Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 1 General Provisions
TITLE 1. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Chapter 1. General Provisions
Chapter 1. General Provisions
1-1-1 Name and Citation of Code
1-1-2 Repeal of Existing Ordinances
1-1-3 Effect of Repealing Ordinances
1-1-4 Effective Date
1-1-5 Conflicts with State Law
1-1-6 Captions
1-1-7 Misdemeanors - General Penalty and
Continuing Violation
1-1-8 Definitions and Rules of Construction
1-1-1 Name and Citation of Code. The
ordinances contained in this code and all amendments
and additions thereto shall constitute and be
designated as the "Code of Revised Ordinances of
Clinton City, Utah," and may be cited as the "Clinton
City Code."
History: 9/84
1-1-2 Repeal of Existing Ordinances. The
provisions appearing in this code, insofar as they are
in substance the same as those of previously existing
ordinances, shall be considered as continuations
thereof and not as new enactments. All other
ordinances and resolutions of Clinton City heretofore
in force, except such as are of a private, local, or
temporary nature, including purchases of water,
grants, dedications, bond issues, elections, and
special levies for local assessments, are hereby
repealed.
History: 9/84
1-1-3 Effect of Repealing Ordinances. This
code shall not affect any act done, or right accrued,
any penalty incurred, any suit, prosecution or
proceeding pending or the tenure of office of any
person holding office at the time when it takes effect;
nor shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect
of reviving any ordinances heretofore repealed or
superseded.
History: 9/84
1-1-4 Effective Date. This code shall become
effective September 25, 1984.
History: 9/84
1-1-5 Conflicts with State Law. Whenever
anything in this code shall be or become in conflict
with any provision of the laws of the State of Utah,
such provision of this code shall be deemed to be
repealed and to be of no effect for such period of
such law so in conflict therewith shall remain in
effect, and such law shall govern. The sections,
paragraphs, sentences, and clauses and phrases of this
code are severable. Therefore if any phrase, clause,
sentence, paragraph or section of this code shall be
declared unconstitutional or without effect by any
final judgment or decree of a court of competent
jurisdiction, such judgment or decree shall not affect
any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences,
paragraphs and sections of this code.
History: 9/84
1-1-6 Captions. The captions in this code
immediately preceding each section are intended as
merely indications of content of the section and shall
not be deemed or be taken to be part of the sections.
History: 9/84
1-1-7 Misdemeanors - General Penalty and
Continuing Violation.
(1) All misdemeanors and infractions in this Code of
Clinton City, including the Zoning and Subdivision
Ordinances, or any other act declared to be unlawful
or an offense in violation of ordinance, law, rule, or
regulation of the City, shall be Class C misdemeanors
unless otherwise classified in the applicable city
ordinance or Utah Code Annotated.
(2) The violation of any provision of this code or any
other ordinance of the city shall be punishable by
fines and imprisonment according to state law.
(3) Every day any violation of this code, or any other
ordinance of the city, law, rule or regulation shall
continue, it shall constitute a separate offense.
History: 9/84, 12/87, 05/99, 06/99, 07/99, 10/10
1-1-8 Definitions and Rules of Construction. In
the construction of this code the following rules and
definitions shall be observed and applied unless such
construction would be inconsistent with the manifest
intent of this code:
Act. The word "act," when used as a written law or
previously as an ordinance, formally ordained by the
legislative power of the city council, shall be
synonymous with the particular title in which it is
found in this code.
Business. The term "business" includes any trade,
profession, calling, activity, operation or enterprise
for which a license is required by any ordinance of
this municipality.
Gender-Singular and Plural. Unless otherwise
indicated from the context of the ordinance, all words
used in the singular shall include the plural and all
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 1 General Provisions
words used in the masculine gender shall extend to
and apply to the feminine gender.
General Rule. All words and phrases shall be
construed and understood according to the common
use and understanding of the language; the technical
words and phrases and such other words and phrases
as may have acquired a particular meaning in law
shall be construed and understood according to such
particular meaning.
Governing Body. The word "governing body" as
used throughout this code means the city council of
Clinton City.
Highway - Road. The terms "highway" and "road"
includes public bridges, and may be equivalent to the
words "county way," "county road," "common road,"
and "state road."
License. The term "license" includes any certificate
or license issued by this municipality.
Location. Whenever any act, conduct or offense is
prohibited or required and no reference is made to
location, unless the context specifically indicates
otherwise, the act, conduct, or offense prohibited or
required shall be within the boundaries of this
municipality.
Municipality. The word "municipality" as used
throughout this code means the City of Clinton, Utah.
Offense. "Offense" means any act, action or conduct
prohibited by this code or the failure to perform any
acts required in this code.
Officer or Official. The terms "officer" or "official"
as used in this code mean any elected or appointed
person employed by the municipality unless the
context clearly indicates otherwise.
Owner. The term "owner" applied to a building or
land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant
in common, joint tenant or lessee of a whole or part
of such building or land.
Person. The term "person" includes all individuals
both male and female, any governmental agency,
corporation, partnership, association, company, and
every other form of organization whether formed
voluntarily or involuntarily.
Property. The term "property" includes both real
and personal property.
Reasonable Time. In all cases where any ordinance
requires that an act be done in a reasonable time or
that reasonable notice be given, such reasonable time
for such notice shall be deemed to mean such time as
may be necessary for the expeditious performance of
such duty or compliance with such notice.
Recorder. The term "recorder" means the individual
appointed to act as the recorder of the city.
Street. The term "street" includes alleys, lanes,
courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares,
public places, sidewalks, gutters and culverts,
crosswalks, and intersections.
Tenant - Occupant. The term "tenant" or
"occupant" applied to a building or land shall apply
to any person who occupies all or any part of such
building or land either alone or with others.
Tenses. The use of any verb in the present tense
shall include the future and past tense when
applicable.
Time - How Computed. The time within which an
act is to be done as provided in this code or in any
resolution or order of this municipality, when
expressed in days, shall be determined by excluding
the first day and including the last day, except if the
last day be a Sunday or a holiday, then the last day
shall be the day next following such Sunday or
holiday which is not a Sunday or holiday. When time
is expressed in hours, Sunday and all holidays shall
be excluded.
Week. The word "week" shall be construed to mean
any seven-day period.
History: 9/84
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
TITLE 2. ADMINISTRATION
Chapter 1. General
Chapter 2. Municipal Government
Chapter 3. Mayor
Chapter 4. Meetings - Voting
Chapter 5. Public Meetings, Executive
Sessions, Records and Publication,
Procedure
Chapter 6. Office of City Manager
Chapter 7. City Officers Generally
Chapter 8. Planning Commission
Chapter 9. Clinton City Justice Court
Chapter 10. Claims Against Municipality
Chapter 11. Records Access and Management
Chapter 12. City Treasurer
Chapter 13. Utility Customer Deposits,
Delinquent Accounts and Water
Disconnects
Chapter 14. Establishment of the Clinton City
Community Arts Board
Chapter 15. Civil Rights
Chapter 1. General
2-1-1 Legislation
2-1-2 Ordinances - Enacting Clause
2-1-3 Ordinances - Numbering
2-1-4 Purpose of Resolutions
2-1-5 Form of Resolution
2-1-6 Resolutions Need no Publication Effective
Date
2-1-7 Bonds for Elected and Appointed City
Officials
2-1-1 Legislation. Except as otherwise
specifically provided, the City Council shall exercise
its legislative powers through ordinances.
History: 9/84
2-1-2 Ordinances - Enacting Clause. The
enacting clause of all ordinances of the City shall be
in the following form: "Be it ordained by the City
Council of Clinton City." No enacting clause shall be
used in any section of any ordinance except the first
section.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-704
History: 9/84
2-1-3 Ordinances - Numbering.
(1) The Recorder shall, insofar as possible, assign all
ordinances of a general nature adopted after these
revised ordinances a number. The first number of
such an ordinance shall be the last two (2) digits of
the year the ordinance is adopted, followed by a dash
which is followed by a number which shall be a
sequential, ascending number indicating the order in
which such ordinance was adopted during the year.
(2) All ordinances of a local, private or temporary
nature, including franchises, grants, dedications, bond
issues and tax levies may be maintained in a separate
book of "Special Ordinances," properly indexed and
organized according to date adopted. These
ordinances shall be numbered in the manner indicated
in the preceding paragraph.
(3) Failure to comply with this section shall not affect
or render invalid any ordinance of this municipality.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-713
History: 8/36, 9/84
2-1-4 Purpose of Resolutions. Unless otherwise
required by law, the City Council may exercise all
administrative powers by resolution including, but
not limited to:
(1) Establishing water and sewer rates;
(2) Charges for garbage collection and fees charged
for municipal services;
(3) Establishing the personnel policies and
guidelines; and
(4) Regulating the use and operation of municipal
property. Punishment, fines or forfeitures may not be
imposed by resolution.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-717
History: 9/84
2-1-5 Form of Resolution. Any resolution passed
by the City Council shall be in a form and contain
sections substantially similar to that prescribed for
ordinances.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-718
History: 9/84
2-1-6 Resolutions Need no Publication Effective
Date. Resolutions may become effective without
publication or posting and may take effect on passage
or at a later date as the City Council may determine,
but resolutions may not become effective more than
three (3) months from the date of passage.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-719 History: 9/84
2-1-7 Bonds for Elected and Appointed City
Officials:
Bonding requirements for elected and appointed City
Officials while working in their official capacities,
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
whether for the City Municipality, City Boards or
City Special Districts, shall be deemed covered and
complete through the City’s liability insurance
coverage which includes crime/theft insurance. Some
common names for such bonds are: fidelity bonds;
surety bonds; treasurer’s bonds and performance
bonds. The purpose of these bonds is to ensure the
safety of public funds in case of theft or other crimes
by City Officials. In lieu of the bonds, the
crime/theft insurance coverage provides a greater
amount of coverage and is universally applied to all
Elected and Appointed Officials and employees at the
start of their term of service/employment with the
City.”
History: 11/18 – Ord. 18-03
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
Chapter 2. Municipal Government
2-2-1 Six-Member Council Form
2-2-2 Functions of the Council
2-2-3 Council Members - Qualifications - Terms
of Office
2-2-4 Eligibility and Qualifications
2-2-5 Vacancy in Office of Mayor or Council
Member
2-2-1 Six-Member Council Form.
(1) The Clinton City form of government shall be
known as the six-member Council form, vesting the
government of the municipality in the City Council
which shall be deemed the governing body of the
municipality. The City Council composed of six (6)
members, one of whom shall be the Mayor and the
remaining five (5) shall be Council members.
(2) The position of City Manager shall continue as
outlined prior to the 2008 Utah Code changes on City
Councils. City Manager duties, powers and authority
are provided in Chapter 6 of this title.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3b-301 & 10-3b-104(2)
History: 9/84, 12/09 – Ord. 09-21
2-2-2 Functions of the Council. The City
Council shall pass ordinances, appropriate funds,
review municipal administration, and perform all
duties that may be required of it by law.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3b-303
History: 9/84, 12/09 – Ord. 09-21
2-2-3 Council Members - Qualifications -
Terms of Office. Council members shall be
residents of the City and serve terms of office of four
(4) years each, or until a successor is qualified.
Council members shall have no other compensated
employment with the municipality.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-31
History: 9/84
2-2-4 Eligibility and Qualifications.
(1) All elective officers of the City shall be chosen
by the registered voters, unless appointed under §2-2-
5.
(2) Any person filling an elected City office must be
a qualified voter as outlined in UCA§20A-9-201(1).
(3) If any official filling an elected office shall at any
time during his or her term of office live outside the
boundaries of the City for a continuous period of
more than 60 days or establish residence outside the
City during his or her term of office, the office shall
there by become automatically vacant.
Cross-reference: UCA § 10-3-301
History: 8/36, 9/84, 12/09, 10/16 – Ord. 16-02
2-2-5 Vacancy in Office of Mayor or Council
Member.
(1) If any vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor or
Council member of the City, the Council shall
appoint a qualified voter in the municipality to fill the
unexpired term of office vacated. Before acting to
fill the vacancy, the municipal legislative body shall:
(a) Give public notice of the vacancy at least two
weeks before the City Council meets to fill the
vacancy;
(b) Identify in the notice the date, time, and place of
the meeting where the vacancy will be filled;
(c) Identify the person to whom an interested person
may submit their application;
(d) The deadline for application submittal; and,
(e) In an open meeting, interview each person whose
name was submitted for consideration and meets the
qualifications for office regarding the person's
qualifications.
(2) If, for any reason, the City Council does not fill
the vacancy within 30 days after the vacancy occurs,
the City Council shall fill the vacancy from among
the names that have been submitted.
(a) The two persons having the highest number of
votes of the City Council after a first vote is taken
shall appear before the City Council and the City
Council shall vote again.
(b) If neither candidate receives a majority vote of
the City Council at that time, the vacancy shall be
filled by lot in the presence of the City Council.
(3) A vacancy in the office of Mayor or member of
the City Council shall be filled by an interim
appointment, followed by an election to fill a twoyear
term, if:
(a) The vacancy occurs, or a letter of resignation is
received, by the Mayor at least 14 days before the
deadline for filing for election in an odd-numbered
year; and
(b) Two years of the vacated term will remain after
the first Monday of January following the next
municipal election.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
(4) In appointing an interim replacement, fulfilling
the requirements of § (3) above, the City Council
shall:
(a) Comply with the notice requirements of this
section; and
(b) In an open meeting, interview each person whose
name was submitted for consideration and meets the
qualifications for office regarding the person's
qualifications.
(5) A member of the Council applying for a Mayoral
vacancy may not participate in any part of the process
to fill the vacancy.
(6) In a closed meeting, the City Council may not:
(a) Interview a person applying to fill an elected
position;
(b) Discuss filling a midterm vacancy or temporary
absence governed by Title 20A, Chapter 1, Part 5,
Candidate Vacancy and Vacancy and Temporary
Absence in Elected Office; or,
(c) Discuss the character, professional competence,
or physical or mental health of the person whose
name was submitted for consideration to fill a
midterm vacancy or temporary absence governed by
Title 20A, Chapter 1, Part 5, Candidate Vacancy and
Vacancy and Temporary Absence in Elected Office.
Cross-reference: UCA § 10-3b-105 & 10-3b-302 &
20A-1-510
History: 8/36, 9/84, 12/09, 4/12, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
Chapter 3. Mayor
2-3-1 Mayor as Presiding Officer - Mayor Pro
Tempore
2-3-2 No Vote Exceptions
2-3-3 No Veto
2-3-4 Duties and Powers of Mayor
2-3-5 Change of Duties
2-3-1 Mayor as Presiding Officer -Mayor Pro
Tempore.
(1) The Mayor shall be the chairman and preside at
the meetings of the City Council. In the absence of
the Mayor or because of his inability or refusal to act,
the governing body may elect a member of the
governing body to preside over the meeting as Mayor
pro tempore, who shall have all of the powers and
duties of the Mayor during his absence or disability.
The election of a Mayor pro tempore shall be entered
in the minutes of the meeting.
(2) The Mayor shall be chief ceremonial officer of
the municipality and shall represent the municipality
in all of its external relationships.
Cross-reference: UCA § 10-3b-302
History: 8/36, 9/84, 12/09
2-3-2 No Vote Exceptions. The Mayor shall not
vote, except:
(1) In case of a tie vote of the Council;
(2) Appointment or dismissal of City Manager; and
(3) On any ordinance that enlarges or restricts the
Mayor’s powers, duties, or functions.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3b-302
History: 9/84, 12/09
2-3-3 No Veto. The Mayor shall have no power to
veto any act of the governing body unless otherwise
specifically authorized by ordinance or state statute.
Cross-reference: UCA § 10-3b-302
History: 9/84, 12/09
2-3-4 Duties and Powers of Mayor. The Mayor
shall:
(1) Have ultimate responsibility to keep the peace
and enforce the laws of the City or town;
(2) Have authority to commute any sentences for
violation of any municipal order;
(3) Have responsibilities for Justice Court Judge
vacancies as outlined in Title 2, Chapter 9 and
UCA§78A-7-202 through 203 et. Seq.
(4) Perform all duties prescribed by law, resolution or
ordinance;
(5) Ensure that all laws, ordinances and resolutions
are faithfully executed and observed;
(6) At any reasonable time examine and inspect the
books, papers, records or documents of the City or
any officer, employee or agent of the City;
(7) Report to the City Council the condition of the
City and recommend for Council consideration any
measures as deemed to be in the best interests of the
City;
(8) When necessary, call on the residents of the City
or town over the age of 21 to assist in enforcing the
laws of the state and ordinances of the City; and
(9) Appoint, with the advice and consent of the
Council, members to fill vacancies on commissions
or committees of the City.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3b-104
History: 8/36, 9/84, 12/09, 10/10, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-3-5 Change of Duties. The Mayor may, with
the concurrence of the majority of the City Council,
change the assignment of any member of the
governing body who is serving on any commissions,
boards, or committees.
History: 8/36, 9/84
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
Chapter 4. Meetings - Voting
2-4-1 Meetings Generally
2-4-2 Special Meetings
2-4-3 Quorum
2-4-4 Adoption of Procedural Rules; Expulsion
of Member
2-4-5 Attendance
2-4-6 How the Vote is Taken
2-4-7 Minimum Vote Required
2-4-8 Reconsideration
2-4-1 Meetings Generally. The City Council
shall by resolution prescribe the frequency, time and
place of the meetings of the City Council; however,
at least one (1) meeting shall be held each month. In
the absence of other provisions prescribed by
resolution, if a meeting day falls on a legal holiday,
the regular meeting shall be held on the next business
day following. Adjourned meetings shall be held
from time to time as circumstances may require.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3b-105
History: 10/37, 9/84, 12/09
2-4-2 Special Meetings.
(1) If at any time the business of the City requires a
special meeting of the City Council, such meeting
may be ordered by the Mayor or any two (2)
members of the Council. The order shall be entered
in the minutes of the City Council. The order shall
provide at least three (3) hours notice of the special
meeting and notice thereof shall be served by the
recorder or clerk upon each member who did not sign
the order by delivering the notice personally or by
leaving it at the member's usual place of abode. The
personal appearance by a member of the Council at
any specially called meeting constitutes a waiver of
the notice required in this section.
(2) No business shall be transacted in any special
meeting except that stated in the call thereof, unless
all Council members are present and unanimously
consent thereto.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-502
History: 10/37, 9/84, 12/09 – Ord. 09-21;
2-4-3 Quorum. The number of members of the
City Council necessary to constitute a quorum is
three (3) or more, excluding the Mayor. No action of
the City Council shall be official or of effect except
when a quorum of the members is present. Fewer
than a quorum may adjourn from a meeting if less
than a quorum occurs during that meeting. If less
than a quorum occurs due to vacancies, the remaining
City Council members may meet, after proper notice
is given, to fill those vacancies.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-504
History: 10/37, 9/84, 12/09
2-4-4 Adoption of Procedural Rules: The City
Council shall, from time to time, make such rules for
the government of its proceeding as it may deem
necessary and proper and make such rules available
at each official meeting as well as on the City’s
website.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-606
History: 9/84, 12/09, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-4-5 Attendance. The City Council shall have
the power to compel the attendance of its own
members and provide such penalties as it deems
necessary for the failure to comply therewith. A
meeting with less than a quorum of members may
properly meet from time to time and are hereby
empowered to compel the attendance of absent
members without proper absence excuses and may,
when necessary, direct the chief of police to bring in
such member or members under arrest. Should any
member of the Council, when notified by the chief of
police or other proper officer, that his presence is
necessary to form a quorum (unless he shall present
an excuse satisfactory to the Council at its next
regular meeting), or should any member leave the
Council when in session without the consent of the
Council, when such leaving would break the quorum,
shall be fined in any sum not exceeding $50.00.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-505
History: 9/84, 12/09, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-4-6 How the Vote is Taken. A roll call shall be
taken and recorded for all ordinances, resolutions,
and any action which would create a liability against
municipality and any other case at the request of any
member of the City Council by a "yes" or a "no" vote
and shall be recorded. Every resolution or ordinance
shall be in writing before the vote is taken.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-506
History: 9/84
2-4-7 Minimum Vote Required.
(1) The minimum number of yes votes required to
pass any ordinance, resolution or to take any action
by the Council, unless otherwise prescribed by law,
shall be a majority of the members of the quorum, but
shall not be less than three (3).
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
(2) Any ordinance, resolution or motion of the City
Council having fewer favorable votes than required
herein shall be deemed defeated and invalid, except a
meeting may be adjourned to a specific time by a
majority vote of the governing body even though
such majority vote is less than that required herein.
(3) A majority of the members of the City Council,
regardless of number, may fill any vacancy in the
governing body, as prescribed by law.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-507 & 20A-1-510
History: 9/84, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-4-8 Reconsideration.
(1) Any request for reconsideration of the vote of an
approved Council agenda item must be made by at
least one of the City Council members who voted in
the majority of the action taken. Such request may be
made at the same meeting as the vote, or made to the
Mayor in writing prior to the subsequent meeting in
time for its inclusion in the agenda.
(2) Any action taken by the City Council shall not be
reconsidered or rescinded at any special meeting
unless the number of members of the City Council
present at the special meeting is equal to or greater
than the number of members present at the meeting
when the action was approved.
(3) If the request for reconsideration is voted upon
and approved by a majority vote of the City Council,
the effect will be as if the original vote was never
taken. The item can then be handled in any proper
manner desired by the majority vote of the City
Council.
Cross-reference: UCA '10-3-508
History: 9/84, 12/09, 10/13, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
Chapter 5. Public Meetings, Executive Sessions,
Records and Publication Procedure
2-5-1 Business of the Governing Body Conducted
Only in Open Meeting
2-5-2 Public Records
2-5-3 Penalty for Disorderly Conduct in Public
Meetings
2-5-4 Authority to Issue Administrative Subpoenas
2-5-5 Authorization, Contents, and Manner of
Service
2-5-6 Electronic Meetings
2-5-1 Business of the Governing Body Conducted
Only in Open Meeting. All meetings of the governing
body of the City shall be held in compliance with the
provisions of Chapter 4 of Title 52 of the Utah Code
Annotated, relating to open and public meetings.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-601
History: 9/84
2-5-2 Public Records. The City Council shall keep a
journal of its proceedings. The books, records, accounts
and documents of the City shall be kept at the office of
the Recorder and approved copies shall be open and
available to the public during regular business hours for
examination and copying. The Council may by
resolution establish reasonable charges for providing
copies of its public records to individuals, except when
by law the municipality must provide the records without
cost to the public.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-603
History: 9/84
2-5-3 Penalty for Disorderly Conduct in Public
Meetings.
(1) The City Council may fine or expel any member for
disorderly conduct on a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the
members of the governing body.
(2) The City Council on a two-thirds (2/3) vote may
expel any person who is disorderly during the meeting of
the City Council. This section or any action taken by the
City Council pursuant hereto shall not preclude
prosecution under any other provision of law.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-607 & 10-3-608
History: 9/84, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-5-4 Authority to Issue Administrative
Subpoenas. Pursuant to authority granted by Section
10-3-610, Utah Code, as amended, or its successor, the
City Council may issue administrative subpoenas to
compel the attendance, before the City Council, of
witnesses and the production of books, records, and other
papers and documents and may cause to be examined
under oath any person whose testimony is necessary or
useful for the good governance of the City. Failure by
any person, without adequate excuse, to obey an
authorized subpoena served upon him shall be unlawful
and punishable as a Class “C” misdemeanor.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-610
History: 9/84, 3/06
2-5-5 Authorization, Contents, and Manner of
Service.
(1) The City Council shall authorize by majority vote the
serving of an administrative subpoena requiring the
attendance of any person to give testimony or produce
records, documents or things for inspection, copying, or
examination, which would come before the City Council.
(2) Every administrative subpoena shall:
(a) Be drafted by the City attorney;
(b) Issue in the name of the City and shall state on its
face that it is an administrative subpoena;
(c) Set forth the possible penalties for failure to respond;
(d) Command each person to whom it is directed to
attend and give testimony at a time and place therein
specified which date and time shall not be less than
fourteen (14) days from the date of service of the
administrative subpoena; and,
(e) Be signed by the Mayor.
(3) An administrative subpoena may also command the
person to whom it is directed to produce the books,
papers, documents or tangible things designated therein.
(4) An administrative subpoena may be served by any
peace officer or constable, or by any other person 18
years of age or older at the time of service. Service of an
administrative subpoena upon a person named therein
shall be made by delivering a copy thereof to such
person.
(5) A certificate with a statement as to the date, place and
manner of service shall be filed with the City Manager’s
office by the person serving the subpoena within seven
(7) days of the date of service; however, failure to file
this proof of service shall not affect the validity of the
service.
History: 03/06, 12/09
2-5-6 Electronic Meetings.
(1) In situations involving emergencies, loss of meeting
facilities, other unforeseen circumstances or to facilitate
the participation of an absent Mayor or City Council
member(s), the City Council may meet electronically to
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
conduct necessary business. In order to facilitate an
electronic meeting, a minimum of three (3) members of
the City Council (one of whom may be the Mayor) must
be physically present at the anchor location where the
meeting is held.
(2) The City Council intends that the Clinton City
Council chambers, located at 2267 N. 1500 W. be the
anchor location for all Council meetings. If an alternative
location is to be used, if multiple locations are to be used,
or if the public's viewing thereof and participation
therein are to be from a remote location, notice of those
locations will be given as early as is practical.
(3) Notice of any electronic meeting will be as provided
for in State law (UCA 52-4-207). In addition, notice of
the meeting will be posted at the anchor location, with
the notice also going to a newspaper of general
circulation and City website. Notice of the electronic
meeting will be provided to the members of the City
Council at least twenty-four (24) hours before the
meeting, if possible, to facilitate their participation. The
notice will also contain a description on how the member
or members of the City Council will be connected to the
electronic meeting.
(4) To the extent possible, electronic meetings will be
conducted in the same manner as regular meetings. To
ensure full participation by all members, additional
procedures and guidelines will be employed.
(a) If the meeting is connected telephonically, then a
speaker phone will be connected in such a manner that
comments made by the member or members
participating by telephone will be broadcast through the
public address system at the anchor location. To ensure
full participation each member present, and those
participating electronically, will be given a specific
opportunity to make inquiries and participate in the
discussion. Votes taken in these circumstances shall be
by roll call method, with each member audibly
verbalizing their vote. Members not at the anchor
location shall be required to identify themselves with
every vote provided electronically.
(b) If a member or members are participating by email or
instant messaging, the email or instant messaging shall
either be projected upon a screen with a person assigned
to read aloud, into the public address system, comments
made, or if no projection system exists, then a person
will be assigned to read said messages into the public
address system. The person to do the reading will be
assigned by the respective member(s) participating
electronically.
Cross-reference: UCA § 52-4-207
History: 01/14, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
Chapter 6. Office of City Manager
2-6-1 Office of City Manager Created
2-6-2 Appointment and Employment
2-6-3 Term of Office
2-6-4 General Duties
2-6-5 Supervision Over Employees
2-6-6 Relationship to Officers and Departments
2-6-7 Contracts
2-6-8 Purchases
2-6-9 Budget Officer
2-6-10 Accounts
2-6-11 Inventories - Property
2-6-12 Reports and Publications
2-6-13 Elections
2-6-14 Collector and Comptroller
2-6-15 Maps - Plats
2-6-16 Offices
2-6-17 Absence from City
2-6-18 Qualifications
2-6-19 Personnel
2-6-20 Legislative Powers and Official Position
2-6-1 Office of City Manager Created. The office
of City Manager is hereby created as provided in Utah
Code Annotated § 10-3b-105(2) and 10-3b-
303(1)(B)(iii)(A)
History: 5/75, 9/84, 12/09
2-6-2 Appointment and Employment. The
appointment of the Manager shall be made by a majority
vote of the Mayor and City Council. The City Council
shall direct the Mayor to negotiate a formal employment
agreement with the appointee, and may set special terms
and conditions on such negotiations. Once a formal
employment agreement has been negotiated with the
appointee, the Mayor shall present the agreement to the
City Council for its approval. Upon the City Council’s
approval, the Mayor shall sign the agreement on behalf
of the City.
Ord. 16-02, 10/16
2-6-3 Term of Office. The Manager shall serve at the
pleasure of the Mayor and City Council except that the
Manager may be appointed for a term not to exceed three
(3) years. The employment agreement may be renewed
by the Council at any time. Any person serving as
Manager of the City under this section may be removed
with or without cause by a majority vote of the Mayor
and City Council.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3b-303(1)(B)(iii)(A) & 10-
3b-105(2)
History: 5/75, 9/84, 12/09, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-6-4 General Duties. The Manager shall:
(1) Have and exercise all powers and duties assigned to
him by the City Council.
(2) Be charged with the enforcement of all laws and
ordinances within the municipality insofar as their
enforcement is within the powers of the City.
(3) Attend all meetings of the City Council, keep the
Council informed as to the affairs of the City, and
recommend to the Council such action as may be
necessary or expedient for the welfare of the City.
(4) Have and exercise general control and supervision
over all activities of the City, including but not limited to
all properties and equipment, water courses, roadways,
easements, public buildings, and all other such items
belonging to, controlled by or under the jurisdiction of
the City.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3b-303 & 10-3b-104(2)
History: 5/75, 9/84, 12/09, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-6-5 Supervision Over Employees. The City
Manager shall have and exercise all powers which are
now or may hereafter be conferred by law upon the City
in respect to the employment and removal of employees
and shall hire and discharge such employees and shall
have and exercise general supervision over all of the
employees of the City.
History: 5/75, 9/84
2-6-6 Relationship to Officers and Departments.
(1) The Manager shall have authority to fill all appointed
offices of the City and to remove persons occupying said
offices, except department heads, which require approval
of the Council.
(2) Every administrative department of the City shall be
under the supervision and control of the City Manager,
who shall have the power to appoint or remove any
officer in said departments in accordance with the
procedure set forth in this section.
History: 5/75, 9/84
2-6-7 Contracts. The City Manager shall examine all
proposed contracts to which the City may be a party, and
shall, with the Recorder, sign on behalf of the City
excepting where the City Council directs that some other
officer or officers shall do so. It shall be the duty of the
City Manager to see to it that all terms of any contract to
which the City is a party are fully performed by all
parties thereof.
2-6-8 Purchases. The City Manager shall be the
general purchasing agent of the City, and except where
specific provision to the contrary is made by law or by
the Council, he shall make all purchases of supplies,
materials, and equipment authorized by the Council and
in the manner prescribed by and subject to the limitations
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
imposed by law and the City Council. No expense shall
be incurred for a purpose requiring a prior appropriation
unless the amount of such purchase is covered by an
unexpended appropriation for the purpose.
Cross-reference: Clinton City Code Title 21
History: 5/75, 9/84
2-6-9 Budget Officer. The City Manager is hereby
designated the budget officer for the City and shall
perform or cause to be performed all of the duties of such
office as set forth in the Uniform Municipal Fiscal
Procedures Act, together with such other duties as the
Council may from time to time, by resolution, designate.
Cross-reference: UCA§10-6
History: 5/75, 9/84
2-6-10 Accounts. It shall be the duty of the City
Manager to keep current accounts showing at all times
the fiscal condition of the City, including the current and
anticipated expenses, appropriations, cash on hand, and
anticipated revenues of all municipal funds and accounts,
and see to the collection of all money due the
municipality.
History: 5/75, 9/84
2-6-11 Inventories - Property. The City Manager
shall keep a current inventory showing all real and
personal property of the City and its location and shall be
responsible for the care and custody of all such property,
including equipment, buildings, parks, and all other City
property, which are not by law assigned to some other
officer or body for care and control.
History: 5/75, 9/84
2-6-12 Reports and Publications. The City Manager
shall publish, or cause to be published, all notices,
ordinances or other documents required by law to be
published and to prepare or cause to be prepared all
reports which the City or any of the officials thereof are
required to prepare.
History: 5/75, 9/84
2-6-13 Elections. The City Manager shall cause to be
prepared all notices, ballots, and election supplies
necessary in connection with municipal elections.
History: 5/75, 9/84
2-6-14 Collector and Comptroller. The City
Manager shall be ex-officio City collector and City
comptroller, unless such offices, or either of them, are
duly filled by appointment; and he shall perform the
duties of each such office in the absence of such
appointment to either of them.
History: 5/75, 9/84
2-6-15 Maps - Plats. Unless otherwise provided by
ordinance, the City Manager shall cause to be kept a
complete set of maps and plats showing the location of
all City utilities, other municipal properties, all streets,
other public places, and all lots or parcels of land
subdivided according to law.
History: 5/75, 9/84
2-6-16 Offices. The City Manager shall maintain an
office in the City hall and shall spend such time in the
performance of his duties as may be required from time
to time by resolution of the Council.
History: 5/75, 9/84
2-6-17 Absence from City. In the event that the City
Manager shall be absent from the City or incapacitated
from performing the duties of his position, an officer or
other person designated by the Mayor may be authorized
to act as Manager during such absence or incapacity,
provided, however, that if such absence or incapacity
shall extend for a period of ten (10) or more consecutive
days, such designation shall be subject to the approval of
the City Council.
History: 9/84
2-6-18 Qualifications. The powers, duties, and
functions of the office of City Manager shall be carried
out by the City Manager, who shall be a qualified person,
who need not be an elector, appointed by the Mayor and
City Council at a salary to be fixed by resolution of the
said Council. Before taking office, the City Manager
shall be included in the crime/theft insurance coverage
with the City’s insurance carrier1”.
History: 9/84, 12/09, 11/18 – Ord. 18-03
2-6-19 Personnel. Additional personnel may from
time to time be employed within the office of City
Manager by action of the City Council.
History: 5/75, 9/84
2-6-20 Legislative Powers and Official Position. The
legislative and judicial powers of the Mayor, his position
as chairman of the governing body, and any ex officio
position the Mayor shall hold shall not be delegated to
the manager.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3b-303 & 10-3b-104(2)
History: 9/84, 12/09
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
Chapter 7. City Officers Generally
2-7-1 Requirement of Oath
2-7-2 Form of Oath of Office
2-7-3 Oath - Given - Filed
2-7-4 Acts of Officials Not Voided
2-7-5 Compensation of Officers and Employees
2-7-6 City Attorney
2-7-7 City Engineer
2-7-8 City Recorder
2-7-9 Recorder's Duties in Relation to Finance
Generally
2-7-10 Recorder - Furnishing of Financial
Statements
2-7-11 Quarterly Financial Reports
2-7-12 Paying Over Money to City Treasurer;
Delivering Records, etc., to Successor in
Office
2-7-1 Requirement of Oath. All elective and
appointed officers of the City shall before assuming
the duties of office, file with the City Recorder a
constitutional oath of office.
History: 9/84
2-7-2 Form of Oath of Office. Before any officer
of the City shall be entitled to assume the days of his
office, he shall take and subscribe to the following
oath: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will
support, obey and defend the Constitution of the
United States and the Constitution of this state; that I
will discharge the duties of my office with fidelity."
History: 9/84
2-7-3 Oath - Given - Filed. The oath of office
required in the previous section shall be administered
by any judge, justice of the peace, notary public, or
by the Recorder of the municipality. Elected officials
shall take their oath of office at 12 o'clock noon on
the first Monday in January following their election
or as soon thereafter as is practicable. Appointed
officers shall take their oath at any time before
entering upon their duties. All oaths of office shall be
filed with the Recorder.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-828
History: 9/84
2-7-4 Acts of Officials Not Voided. No official
act by any municipal officer shall be invalid for the
reason that he failed to take the oath of office.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-829
History: 9/84
2-7-5 Compensation of Officers and Employees.
The salary or compensation of all officers and
employees shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the City Council.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-901
History: 9/84
2-7-6 City Attorney. The Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the City Council, may appoint a City
Attorney. The City Attorney shall be a regularly
licensed attorney and shall perform the duties
required of him by the general laws and by the
ordinances of the City and such other duties as
Council may by ordinance or resolution require. The
City Attorney may, with the consent and approval of
the Council, appoint a deputy to advise the City
officers in all legal matters or perform other duties
ordinarily performed by the City Attorney.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-928
History: 9/84
2-7-7 City Engineer. The Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the City Council, may appoint the
City Engineer. The City Engineer shall perform the
duties required of him by the general laws and by the
ordinances of the City and such other duties as
Council may by ordinance, minute order or resolution
require. Instead of appointing a City Engineer, the
Mayor may, upon the advice and consent of the City
Council, employ an engineer as a regular City
employee to perform such duties as may be
prescribed.
History: 9/84, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-7-8 City Recorder. The City Recorder shall
keep an office at the place of the meeting of the City
Council or at such other place convenient thereto as
the City Council may direct. The Recorder shall
keep the corporate seal and all papers and records of
the City, and shall attend and keep the record of the
proceedings of the City Council. Copies of all papers
filed in the Recorder’s office, and transcripts from all
records of the City Council, certified by the Recorder
under the corporate seal, shall be evidence in all
courts as if the original were produced. The
Recorder shall cause a certified copy of all
ordinances passed by the City Council to be posted in
three (3) public places in the City within one (1)
week after the passage of such ordinance by the City
Council.
History: 9/84, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
2-7-9 Recorder's Duties in Relation to Finance
Generally. The City Recorder shall draw and
countersign all orders upon the treasurer in pursuance
of any order or resolution of the City Council, and
keep a full and accurate account thereof in books
provided for that purpose. The Recorder shall make
to the City Council, from time to time upon the order
of the Council, reports of the financial condition of
the City; make and keep a list of outstanding bonds,
to whom issued, for what purpose, when and where
payable and the rate of interest they respectively bear,
and recommend such action to the City Council as
shall secure the payment of the principal and interest
of such bonds; report annually on or before June 1 to
the City Council an estimate of the expenses of the
City and the revenue necessary to be raised for the
current year; and as provided relating to City budget
shall keep regular books of account in which shall
enter all indebtedness of the City, and which shall at
all times show the financial condition of the City, the
amount of bonds, orders, certificates or other
evidences of indebtedness which have been
redeemed, and the amount of each outstanding; shall
keep accounts with all receiving and disbursing
officers of the City, showing the amount they have
received from the different sources of revenue and
the amount which they have disbursed under the
direction of the City Manager as listed in the
approved budget; shall examine reports, books,
papers, vouchers and accounts of the City Treasurer;
shall audit all claims and demands against the City;
and shall keep a record of all claims presented and
the action of the Council thereon; shall keep all
contracts, and financial transactions (records
available for review under the GRAMA law
guidelines), and shall perform such other duties as the
City Council may provide by ordinance.
History: 9/84, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-7-10 Recorder - Furnishing of Financial
Statements. The City Recorder shall after the end of
a fiscal year and as expediently as possible, have
prepared an audit of the financial condition of the
City for the previous fiscal year ending June 30; and
on expiration of the appointed term of employment
shall furnish to the subsequent City Recorder such
statements and information as required by law.
History: 9/84, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-7-11 Financial Reports. The City Recorder shall
regularly make reports to the City Council at its
regular meetings as to the financial situation of City
funds and accounts.
History: 9/84, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-7-12 Paying Over Money to City Treasurer;
Delivering Records, etc., to Successor in Office.
The City Recorder shall pay into the City treasury all
money belonging to and received by the City. When
replaced, the Recorder shall deliver to a successor the
corporate seal, together with all books, papers,
records and other property in his possession
belonging to the City.
History: 9/84, 10/10, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
Chapter 8. Planning Commission
2-8-1 Purpose and Intent
2-8-2 Planning Commission
2-8-3 Duties and Powers
2-8-4 Appeal Process
2-8-1 Purpose and Intent. The purpose and
intent of this ordinance is to establish a City Planning
Commission to represent the concerns of a diverse
citizenry and the broad interests of the community as
a whole, whose activities should be conducted with
convenience and accessibility to the general public of
the City of Clinton.
History: 11/83
2-8-2 Planning Commission.
(1) Creation - Appointment.
(a) There is hereby created a Planning Commission
for Clinton City, consisting of seven (7) total
members whom are appointed by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council.
(b) Members of the Commission shall be selected
from the qualified electors of the City, based on a
variety of backgrounds and locations within the City.
Moreover, no more than two (2) members shall share
the same professional background or area of
expertise.
(2) Terms of Office. Terms of office of the seven (7)
citizen members of the Commission shall be
staggered at intervals to provide uniformity and
continuity of policy. Such appointed citizen
members shall serve for a period of three (3) years
and at staggered intervals, but in any event, each
member of the Planning Commission shall serve until
the expiration of the term for which he is appointed
and until a successor is appointed and qualified.
(3) Oath of Office. Members of the Planning
Commission shall qualify by taking, subscribing, and
filing with the City Recorder or authorized appointee
an oath of office required by the state constitution.
(4) Removal and Vacancies. Members of the
Planning Commission may be removed for cause by
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council. "Cause" may include, but shall not be
limited to: violations of the state's Public Officers
and Employee Ethics Act, conflicts of interest, and
failure to attend a minimum of 80% of meetings.
Any vacancy occurring on the Commission by reason
of death, resignation, or removal shall be filled by the
Mayor with the advice and consent of the City
Council for the unexpired term of such member.
(5) Compensation. Planning Commission members
shall serve without compensation, except for
reasonable expense per meeting attended.
(6) Staff Expenditure. The Planning Commission
may request appointment of such employees and staff
as it may deem necessary; however, any expenditures
of the Commission shall be first approved by the City
Manager as being within the amount budgeted by the
City for such purposes for that year.
(7) Procedure. The Planning Commission shall,
during its first meeting in January of each year, elect
from its membership a chairman. The chairman shall
serve for a term of one (1) year, and shall not succeed
in said office. The Commission shall also elect other
such officers as it may deem necessary and adopt and
later change or alter rules and regulations of
organization and procedure consistent with the City
code and state laws.
(8) Quorum. Four (4) voting members of the
Planning Commission shall constitute a quorum.
Approval of requests presented to the Planning
Commission can occur only by a majority of four (4)
favorable votes of the quorum.
(9) Meetings. The Planning Commission shall meet
at least once each month as designated by the
Commission in their bylaws. Public hearings of the
Planning Commission may be held at such meetings;
however, all public hearings shall be held after the
regular working hours of the City, upon proper notice
to consider any matters within the scope of the
Commission's duties as provided by the code or state
statute. All meetings and public hearings of the
Planning Commission shall be held in a public place
designated by the Commission and shall be of
sufficient size to insure public access to the
operations of the Commission.
(10) Records of Proceedings. The Commission shall
keep records of its proceedings, which shall be
available to public inspection.
History: 11/83, 9/84, 2/93, 1/97, 9/16
2-8-3 Duties and Powers.
(1) General Plan. It shall be the function and duty of
the Planning Commission, after holding public
hearings, to recommend to the City Council a
General Plan for the physical development of
Clinton, as required by the Municipal Land Use,
Development, and Management Act, Utah Code
Annotated, Chapter 10-9a, and to maintain such plan
as needed to reflect current City conditions and
needs.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
(2) Zoning. It shall be the function and duty of the
Planning Commission to recommend to the City
Council a zoning plan, including text and map,
representing the views of the Planning Commission
for City zoning. This zoning plan recommendation
shall be made in accordance with the General Plan.
After adoption by the City Council, this zoning plan
shall be the basis for zoning decisions within the
City.
(3) Reports. The Planning Commission may make
reports and recommendations relating to the planning
and development of the City, to public officials and
agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational,
professional, and other organizations and citizens.
The Planning Commission, its members and
authorized City employees in the performance of its
functions, may enter upon any land at reasonable
times to make examination, survey, place and
maintain necessary monuments and marks thereon.
In general, the Planning Commission shall have such
powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform
its functions and promote City planning and zoning.
(4) Land Subdivision or Re-subdivision. Following
the adoption of an official plan in the manner
prescribed in this code, no map or plat of any
subdivision presented for record, affecting land
within the corporate limits of the City shall be
entitled to be recorded or shall be valid unless the
subdivision thereon shall provide for streets, alleys,
and public grounds in conformity with any
requirements applicable thereto of such official plan
and City ordinances.
History: 11/83, 9/8, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-8-4 Appeal Process. Any person aggrieved by
any decision of the Planning Commission shall have
the right to make appeals to the Board of Zoning
Adjustments and/or to the City Council, as provided
by the City code.
History: 11/83, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
Chapter 9. Clinton City Justice Court
2-9-1 Creation of Office
2-9-2 Appointment
2-9-3 Term of Office
2-9-4 Compensation
2-9-5 Annual Training
2-9-6 Justice Court Staff and Facilities
2-9-7 Warrants
2-9-1 Creation of Office. There is hereby created
the office of Justice Court Judge of the Clinton City
Justice Court.
History: 12/37, 9/84, 08/10
2-9-2 Appointment.
(1) Justice Court Nominating Commission:
(a) In the event there is a vacancy in the office of
Justice Court Judge of Clinton City Justice Court the
Mayor shall select and Council ratify the selection of
two individuals to serve on the Davis County Justice
Court Nominating Commission. These individuals
shall serve as local members of the Commission
throughout the selection of a new Justice Court Judge
for the Clinton City Justice Court and are released
from their commitment upon completion of the
selection.
(b) Members to the Commission may not be an
elected member of the Clinton City Council or the
Mayor.
(c) The Commission shall be staffed by the State
Administrative Office of the Courts and follow the
procedures outlined in the State Code.
(2) Justice Court Judge:
(a) The Mayor shall select a candidate from a list of
nominees provided by the Justice Court Nominating
Commission.
(b) The City Council shall ratify the appointment of
the Justice Court Judge for the Clinton City Justice
Court.
(3) Public Prosecutors:
(a) The Court Clerk shall advertise a request for bids
to be submitted by qualified individuals and shall
make recommendation to the City Council for
selection of the Prosecutor.
(b) The Council shall appoint a Prosecutor by motion
and majority vote of the Council.
(c) The Prosecutor shall serve at the convenience of
the Council and may be released at any time without
cause.
Cross-reference: UCA §78A-7-202 through 203
History: 08/10, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-9-3 Term of Office.
(1) The term of office of a Justice Court Judge is six
(6) years.
(2) Upon the expiration of a Justice Court Judge’s
term the Judge shall be subject to an unopposed
retention election.
Cross-reference: UCA §78A-7-203
History: 08/10
2-9-4 Compensation.
(1) Justice Court Judge:
(a) The Justice Court Judge shall be paid a fixed
compensation determined by the Council based on
comparative workload expected for the Justice Court
Judge to that of a District Judge in Davis County and
retirement requirements of the Utah Retirement
System.
(b) The Justice Court Judge shall receive an annual
salary adjustment at least equal to the average salary
adjustment for all Clinton City employees, subject to
limitations in State Code.
(c) The salary fixed may not be diminished during
the term for which the Justice Court Judge has been
appointed or elected.
(d) A copy of the resolution, ordinance, or other
document fixing the salary of the Justice Court Judge,
and any adjustments, shall be furnished to the state
court administrator.
(2) Prosecutor:
(a) Prosecutors shall be paid a fixed compensation
based upon an accepted bid proposal.
(b) Prosecutors shall receive an annual salary
adjustment at least equal to the average salary
adjustment for all Clinton City employees.
Cross-reference: UCA §78A-7-206
History: 12/37, 9/84, 08/10, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-9-5 Annual Training. The Justice Court Judge
shall attend at least one (1) qualifying seminar or
training court supervised by the Judicial Counsel in
each calendar year. If the Judge does not attend the
required seminars or courses for two (2) consecutive
years, the Judge may be removed from office for
cause under the provisions of Utah Code Annotated
§78A-7-205.
Cross-reference: UCA §78A-7-205,
History: 9/84, 08/10, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
2-9-6 Justice Court Staff and Facilities. As long
as Clinton City maintains a Justice Court the City
shall provide:
(1) Public prosecutors to perform prosecution duties
before the justice court;
(2) Adequate funding for the costs of defense for
persons charged with a public offense who are
determined by the Judge to be indigent;
(3) Security for the Justice Court;
(4) A facility within the City that is conducive and
appropriate to the administration of justice; and,
(5) Adequately compensated clerical personnel to
conduct the business of the court.
(6) Adequate funding to meet the educational
requirements for the Justice Court Judge and Court
Staff as required by the Judicial Counsel in each
calendar year.
Cross-reference: UCA §78A-7-209, 211 & 213
History: 08/10
2-9-7 Warrants. All warrants issued by the
Justice Court are to be directed to the Clinton City
Police Department unless use of a Constable has been
authorized by the City Council.
Cross-reference: UCA §78A-7-109
History: 08/10, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
Chapter 10. Claims Against Municipality
2-10-1 Records Open to Inspection
2-10-2 Claim for Injury-Notice-Contents Service-
Legal Disability
2-10-3 Time for Filing Notice of Claim
2-10-4 Denial of Claim for Injury
2-10-1 Records Open to Inspection. The City
Council shall keep a journal of its proceedings. The
books, records, accounts, and documents of the City
shall be kept at the office of the Recorder and
approved copies shall be open and available to the
public during regular business hours for examination
and copying. Except when required by law to
provide records without cost to the public, a
reasonable charge for providing copies to the public
shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council.
Cross-reference: UCA §10-3-603
History: 9/84
2-10-2 Claim for Injury-Notice-Contents-
Service-Legal Disability.
(1) A claim is deemed to arise when the statute of
limitations that would apply if the claim were against
a private person commences to run.
(2) Any person having a claim for injury against the
City or against its employee for an act or omission
occurring during the performance of his duties,
within the scope of employment, or under color of
authority shall, before maintaining an action, file a
written notice of claim with the City.
(3) The notice of claim shall set forth a brief
statement of the facts, the nature of the claim
asserted, and the damages incurred by the claimant so
far as he shall know, shall be signed by the person
making the claim or such person's agent, attorney,
parent or legal guardian, and shall be directed and
delivered to the City Manager within the time
prescribed in section 2-10-3.
(4) If, at the time the claim arises, the claimant is
under the age of majority, or mentally incompetent or
without a legal guardian, or imprisoned, upon
application by the claimant and after hearing and
notice to the City, a court of competent jurisdiction,
in its discretion, may extend the time for service of
notice of claim; but in no event shall it grant an
extension which exceeds the applicable statute of
limitations. In determining whether to grant an
extension, the court shall consider whether the delay
in serving the notice of claim would substantially
prejudice the City in maintaining its defense on the
merits.
Cross-reference: UCA §63G-7-401
History: 9/84, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-10-3 Time for Filing Notice of Claim. A claim
against the City or against its employee for an act or
omission occurring in the performance of its duties,
within the scope of employment, or under color of
authority, is barred unless notice of claim is filed
with the City Manager of the City within one (1) year
after the claim arises, or before the expiration of any
extension of time granted under section 2-10-2.
Cross-reference: UCA §63G-7-403 & 78B-2-302
History: 9/84, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-10-4 Denial of Claim for Injury. If the claim is
denied, a claimant may institute an action in the
district court against the City pursuant to the
requirements of applicable state law.
History: 9/84
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
Chapter 11. Records Access
and Management
2-11-1 Short Title
2-11-2 Adoption of State GRAMA Code
2-11-3 Fees
2-11-1 Short Title. This chapter shall be known as
the "Clinton City Government Records Access and
Management Act".
History: 7/92
2-11-2 Adoption of State GRAMA Code
The City adopts for enforcement the latest version of
the Utah State Code Title 63G Chapter 2, known as
GRAMA (Government Records Access and
Management Act).
History: 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-11-3 Fees
A reasonable charge for providing copies to the
public shall be fixed by Resolution of the City
Council (see annual Fee Schedule).
History: 10/16 - Ord 16-02
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
Chapter 12. City Treasurer
2-12-1 City Treasurer
2-12-2 Appointment
2-12-3 Bond of Treasurer
2-12-4 Oath of Office
2-12-5 Act of Treasurer not Voided
2-12-6 Duties
2-12-7 City Treasurer; Duty to Receive all of
City's Money; Settlements with City
Recorder
2-12-8 Receipts for Payments to City
2-12-1 City Treasurer. The Office of Clinton City
Treasurer is hereby created in accordance with Utah
Code §10-3-916.
History: 1/10
2-12-2 Appointment. The Mayor, with the advice
and consent of the City Council, shall appoint the
Clinton City Treasurer on or before the First Monday
in February following a municipal election. In case
of the need for a midterm replacement, this same
process shall be followed with the appointment being
immediate. The appointed Treasurer shall continue
in office until the successor is appointed and
qualified.
History: 1/10, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-12-3 Bond of Treasurer. The City Treasurer
shall be included in the crime/theft insurance
coverage provided by the City as allowed by the State
Money Management Council.”
History: 1/10, 11/18 – Ord. 18-03
2-12-4 Oath of Office. The Clinton City Treasurer,
before entering on the duties of the Treasurer shall
take, subscribe and file the constitutional oath of
office. The Oath shall be taken after appointment
and any time before entering on the duties as
Treasurer. The oath of office shall be administered
by and filed with the City Recorder.
History: 1/10
2-12-5 Act of Treasurer not Voided. No official
act of the Treasurer shall be invalid for the reason
that the Treasurer failed to take the oath of office.
History: 1/10
2-12-6 Duties. The duties of the Treasurer shall be
set forth by the City Manager and/or City Council as
they shall from time to time direct.
History: 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-12-7 City Treasurer; Duty to Receive all of
City's Money; Settlements with City Recorder.
(1) The City Treasurer shall receive all money
belonging to the City, including all taxes, licenses
and fines and keep an accurate and detailed account
thereof, and shall collect special taxes and
assessments as provided by law and the code of the
City. The City Treasurer shall make a settlement
with the Recorder, as the Council may direct at the
end of every month, and turn over all warrants,
interest coupons, bonds or other evidence of the
indebtedness of the City which may have been
redeemed by the City Treasurer during the month,
taking the receipts of the Recorder therefore, and all
such warrants, orders or other evidence of
indebtedness shall be cancelled by the City Treasurer
and have written or stamped thereon the date of their
payment or redemption.
History: 8/36, 9/84, 10/10, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-12-8 Receipts for Payments to City. The City
Treasurer shall give every person paying money to
the City Treasurer a receipt therefore, specifying the
date of payment and upon what account paid; and
shall file the duplicate of such receipt with the
Recorder at the date of the monthly report.
History: 8/36, 9/84, 10/10, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
Chapter 13. Utility Customer Fees, Delinquent
Accounts and Water Disconnections
2-13-1 Purpose
2-13-2 City Utilities
2-13-3 City Managed Utilities
2-13-4 City Managed Davis County Fees
2-13-5 Utility Fees
2-13-6 Establishment of Fees
2-13-7 Special Rates
2-13-8 Application for Utility Service Agreement
2-13-9 Non-owner Applicants
2-13-10 Owner Guarantee Agreement for
Rental/Lease Premises
2-13-11 Returned Check Fee
2-13-12 Customer Initialization Fee
2-13-13 Customer Deposits
2-13-14 Utility Billing
2-13-15 Accountability of Utility Payment
2-13-16 Service Charge
2-13-17 Property Owner Shutoff Request
2-13-18 Delinquent Accounts – Delinquent Notice
and Discontinuance of Service
2-13-19 Administrative Charges
2-13-20 Disconnection of Water
2-13-21 Interest on Delinquent Accounts
2-13-22 Declaration of a Nuisance
2-13-23 Collection by Property Lien
2-13-24 Appeal of Decision, Rates, Fees and
Rebates
2-13-25 Use Without Payment Prohibited
2-13-26 Unauthorized Users
2-13-1 Purpose. The purpose of this chapter is to
establish the City utilities and a utility billing process
and to establish a fee requirement for utility
customers; a policy concerning deposits affecting
existing customers and disconnected customers; and
procedures and policies concerning delinquent
accounts, disconnection or discontinuation of utility
services, means of collections, and reinstatement of
services.
History: 11/87, 11/07, 1/10, 6/11
2-13-2 City Utilities. The following services are
established as City Utilities; however, this does not
limit the City from establishing other utilities as
necessary.
(1) The City shall provide the following services to
residences:
(a) Culinary water;
(b) Solid waste (garbage);
(c) Storm water removal;
(d) Waste water collection (sanitary sewerage)
(2) The City shall provide the following services to
multi-family residential and non-residential land
uses:
(a) Culinary water;
(b) Storm water removal;
(c) Waste water collection (sanitary sewerage).
History, 1/10, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-13-3 City Managed Utilities. The City may
contract with other utilities affiliated with the City
and servicing areas within the City for the
management of their billing process. For the purpose
of managing the collection and distribution of these
accounts the policies and procedures outlined in this
chapter shall apply. The collection of fees is
applicable to, but not limited to, all customers of the
Managed Utilities within the service areas of the
following utilities:
(1) Pressure irrigation water service, Davis and
Weber Counties Canal Co. (DWCC)
(2) Waste water collection (sanitary sewerage),
Clinton City Sanitary Sewer Special Service District,
(SSSSD).
History: 1/10, 6/11, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-13-4 City Managed Davis County Fees. The
City may establish fees associated with Davis County
services provided within the City when the County
charges the City for these services. For the purpose
of managing the collection and distribution of these
the accounts policies and procedures outlined in this
chapter shall apply. The collection of fees is
applicable to, but not limited to, all potential
customers of these Davis County services within the
City of the following utilities:
(1) Animal Control
(2) Emergency Dispatch Services
History: 6/11
2-13-5 Utility Fees. Utility fees shall be
established based upon and adequate to sustain the
cost of the service provided. A minimum service
may be established and scaled upward based upon the
level or quantity of service given. Fees may be
established for direct and indirect services, both
tangible and intangible.
History: 1/10
2-13-6 Establishment of Fees. All rates for
services associated with the City utility systems, to
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
include but not be limited to fees, deposits, billing,
guaranteeing, penalties, fines, inspections,
assessments and filing or recording actions shall be
established by the City Council, from time to time,
and adopted, by resolution, as part of the Clinton City
Consolidated Fee Schedule. Pass through fees from
other agencies, shall be as set by those agencies
regardless of the fees published in the Consolidated
Fee Schedule.
History: 9/65, 9/84, 1/10
2-13-7 Special Rates. The City Council may from
time to time fix, by resolution, special rates and
conditions for users of exceptionally large amounts of
utility service such as large water quantities,
discharging wastes of unusual characteristics, or
making use thereof under exceptional circumstances
upon such terms and conditions that they may deem
proper.
History: 9/65, 9/84, 1/10, 6/11
2-13-8 Application for Utility Service -
Agreement.
(1) Any owner of property desiring or who is
required to secure service shall apply to the City
Treasurer by paying a deposit fee in a sum to be fixed
by resolution of the City Council and by filing an
agreement application provided by the City.
(2) Any owner of property receiving service by a
City Utility shall notify the City Treasurer of any
change in contact information to include name,
mailing address or phone number within ten (10)
working days of a change.
History: 9/65, 9/84, 6/11, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-13-9 Non-owner Applicants. As of the date of
this ordinance, tenant applications shall not be
accepted, all utility applications shall be filed by the
property owner as outlined in § 2-13-8.
History: 1/10, 6/11
2-13-10 Owner Guarantee Agreement for
Rental/Lease Premises. Owners of rental or lease
property under lease effective July 1, 2011, shall
place on file an agreement with the City indicating
that the owner agrees to:
(1) Pay for all utility services furnished by the City
for any tenant, or any other occupant of the premises,
in case any tenant or occupant fails to pay for the
utility services according to applicable City
ordinance, rules, and regulations enacted or adopted
by the City Council.
(2) Pay for any and all attorney fees, reasonable
collection, recording and court costs, and interest for
unpaid utility services.
(3) Owner agrees to notify Clinton City if the service
address is sold and to whom it is sold.
(4) Any changes in renter after the date of this
ordinance § 2-13-9 applies.
History: 6/11
2-13-11 Returned Check Fee.
(1) The City Council shall establish a returned check
fee, established as set in § 2-13-5, sufficient to cover
the costs to the City related to returned checks or
other actions resulting from nonsufficient funds.
(2) If a customer has two (2) returned checks or other
actions resulting from nonsufficient funds within a
twenty-four (24) month period future payments shall
be paid in cash, credit card, certified check or money
order for an indefinite period of time established by
the Treasurer.
History: 6/11, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-13-12 Customer Initialization Fee. Any person
desiring or who is required to secure services shall
pay a connection fee, established as set in § 2-13-6, at
the time of their application. Initialization fees are
non-refundable.
History: 6/11
2-13-13 Customer Deposits. The following policy
shall govern customer utility deposits:
(1) Each application for City utilities shall be
accompanied by a deposit prior to receiving service.
This deposit can be waived if the applicant has a
current prior account history with the City of 24
consecutive months with no delinquent balances.
(2) Any customer who maintains a record of no pastdue
balances for a period of 24 consecutive months
shall have the deposit credited to the account. If all
City utility services have been terminated, the City
shall apply the deposit, if any, to the unpaid account
balance. Any amount of said deposit remaining after
payment of said account shall be returned to the user.
If the whereabouts of the user is unknown and no
address has been provided to the City, any unclaimed
deposit or overpayment on the terminated account
shall be applied at the end of the fiscal year to the bad
debt account for the enterprise fund. The City is not
responsible for payment of interest on deposits.
(3) Any customer who has City utility services
disconnected for non-payment of the City utility bill
will be required to increase any existing deposit to
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
the current rate, if the amount of the deposit is under
an old deposit rate.
(4) Such deposit shall not be considered an advance
payment of any service charges, and unpaid deposit
accounts may render the service account delinquent.
Notwithstanding the existence of such deposit, the
user shall not have the right to compel the City to
apply such deposit to any account to avoid
delinquency. Deposit refunds are only allowed as
outlined in §2-13-13.
History: 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-13-14 Utility Billing. The City Treasurer shall
furnish to each active account, once each month or
such other regular interval as the City Council shall
direct, a written or printed statement which states:
(1) The amount of the bill for each service assessed.
(2) The statement shall specify the place of payment
and date due.
(3) The sum total of all charges must be paid by the
due date specified on the bill.
(4) The statement shall be mailed to the property
owner unless an alternate address is provided by the
property owner on the application required by § 2-13-
8.
History: 1/10, 6/11, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-13-15 Accountability of Utility Payment. All
payments made to the City for utilities provided shall
be accredited to the utility bill individually and in the
following order: penalties and shutoff fees; expenses
incurred by the City including attorney's fees or
recording fees; fees to City Managed Davis County
Fees; City Managed Utilities; and then to City
Utilities in the following order sanitary sewer, storm
water, solid waste and lastly to culinary water fees.
History: 1/10, 6/11
2-13-16 Service Charge.
(1) All owners of properties receiving a utility either
within or without the City shall be responsible for the
payment of the charges associated with the individual
utilities servicing the property as established in this
Title.
(2) If a customer’s property will be vacant for an
entire billing cycle or multiple billing cycles, the
owner of the property may make arrangements with
the Treasurer for minimal fees to be assessed during
the continued vacancy of the property. Secondary
water charges and storm water removal charges shall
not be discontinued during any vacancy.
Adjustments shall only be made for complete billing
cycles.
(3) The City Manager or other authorized agent of
the City may excuse needy persons who are not
reasonably capable of paying the monthly charge for
residential collection of utilities from the payment of
the residential rate for a period of time as may be
deemed proper or necessary.
(4) The City Council, by Resolution and based upon
significant findings, may excuse a class of
individuals for a set period of time.
History: 5/62, 9/84, 12/89, 1/10, 6/11
2-13-17 Property Owner Shutoff Request. Any
property owner who is renting a dwelling or other
structure utilizing utilities or services outlined in this
Chapter may not request that the utilities be
discontinued if the property is currently or is planned
to remain occupied.
History: 6/11, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
2-13-18 Delinquent Accounts - Delinquent Notice
and Discontinuance of Service.
(1) Notice shall be provided as established in § 2-13-
14.
(2) The Treasurer, or other authorized agent of the
City, is hereby empowered to enforce the payment of
all delinquent utility service charges by an action of
law in the corporate name of the City. This may
include, but is not limited to, disconnecting the water
supply, sending the account to a collection agency,
initiating action through small claims court, or filing
a tax lien.
(3) The following procedures shall be followed in
dealing with delinquent utility accounts that are
receiving utilities supplied or managed by the City:
(a) Any person or entity who receives a utility
supplied or managed by the City and neglects, fails,
or refuses to pay the sum total of the City’s utility bill
within 5 days after the date due as outlined in § 2-13-
14 shall receive a delinquent notice and a notice of
intent to disconnect. The bill must be paid by the
date specified on this delinquent notice, which is
normally 10 to 15 days from the date of issuance of
the notice. Failure to make the appropriate payment
to the City will result in culinary water disconnection
and may include the discontinuance of other services,
e.g. secondary water, garbage. The notice shall
substantially include the following:
(i) The date of the notice.
(ii) The name and mailing address of the customer
listed on the monthly utility bill.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
(iii) The amount due, including any finance or
administrative charges.
(iv) A statement that services will be disconnected
without further notice unless payment is received
before the shut off date listed in the notice.
(v) A statement that once service has been
disconnected, it will not be resumed until all service
charges, shut-off fees, after hours fees, administrative
fees, and delinquent past due amounts have been
paid.
(vi) A statement identifying the amount of the shutoff
fee that will be charged in addition to any other
fee, fine, or penalty for service which is disconnected
due to non-payment of the delinquent account.
(b) A statement informing renters that the shutoff
notice applies to them even though their property
owner is responsible for paying the utility bill and
instructing renters that it is their responsibility to
resolve any issues related to the shutoff with their
property owner.
(c) Notice to property owners shall contain the same
information as outlined in § (a) above, however it
shall be mailed to the address of record filed in the
Treasurer’s office as required in § 2-13-8.
(4) Failure to notify the Treasurer of change of
registration information required by § 2-13-8(2) does
not exempt a property owner from obligations
resulting from a delinquent account or prevent the
City from taking action as set in Title.
History: 9/65, 9/84, 6/11
2-13-19 Administrative Charges. Any charges
assessed as part of any utility delinquent notice shall
be deemed a part of the water utility bill; and unless it
is timely paid, the account remains delinquent and
pursuant to the procedures outlined above, the water
service shall be disconnected. A fee will be
assessed, as established in § 2-13-5, to shut
off/reconnect water service that has been turned off
for non-payment. A separate after hour’s fee may be
assessed if water is requested to be reconnected
before or after the normal business hours of the City.
History: 11/87, 11/04, 6/11
2-13-20 Disconnection of Water. Any customer
who fails to comply with the notice of delinquent
account shall be disconnected from the culinary water
system on or after the date indicated on the notice to
disconnect. Water service shall not be resumed until
all fees, charges, and past-due amounts are paid in
full. If for economic reasons a customer is unable to
pay the balance in full, the City Manager, or other
authorized agent of the City, may set up a payment
plan. If the customer does not follow through with
the payment plan, and the City Manager or
authorized agent is not contacted and approval is not
given for an additional extension, water services may
be disconnected without further notice.
History: 11/87, 11/04
2-13-21 Interest on Delinquent Accounts. All
delinquent utility service accounts may be assessed
interest at a rate set by resolution of the City Council.
In the absence of a resolution providing for interest,
interest shall be assessed at the rate pursuant to Utah
Code Annotated 15-1-1.
History: 11/87, 11/04, 1/10
2-13-22 Declaration of a Nuisance. A delinquent
utility fee is declared a nuisance upon the respective
property being serviced by the utility.
History: 1/10, 6/11
2-13-23 Collection by Property Lien. A delinquent
utility fee may be placed on the tax bill for the
amount of such delinquent fees plus late charges and
cost of lien administration and collected as ordinary
taxes by the County. Establishment of a notice as
outlined in § 2-13-18 is sufficient for a certified copy
of the lien to be retained by the City Treasurer, for
the amount of the respective assessments against the
parcels of land as they appear on the current
assessment role. The lien created attaches upon
recordation in the office of the County Recorder.
The assessment may be collected at the same time
and in the same manner as ordinary City real estate
property taxes are collected and shall be subject to
the same penalties and the same procedure and sale in
case of delinquency as provided for such taxes. All
laws applicable to the levy, collection and
enforcement of City real estate property taxes shall
be applicable to such assessment.
History: 1/10, 6/11
2-13-24 Appeal of Decision, Rates, Fees and
Rebates.
(1) Any person or entity that believes that this Title
was interpreted or applied erroneously by a member
of the City Staff may appeal to the City Manager.
(2) The City Manager may hear complaints and make
corrections of any assessments, established in this
Title, deemed to be illegal, unequal, or unjust.
(3) The City Manager may temporarily, if he sees fit,
adjust, assess, or rebate all or any part of a fee
established in this Chapter, related to the systems
established in this Chapter, of any indigent person.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
(4) Appeals shall be submitted to the City Manager,
in writing, explaining the circumstances that justify
the request along with any fees established as set in
§2-13-5.
(5) The City Manager will respond to the appellant
within 30 days of receiving an appeal and inform the
Treasurer of action resulting from the appeal.
History: 1/10, 6/11
2-13-25 Use Without Payment Prohibited. It shall
be unlawful for any person by himself, family,
servants, or agents to utilize the City utilities without
paying therefore as herein provided.
History: 8/96
2-13-26 Unauthorized Users. It shall be unlawful
for any utility user to permit any person from other
premises or any unauthorized persons to use or obtain
utility services from his premises utility.
History: 9/65, 9/84, 1/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
Chapter 14. Establishment of the Clinton City
Community Arts Board
2-14-1 Board Created – Appointment – Term –
Purpose – Voting - Meetings
2-14-2 Removal and Vacancy
2-14-3 Records and Public Notice
2-14-1 Board Created - Appointment - Term -
Purposes - Voting - Meetings.
(1) There shall be a Community Arts Board (Arts
Board) established consisting of five (5) volunteer
members, each of whom shall be appointed to serve
by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council. Each member shall be appointed for two (2)
years.
(2) The Arts Board membership shall consist of five
(5) citizens of Clinton City over the age of eighteen
(18) years of age. Three (3) members shall be
required for a quorum, with a minimum of three (3)
votes in favor for passage of a recommendation. A
City Council member may be assigned by the Mayor
as a non-voting liaison to the Arts Board. The City
Manager shall staff the Arts Board with such City
staff members as may be necessary.
(3) Citizens residing outside of Clinton City may be
appointed to a two (2) year term as a nonvoting
member by the Mayor, with the advice and consent
of the City Council. Non-resident members do not
count toward the five (5) members required in
Section 1 or to constitute a quorum.
(4) Any resident of Clinton City may participate with
the Arts Council as an ad hoc non-voting participant,
without the notification of the Mayor or Council.
(5) The mission of the Arts Board is to plan, foster,
encourage and promote fine arts, performing arts,
community enhancement programs, and other artistic
and cultural activities; with the purpose of enriching
the lives of Clinton City residents.
(6) The Arts Board shall meet at least quarterly, but
may meet as frequently as needed to accomplish their
duties and mission.
(7) The Arts Board shall generally function as an
independent body, coordinating and correlating with
the City, but functioning on their own using
volunteers and non-monetary donations as much as
possible. Use of the City name for fund raising must
be cleared through the City Manager, who may
require the request to go before the City Council. All
funding must be accounted for as required by City
governmental accounting rules.
(8) The Arts Board shall, annually by majority vote,
select from their body a chair, vice-chair and
secretary.
2-14-2 Removal and Vacancy.
(1) Any member of the Arts Board may be removed
by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council.
(2) If any member does not attend three (3)
consecutive meetings, the Arts Board by majority
vote, may recommend to the Mayor and City Council
to remove the absent member and provide a
replacement member for the remainder of the existing
term.
2-14-3 Records and Public Notice.
(1) The Arts Board shall keep regular minutes of all
of its meetings. Such records shall be open to the
public pursuant to the current City and State Codes.
(2) Meetings of the Arts Board must be noticed in
accordance with the current State Code pertaining to
public meetings.
History; 11/09, 10/16 - Ord 16-02; 04/17, Ord 17-01
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
Chapter 15. Civil Rights
2-15-1 Short title
2-15-2 Declaration of Policy
2-15-3 Declaration of Civil Rights
2-15-4 Equal Rights in Places of Public
Accommodation, Resort or Amusement
2-15-5 Exclusion, Segregation and
Discrimination Prohibited in Places of
Public Accommodation, Resort or
Amusement
2-15-6 Places of Public Accommodation, Resort
or Amusement Defined
2-15-7 Extent of Personal Responsibility
2-15-8 Penalty for Violation
2-15-9 Suspension or Revocation of License
2-15-1 Short Title. This Chapter shall be known as
Clinton City Civil Rights Ordinance.
History: 01/99
2-15-2 Declaration of Policy. It is hereby declared
to be the policy of Clinton City in the exercise of its
police power for the protection of the public welfare,
health, safety and peace of the City and the
inhabitants thereof, to prohibit discrimination in
places of public accommodation, resort or
amusement due to race, color, religion, ancestry or
national origin.
History: 01/99
2-15-3 Declaration of Civil Right. All persons
have the right to the full and equal accommodations,
advantages, facilities and privileges of any place of
public accommodation, resort or amusement within
the City subject only to the conditions and limitations
established by law and applicable alike to all persons.
The right is recognized and declared to be a civil
right.
History: 01/99
2-15-4 Equal Rights in Places of Public
Accommodation, Resort or Amusement. No
person being the owner, lessee, proprietor, manager,
superintendent, agent or employee of any place of
public accommodation, resort or amusement within
the City shall directly or indirectly refuse, withhold
from or deny to any person any of the
accommodations, advantages, facilities or privileges
thereof, and no person shall directly or indirectly
publish, circulate, issue, display, post or mail or
cause to be published, circulated, issued, displayed,
posted or mailed within the City any written, painted
or printed communication, notice or advertisement to
the effect that any of the accommodations,
advantages, facilities and privileges of a place of
public accommodations, resort or amusement shall be
refused, withheld from or denied to any person on
account of race, color, religion, ancestry or national
origin, or that the patronage or custom thereof of any
person belonging to or purporting to be of any
particular race, color, religion, ancestry or national
origin is unwelcome, objectionable or not acceptable,
desired or solicited. The production of any such
written, painted or printed communication, notice or
advertisement, purporting to relate to any such place
and to be made any person being the owner, lessee,
proprietor, superintendent, manager, agent or
employee thereof, shall be presumptive evidence in
any proceedings that the same was authorized and
published by such person.
History: 01/99
2-15-5 Exclusion, Segregation and
Discrimination Prohibited in Places of Public
Accommodation, Resort or Amusement. Any
exclusion or segregation of or discrimination against
any person on account of race, color, religion,
ancestry or national origin in places of public
accommodation, resort or amusement within the City
shall be unlawful.
History: 01/99
2-15-6 Places of Public Accommodation, Resort
or Amusement Defined. A place of public
accommodation, resort or amusement within the
meaning of this Chapter shall be deemed to include
inns, taverns, roadhouses, motels, hotels, whether
conducted for the entertainment of transient guests or
for the accommodation of those seeking health,
recreation or rest, restaurants, eating houses and any
place where food is sold for consumption on the
premises, buffets, saloons, barrooms, and any store,
park or enclosure where spirituous or malt liquors are
sold; ice cream parlors, confectioneries, soda
fountains, and all stores where ice cream, ice and
fruit preparations or their derivatives, or where
beverages of any kind are retailed for consumption
on the premises; dispensaries, clinics, hospitals,
bathhouses, theaters, motion picture houses, music
halls, concert halls, circuses, race courses, skating
rinks, amusement and recreation parks, fairs, bowling
alleys, golf courses, gymnasiums, shooting galleries,
billiard and pool parlors, swimming pools, public
libraries, garages, all public conveyances operated on
land, water or in the air, as well as the stations and
terminals thereof; public halls and public elevators of
buildings and structures occupied by two or more
tenants, or by the owner and one or more tenants.
Nothing herein contained shall be construed to
include any institution, club or place of
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 2 Administration
accommodation which is in its nature distinctly
private.
History: 01/99
2-15-7 Extent of Personal Responsibility. The
provisions and requirements of this Chapter shall
bind and obligate every owner, lessee, operator,
proprietor, manager, agent and employee, whether a
natural person, corporation, or unincorporated
association, engaged in or exercising control over the
operation of any place of public accommodation
resort or amusement; provided, that whenever any
agent or employee shall so exercise any function or
employ any power with which he is charged or
entrusted as to violate any provisions of this Chapter,
both he and his principal or employer shall be held
equally responsible.
History: 01/99
2-15-8 Penalty for Violation. Any person who or
any agency, bureau, corporation or association which
shall willfully violate any of the provisions of this
Chapter or who or which shall aid or cause the
violation of any of said provisions shall be deemed
guilty of a Class “B” misdemeanor.
History: 01/99
2-15-9 Suspension or Revocation of License.
Whenever it shall have been judicially determined
that a licensee or person operating or doing business
under a license has violated this Chapter in the course
of such operation or business two (2) times or more
within any 12–month period, the City Council shall
suspend or revoke such license as provided in this
Title.
History: 01/99, 10/16 - Ord 16-02
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 3 Animal Control
TITLE 3. ANIMAL CONTROL
Chapter 1. Adoption of Davis County
Animal Control Ordinance
Chapter 2. City Addenda to the Davis
County Code
Chapter 1. Adoption of Davis County Animal
Control Ordinance
3-1-1 Animal Control Ordinance for Clinton
City.
3-1-1 Animal Control Ordinance for Clinton
City.
(1) Except for the exceptions listed below, the City
adopts for enforcement the latest version of the Davis
County Animal Control Ordinance found in the
County’s Title 6 of their code.
(2) Exceptions to the County Animal Control
Ordinance to be enforced within Clinton City are:
(a) Licensing of cats is not required within Clinton
City (reference section 6.12.060 of the County Code);
and,
(b) The maximum limit of dogs over four (4) months
of age shall be two (2) per household (reference
Section 6.12.060 of the County Code).
History: 2/12
(Davis County Animal Control Ordinance
Attached for Reference.)
Clinton Code of Ordinances Title 3 Animal Control
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 3 Animal Control
Chapter 2. City Addenda to the Davis
County Code
3-2-1 Addendum to Section 6.16.110- Animal
Waste, to the Davis County Code.
3-2-1 Addendum to Section 6.16.110- Animal
Waste, to the Davis County Code.
(1) The owner or custodian of an animal shall be
responsible for the immediate removal of any excreta
deposited by his or her animal on any public walk,
recreation area, or private property other than private
property belonging to the owner of the animal. It shall
be unlawful for the owner or custodian to fail to so
remove the excreta.
(2) The owner or custodian of an animal shall have on
their person an adequate supply of plastic bags, or
other acceptable item, for removal of any excreta
deposited by his or her animal, while walking their
animal on any public walk, recreation area, right-ofway,
or private property other than that belonging to
the owner of the animal.
(3) Any person found in violation of § 3-2-3 above,
by an employee of Clinton City authorized to enforce
this code, may be cited for a Civil Violation and
subject to a Civil Fine.
(4) Fines for Civil Offences of this code shall be
adopted by Resolution of the City Council, from time
to time, and published in the Clinton City
Consolidated Fee Schedule. Fines shall be set based
upon an increasing scale for subsequent offenses.
History: 05/12










Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 4 Annexation
TITLE 4. ANNEXATION*
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. Repealed
Chapter 3. Annexation Policy Plan
Chapter 4. Criteria to Guide Annexation
Decisions
Chapter 5. General Requirements for
Annexation
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. Repealed
Chapter 3. Annexation Policy Plan
4-3-1 Adoption
4-3-2 Office of Primary Responsibility
4-3-3 Purpose of the Plan
4-3-4 Plan Preparation and Adoption
4-3-5 Public Hearings
4-3-6 Availability of Plan
4-3-7 Definitions
4-3-1 Adoption. The Annexation Policy Plan
(herein referred to as ‘the Plan”) was adopted by
Resolution of the Clinton City Council, Resolution
Number 15-03, dated April 22, 2003, as required by
Section 10-2-401.5 of the Utah Code.
History: 11/09
4-3-2 Office of Primary Responsibility. The
Community Development Department is the Office
of Primary Responsibility for review and proposing
changes to this Title and the Annexation Policy Plan.
The Director may call on other departments for
assistance in reviewing this Chapter.
4-3-3 Purpose of the Plan. The Plan is
established to be a guide for making decisions
regarding the future annexation of unincorporated
lands into the boundaries of the City of Clinton.
History: 11/09
4-3-4 Plan Preparation and Adoption. The
Preparation of the Plan began on December 17, 2002,
with a workshop of the Clinton City Planning
Commission, City Council and City staff. At this
workshop, participants assisted in determining the
specific criteria necessary to guide the City’s
decisions to grant future annexation petitions, as
outlined in the Utah Code. A review of the first draft
of the plan was held by the Planning Commission on
January 21, 2003, after which the dates for two public
hearings were scheduled.
History: 11/09
4-3-5 Public Hearings. The first public hearing
was held by the Planning Commission on March 18,
and was continued on April 1, 2003. The City
Council held a public hearing on April 8, 2003,
which, after following a few adjustments based upon
public input, the plan was adopted April 22, 2003.
4-3-6 Availability of the Plan. Portions of the
Plan are included in this Title. The Plan, in its
entirety, may be viewed by contacting the Clinton
City Community Development Department.
4-3-7 Definitions. The following definitions
apply to this Title.
“City Facilities” means amenities that will be turned
over to and become the property of the City along
with the obligation for maintenance and upkeep.
Such amenities include, but are not limited to, parks,
trails, street lights, or buildings, etc.
History: 11/09
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 4 Annexation
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 4 Annexation
Chapter 4. Criteria to Guide Annexation
Decisions
4-4-1 Need for Municipal Services in
Unincorporated Areas
4-4-2 Plan for Extension of Municipal Services
4-4-3 How the Services will be Financed
4-4-4 An Estimate of the Tax Consequences to
Residents
4-4-1 Need for Municipal Services in
Unincorporated Areas.
(1) The unincorporated areas to be considered for
annexation into the City are located within Davis
County. The expansion area is identified generally as
being north and west of the current City boundaries,
extending westward.
(2) The need for municipal services in this area
would most likely hinge on accommodating
development desiring to become a part of the City.
Future needs for community growth will encompass a
variety of land uses, including low to medium density
residential, some commercial near the areas of the
proposed Legacy Highway, and open space and
wetlands.
History: 11/09, 12/09
4-4-2 Plan for Extension of Municipal Services.
(1) Community growth in the identified annexation
area would require the extension of full municipal
services. These services and infrastructure will be
extended into areas on an as-needed basis. The Plan
contains a review of the municipal services and their
providers as well as the current status and their ability
for extension. The Plan should be referred to
whenever considering the affect of extending services
to facilitate an annexation petition.
(2) Currently sewer services in the annexation area
are handled through septic tank, which limits the
potential for significant growth in the area. The
development of the sewer lift station in the City has
made it possible for some land west of the station to
connect to the station. However, a complete
evaluation of the capacity and capabilities of the
station will be necessary.
(3) Concerns for drainage and flooding will also exist
in the designated area for annexation. Natural and
storm drainage channels and canals in the area will
require extension. Ground water issues will need to
be evaluated and may necessitate a ban on basement
construction methods.
History: 11/09
4-4-3 How the Services will be Financed.
(1) Financing of infrastructure expansion will, for the
most part, be paid by the developers of the properties
requiring the expansion. Properties in the
unincorporated Davis County area will be required to
be annexed into the City in order to be connected to
the municipal services.
(2) The City may elect to participate in the financing
of some City facilities which will improve service to
existing development. These costs will be met by
various means. The City may chose to use general
funds, impact fees, special improvement districts,
bonding, grants or other financial means.
History: 11/09, 12/09
4-4-4 An Estimate of the Tax Consequences to
Residents.
(1) Property taxes from residential properties
generally do not cover the full costs of providing
services to those residences. If all annexation areas
are developed solely as residential, the annexation of
these properties will result in an increase to the City’s
burden of paying for the services required by the
development. To decrease the tax burden, areas near
the proposed Legacy Highway corridor have been
identified for potential commercial uses.
(2) The Plan has an example of comparison of tax
rates for property within the City and property in the
unincorporated portion of the County in the Plan
area. A similar study, for both residential and
commercial, would need to be accomplished at the
time of application review to accurately evaluate the
increase upon properties being annexed into the City.
History: 11/09
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 4 Annexation
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 4 Annexation
Chapter 5. General Requirements for
Annexation
4-5-1 Petitioners for Annexation - Compliance
with State Law; Plats
4-5-2 Referral to City Planning Commission
4-5-3 Development Agreement
4-5-4 Bonds of Petitioners
4-5-5 Policy as to Property Subject to
4-5 Annexation
4-5-6 Securing Land for Public Sites
4-5-7 Public Utility and Drainage Easements
4-5-8 Securing of Water Rights in Annexed
Area
4-5-9 Applicability of Zoning Regulations in
Annexed Areas
4-5-10 Fees and Charges
4-5-11 Levels of Service and Improvement
Standards
4-5-12 Assumption of Outstanding Obligations
4-5-13 Streets
4-5-14 Irrigation Ditches or Canals
4-5-1 Petitioners for Annexation - Compliance
with State Law; Plats. All petitions for annexation
to the City shall comply with the requirements of the
laws of the State governing annexation and shall be
accompanied by a map or plat drawn on mylar, or
similar material approved by the City, to a scale and
size suitable to be recorded at the County. No
annexation is complete until the city approved plat
and ordinance are recorded at the County Recorder’s
Office and other filings as required by State Code.
History: 9/84; 11/09
4-5-2 Referral to City Planning Commission.
All petitions for annexation shall be referred to the
City Planning Commission for study and
recommendation.
History: 9/84
4-5-3 Development Agreement.
(1) The City Council, after recommendations from
the Planning Commission, shall determine what
questions and problems are presented by each
petition for annexation and shall invite the petitioners
to consult concerning the equitable solution thereof.
The parties in good faith shall endeavor to enter into
a written development agreement (Agreement)
covering the solution to any questions and problems.
The Agreement shall cover all points necessary to be
considered in order to secure compliance with the
annexation policies as set forth in this Title and the
Plan.
History: 12/09
(2) This Agreement shall be considered a contract
and shall be recorded against the land with the
annexation plat and ordinance.
History: 9/84; 10/9; 11/09; 12/09
(3) The Agreement may contain any reasonable
provisions relating to the installation of municipal
utility service lines, City facilities and furnishing of
municipal utility service.
History: 9/84; 10/9; 12/09
4-5-4 Bonds of Petitioners. Before an annexation
ordinance is passed by the City, the petitioners
seeking annexation shall execute and deposit with the
City all bonds and escrows outlined in the
Agreements to adequately insure the performance of
commitments contained in the Agreement, the
provisions of the ordinance, and any other
requirements that the Council deems necessary.
History: 9/84; 12/09
4-5-5 Policy as to Property Subject to
Annexation.
(1) The general policy of the City with respect to
property subject to annexation is hereby declared as
follows:
History: 12/09
(a) To annex contiguous territory for reasons deemed
to be in the interest of the City and not otherwise.
(b) To annex enclaves.
(c) To annex territory only if no enclave will be
created thereby.
(d) To annex territory if the City determines it is
feasible to serve the area with utilities and other
municipal services within a reasonable time.
History: 9/84
(2) The Plan emphasizes procedures and policies to
consider during evaluation of an annexation petition.
The Plan shall be reviewed when evaluating a
petition.
History: 11/09; 12/09
4-5-6 Securing Land for Public Sites.
(1) The City shall not require the donation of land for
public sites unless the sites are specific to a
development proposal and utility that the City will be
expected to maintain.
History: 9/84; 11/09
(2) The City shall be granted the option to secure
land for public sites, as it may determine, which
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 4 Annexation
option may be exercised between the time of
annexation and acceptance of any subdivision plat.
The City shall acquire these sites at their fair
unimproved value as of the time of annexation and as
determined by competent appraisal in the event
mutual agreement cannot be reached. If the property
is to be appraised, each party shall appoint a
disinterested appraiser and they in turn shall choose a
disinterested third party. The decision of a majority
shall be binding. The cost thereof shall be borne
equally. The City shall be responsible for the cost of
any off-site improvements associated with the sites.
History: 9/84, 11/09; 12/09
(3) A similar option shall be granted to the
appropriate school district with respect to public
school sites, the terms thereof to be agreed upon
between the annexing parties and the school district.
Sale of these lands to a school district does not
exempt the lands from the requirements of § 4-5-8
below.
History: 9/84; 10/9
4-5-7 Public Utility and Drainage Easements.
Public utility and drainage easements, or the fee title,
as determined by the City, shall be donated for
utilities and drainage with there locations to be
determined by the City.
History: 9/84; 11/09,12/09
4-5-8 Securing of Water Rights for Annexed
Area.
(1) The petitioner shall provide to the City adequate
culinary water shares to service the intended uses of
the annexation area. As an option, if the City has
adequate water shares, the City may require the
petitioner to reimburse the City for the water that the
City has purchased.
History: 12/09
(2) The City has the option of requiring secondary
water to be provided in the annexation area. If
secondary water is to be provided in the annexation
area the petitioner shall work with the Davis and
Weber County Canal Company (DWCC) to provide
the water as established in the Agreement between
DWCC and the City.
History: 9/84, 11/09; 12/09
4-5-9 Applicability of Zoning Regulations in
Annexed Areas.
(1) The zoning of areas to be annexed shall be
governed and controlled at all times by the zoning
regulations of the City.
History: 9/84
(2) Petitioners shall indicate on the application the
zoning that is requested to be applied to the proposed
area for annexation.
History: 12/09
(3) The zoning of property within the annexation area
shall be determined during establishment of the
Agreement and shall be designated by ordinance
subsequent to the annexation ordinance.
(4) The zoning requested or being considered shall be
announced in public notices required as part of the
annexation process.
History: 11/09
4-5-10 Fees and Charges.
(1) There shall be paid to the City by the owners of
land petitioning for annexation a fee as determined
by the City Council, from time to time, and published
in the Consolidated Fee Schedule. This fee shall
cover the processing, engineering, and staffing of
research by the City. An annexation application is
not considered complete until this fee is paid.
(2) In addition to the processing fee outlined in § 4-5-
10 above the Council may consider specific
annexation capital fees associated with the following:
(a) The reasonably projected cost of providing utility
service lines or City facilities to serve the lands
within the area of the petition; and,
(b) The cost of City facilities, utilities and services
already installed which would serve or be in a
position to serve the area sought to be annexed.
(3) Payment of capital fees shall be made on or
before five (5) years from the effective date of
annexation in one (1) sum or in installments as the
Council shall determine, and if in installments, the
Council shall further determine the amounts and due
dates of payments. Payment agreements are to be
outlined in the Agreement.
(4) Upon application and showing of a hardship or
other extenuating circumstance satisfactory to the
Council, and if in the judgment of the Council it
appears that its interest will not suffer substantially,
the Council may, from time to time, extend the time
of payment of all or any part of the capital fees.
However, no extension for more than two (2) years
shall be granted at any one (1) time. Further, no
extension shall be granted at any time without a
partial payment of the capital fees in an amount and
at a time that the Council determines.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 4 Annexation
(5) In the event land annexed includes lands of
owners who have not joined in the petition for
annexation, and who have not agreed to pay or
execute a contract agreeing to pay the sums specified
in § (1) above the City Council may establish impact
fees as a prerequisite to the issuance of a building
permit or allowing connection to municipal utilities.
The impact fee shall be reasonable and proportional
to the monetary equivalent of the amount payable by
the petitioners for the services provided.
(6) No capital or impact fees shall be payable in
respect to the annexation of lands dedicated to the
City as established in § 4-5-6 or 4-5-8 above.
(7) The agreement shall provide for the responsibility
of extending services to or into the annexation area
along with any issues related to timing, payment,
reimbursement, or financing.
History: 9/84, 11/09; 12/09
4-5-11 Levels of Service and Improvement
Standards.
(1) It is expected that development of utilities and
City facilities within the annexed area shall be
equivalent to or to a higher standard than the level of
service currently established within the City. Any
deviations from the existing level of service shall be
approved by the City.
(2) All improvements shall, as a minimum, meet the
standards established by the City. In the event that a
standard is needed that the City does not have, shall
be based upon sound engineering practices and
approved by the City.
History: 11/09
4-5-12 Assumption of Outstanding Obligations.
(1) Outstanding bonded obligations involving special
service districts, schools, etc., shall be paid by the
annexing parties or assumed under mutually
satisfactory agreements between and among the
holders of the bonds and the petitioners.
History: 12/09
(2) All taxes, property or otherwise and green belt
roll back taxes shall be the responsibility of the
petitioners and shall be up to date prior to the
recording of the annexation plat.
History: 9/84; 10/9
4-5-13 Streets.
(1) In areas traversed or to be traversed by major
streets, as established in the Clinton City
Transportation Master Plan, the rights-of-way, as
required by the City, shall be provided.
Consideration of improvement of major streets shall
be included in the Agreement.
History: 12/09
(2) Existing streets and roads shall be improved to
meet the existing City standard. Timing of these
improvements shall be included in the Agreement.
History: 9/84; 10/9
4-5-14 Irrigation Ditches or Canals. In areas
traversed by existing irrigation ditches or canals, the
petitioners, so far as is practicable, shall cover or
enclose these ditches in a manner that is approved by
both the ditch company and the City.
History: 9/84, 11/09; 12/09
*Cross-reference: UCA §10-2-401 to §428
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 4 Annexation
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
TITLE 5. BUILDING REGULATIONS
Chapter 1. General Provisions
Chapter 2. Building Official
Chapter 3. Technical Codes
Chapter 4. Stop Work Order
Chapter 5. Relocation of Building
Chapter 6. Demolition or Removal of Buildings
Chapter 7. Certificate of Notice of Non-
Compliance
Chapter 8. Other Building and Construction
Regulations
Chapter 9. Residential Rental Fit Premises
Chapter 10. Penalties
Chapter 11. Vacant Buildings
Chapter 12. Off-site Improvement Agreements
and Repayment for City Installed
Improvements
Chapter 1. General Provisions
5-1-1 Permit Required and Exceptions
5-1-2 Application for Permit
5-1-3 Approval of Permit and Plan
5-1-4 Revocation of a Permit
5-1-5 Closure/Expiration of a Permit
5-1-6 Variations of Plan Prohibited
5-1-7 Fee Schedule
5-1-8 Determination and Payment of Fees
5-1-9 Work Without Payment of Fees
5-1-10 Plan Review Fee
5-1-11 Completion and Off-site Bond Agreement
to Assure Project Completion and Final
a. Condition of Off-site Improvements
5-1-12 Release of Funds
5-1-13 Liability for Damages
5-1-1 Permit Required and Exceptions. No
building, structure or building service equipment
regulated by this code and the technical codes shall
be erected, constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired,
moved, improved, removed, converted or demolished
unless a separate, appropriate permit for each
building, structure or building service equipment has
first been obtained from the Building Official.
History: 2/98, 4/07
5-1-2 Application for Permit. A building permit
shall be secured from the Community Development
Department upon written application accompanied by
plans and specifications, in duplicate or other number
of copies established by the Building Official, which
must state the specific nature of the construction or
alterations to be made. At a minimum, the plans and
application shall provide the information required by
the appropriate technical codes adopted by the State
of Utah Building Commission.
History: 2/98, 4/07
5-1-3 Approval of Permit and Plan. The
application and plans shall be reviewed by the City
Planner for zoning compliance. The Building
Official or his designated representative who shall
review the plan to determine whether the proposed
construction or alteration conforms to the appropriate
technical codes and ordinances of this city. Plans
shall be returned to the applicant upon payment of
fees, either marked “Disapproved” (with comments),
or “Approved for Construction”. In the event plans
are either approved for construction or approved with
comments a building permit shall be issued to the
applicant together with one (1) set of the approved
plans. One (1) set of the plans shall be retained by
the Community Development Department and
maintained on file with the original copy of the
building permit until the building permit is close
History: 2/98, 4/07
5-1-4 Revocation of a Permit. The Building
Official may, in writing, suspend or revoke at any
time a permit which has been issued which may result
in a violation of any ordinance or technical/model
code of this city or was issued based on
false/improper information.
History: 2/98, 4/07
5-1-5 Closure/Expiration of a Permit. A
building permit issued by the City of Clinton shall be
closed once a certificate of occupancy or notification
of passing final inspection has been issued. For the
purpose of this section the 180 day period starts anew
every time an inspection of the building or work
authorized by the permit is inspected by a building
inspector. An extension may be granted by the
Building Official when he/she has determined that
extenuating circumstances exist.
History: 2/98, 4/07
5-1-6 Variations of Plan Prohibited. No design
or material variation from the approved plan shall be
allowed unless such variations shall first have been
approved in writing by the Building Official or his
representative.
History: 2/98, 4/07
5-1-7 Fee Schedule. The Community
Development Department shall collect a fee for a
building permit in amounts to be fixed by resolution
of the City Council
History: 2/98, 4/07
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
5-1-8 Determination and Payment of Fees. A
permit shall not be valid until the fees prescribed by
law have been paid, nor shall an amendment to a
permit be released until the additional fee, if any, has
been paid. The applicant for a commercial permit
shall provide an estimated permit value at time of
application. Permit valuations shall include total
value of work, including materials and labor, for
which the permit is being issued, such as electrical,
gas, mechanical, plumbing equipment and permanent
systems. If, in the opinion of the Building Official,
the valuation is underestimated on the application, the
permit shall be denied, unless the applicant can show
detailed estimates to meet the approval of the
Building Official. Final building permit valuation
shall be set by the Building Official.
History: 4/07
5-1-9 Work Without Payment of Fees. Any
person who commences any work on a building,
structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing
system before obtaining the necessary permits shall
be subject to a fee established by the Building
Official that shall be in addition to the required
permit fees. The payment of the fee for the
construction, alteration, removal or demolition for
work done in connection to or concurrently with the
work authorized by a building permit shall not relieve
the applicant or holder of the permit from the
payment of other fees that are prescribed by law. The
Building Official is authorized to establish a refund
policy.
History: 4/07
5-1-10 Plan Review Fee. The plan review fee shall
be a percentage of the building permit fee as
established from time to time by resolution of the
City Council. The Building Official may require
payment of the plan review fee at the time the plans
are submitted.
History 4/07
5-1-11 Completion and Off-site Bond Agreement
to Assure Project Completion and Final Condition
of Off-site Improvements.
(1) All applications for building permits with the
potential of damaging improvements within the
public right-of-way or that may result in a request for
occupancy prior to completion of all improvements,
shall be accompanied by a Permit Completion and
Off-site Improvement Protection Agreement,
hereinafter referred to as a “Bond Agreement” to
assure project completion and the maintenance of
Off-site improvements. The requirement for a bond
shall be at the determination of the Building Official.
The Bond Agreement shall be prepared by the
Community Development Department and signed by
the owner or his authorized representative (referred to
as “Builder”) of the property to be improved. The
bond shall be in a sum set by resolution of the City
Council or by determining the cost of the
improvements, whichever is greater. The purpose of
the bond shall be to assure the satisfactory
completion of the project as well as maintaining the
satisfactory condition of the curb, gutter, sidewalk,
drive approach, landscaping, paving, patching,
asphalt cut, and other public improvement (protected
items) theretofore installed on and in close proximity
to the individual property for which the building
permit was sought. The Bond Agreement shall
terminate and the bond is released after satisfactory
completion of the project and the protected items are
inspected and found to be not damaged or are
installed to meet city standards. Inspection of the
protected items shall be done by the Clinton City
Public Works Department. Additionally, the building
permit must be closed by the Community
Development Department with issuance of a
certificate of occupancy or other notification of
passing a final inspection by the city Building
Official.
(2) After the final inspection of the protected items, if
the structure for which the permit was issued is
habitable and any non-compliance items were noted
on the inspection form, this form shall be referred to
as the Temporary Certificate of Occupancy (TCO).
The building inspector will provide a copy of the
TCO to Builder. Builder shall make the necessary
repairs within 120 days of receipt of the TCO.
(3) In the event the TCO is not cleared and a
Certificate of Occupancy or other certification of
completion of the building permit is not issued within
120 days after issuance of the TCO, the Bond
Agreement shall terminate and Builder shall have no
further claim upon the Bond. The Building Official
may grant one extension, not to exceed, ninety (90)
days to this Agreement when the Builder and
structure owner have indicated they have an
agreeable schedule for completion of the noncompliance
items.
(4) Once the Bond Agreement is terminated, the
current owner of the property may submit a Clinton
City Indemnification Request/Agreement to the
Community Development Department for
consideration by the Building Official. Upon the
approval of the Indemnification Request/Agreement
by the Building Official and the completion of all
items noted on the TCO by the current owner, the
Bond may be released to the current owner. The
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
current owner must complete all items noted on the
TCO within 90-days of approval of the
Indemnification Request/Agreement by the Building
Official. The Building Official may grant one
extension, not to exceed, ninety (90) days to this
Agreement when the owner has explained
extenuating circumstances and presented a timeline
for completion of the non-compliance items.
(5) The City may file a Certificate of Notice of Non-
Compliance, in accordance with Chapter 7, of this
Title, with the Davis County Recorder’s Office, if the
requirements outlined in the Bond Agreement or
Indemnification Request/Agreement are not met by
the Builder/owner.
(6) The City may file a complaint with the State
Division of Professional Licensing against the
Builder for failure to complete a project associated
with an issued building permit.
(7) Nothing in this ordinance or any agreement
established by this ordinance prohibits the City from
requiring the Builder to provide proof that an escrow
account, in the name of the purchaser of Lot and
associated structure related to the issued permit, to
secure the completion of any items that the Building
Official feels are not covered by the amount of the
bond established by the Bond Agreement.
(8) In the event that no certificate of occupancy has
been issued within the time period established in the
Bond Agreement or Indemnification
Request/Agreement these agreements will be
considered terminated and all funds being held by the
City will be forfeited to the City to cover costs
associated with repairs to public improvements and
this process. Nothing in this ordinance or any
agreement established by this ordinance is intended to
imply that the City will complete items on the TCO
associated with anything other than public
improvements and infrastructure.
History: 1/09
5-1-12 Release of Funds. Funds held by the Bond
Agreement shall be released to the individual/party
indicated on the Bond Agreement, through a properly
executed Indemnification Request/Agreement as
approved by the Building Official or through
forfeiture to the City.
History: 2/98, 4/07, 1/09
5-1-13 Liability for Damages. This ordinance
shall not be construed to relieve from or lessen the
responsibility of any person owning, operating or
controlling any building or structure for any damages
to persons or property caused by defects, nor shall the
code enforcement agency or its parent jurisdiction be
held as assuming any such liability by reason of the
inspections authorized by this code or any permits or
certificates issued under the technical codes adopted
by the State of Utah Building Commission this
ordinance and other ordinances as adopted by the
Clinton City Council.
History 4/07
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
Chapter 2. Building Official
5-2-1 Building Official
5-2-2 Building Inspector
5-2-3 Powers and Duties
5-2-4 Additional Duties
5-2-5 Liability
5-2-1 Building Official. There is hereby created
the position of city Building Official. The Building
Official shall meet the requirements of the State of
Utah for a building inspector and be licensed by the
State. The Building Official will be appointed by the
city manager and will be assigned to the Community
Development Department of the city. The Building
Official is assigned as the supervisor of the city
building inspectors, if appointed as well as other
duties as outlined in the city official position
description. The Building Official is empowered
with the powers, duties and responsibilities as
outlined in the technical codes adopted by the State of
Utah Building Commission this ordinance and other
ordinances as adopted by the Clinton City Council.
History: 2/98
5-2-2 Building Inspector. There are hereby
created the position(s) of city building inspector(s).
The building inspector, if appointed will perform as
outlined in the city official position description.
Building inspectors shall meet the licensing
requirement’s of the State of Utah and be licensed by
the State. The building inspectors will be appointed
by the city manager and serve under the supervision
of the Building Official within the Community
Development Department. The building inspector is
empowered with the powers, duties and
responsibilities as outlined in the technical codes
adopted by the State of Utah Building Commission,
this ordinance and other ordinances as adopted by the
Clinton City Council.
History: 2/98, 4/07
5-2-3 Powers and Duties. The Building Official
or his representative shall have the power and duties
outlined in the model codes adopted by the State of
Utah and elsewhere in this ordinance to include but
not be limited to: Right of Entry; Stop Work Orders;
Authority to Disconnect Utilities; Authority to
Condemn Building Service Equipment.
History: 2/9, 4/07
5-2-4 Additional Duties. The Building Official or
his representative shall, in addition to enforcing the
provisions of the technical codes adopted by the State
of Utah Building Commission and other relevant
provisions of this code, inspect all buildings,
structures, ditches, signs, fences and objects to
determine their safety effect on all persons who are
within the city.
History: 2/98, 4/07
5-2-5 Liability. The Building Official nor his
representative charged with the enforcement of this
code, acting in good faith and without malice in the
discharge of the duties required by the technical
codes adopted by the State of Utah Building
Commission, this ordinance and other ordinances as
adopted by the Clinton City Council shall not thereby
be rendered personally liable for damages that may
accrue to persons or property as a result of an act or
by reason of an act or omission in the discharge of
such duties. A suit brought against the Building
Official or employee because of such act or omission
performed by the Building Official or employee in
the enforcement of any pervasion of such codes or
other pertinent laws or ordinances implemented
through the enforcement of the technical codes
adopted by the State of Utah Building Commission,
this ordinance and other ordinances as adopted by the
Clinton City Council or enforced by the code
enforcement agency shall be defended by this
jurisdiction until final termination of such
proceedings, and any judgment resulting there from
shall be assumed by this jurisdiction.
History: 2/98
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
Chapter 3. Technical Codes
5-3-1 Adoption of the Technical Codes
5-3-2 Adoption of Other Codes
5-3-3 Additional Construction Requirements
5-3-1 Adoption of the Technical Codes. At a
minimum, Clinton City shall follow the codes
adopted by the State of Utah Building Commission
and as amended or appended in this and other
ordinances by the city as permitted by the State of
Utah. The city shall maintain in book form, a
minimum of three (3) copies of these codes on file in
the Community Development Department for use by
city employees and examination by the public.
History: 2/98
5-3-2 Adoption of Other Codes. Clinton City
adopts the following codes as amended herein.
(1) The current editions of the technical/model codes
as adopted by the State of Utah and as published by
the International Code Council.
(2) 1997 Uniform Code for the Abatement of
Dangerous Buildings as published by the
International Conference of Building Officials
EXCEPTIONS: For the purpose of this code the term
“health officer” or other reference to a health
department shall refer to the Davis County
Environment Health and Laboratory Division and
representatives thereof. Section 802.2. is modified to
delete reference to the repair and demolition fund,
after cost estimates are developed through in house
estimates or sealed bids the Building Official will
present estimates to the city council for approval and
dedication of funds from the general fund. For the
purpose of this ordinance the term “clerk” is
interchangeable with “Recorder”. Section 912 is
amended to read that all recovered funds will be
returned to the general fund rather than the repair and
demolition fund.
History: 2/9; 4/07
5-3-3 Additional Construction Requirements.
Additional construction requirements shall be
evaluated during regularly building inspections
indicated. Construction shall not proceed beyond a
required inspection until the inspection has been
accomplished and approved by the Building Official
or his appointed representative
(1) In both commercial and residential construction, a
four (4) inch minimum depth of one (1) inch or
smaller rock will be required under all basement
floors unless otherwise permitted by the Building
Official or the authorized representatives. Inspected
with under floor plumbing or special inspection.
(2) All groups, as defined by the most recent edition
of the International Building Code, having six (6)
inches or more of exposed foundation above the
finish grade shall be finished plaster or have a
finished surface no less than that obtained by the use
of plaster. Examples of such finishes include, but are
not limited to, decorative finishes using molded
forms, aggregate, troweled concrete, etc. Inspected at
time of final inspection.
(3) Only materials recognized by the current edition
of the International Residential Code and
International Plumbing Code may be used from the
water meter to the shut off valve located within the
building. If a copper waterline is provided, the
building shut-off valve shall be so located such that
there is adequate space between the floor and the
valve so electrical grounding clamps may be attached
without modification to the water main or foundation
walls. A ufer ground must be installed in accordance
with the current edition of the National Electrical
Code. The ufer grounding clamp shall be installed
within the garage wall cavity. The clamp must be
installed in a manner which will accommodate
permanent access to the ground clamp through a mud
ring w/cover or outlet box w/cover.
(4) Monolithic slabs used for the support of accessory
structures are limited to single story structures with
an overall floor area not to exceed 600 sq. ft.. All
monolithic slabs must be engineered or may comply
with Clinton City specifications when approved by
the Building Official or his representative.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
(5) Footing and Foundation Sub drain. A sub drain
which meets the requirements/specifications as
outlined in the “Clinton City Typical Footing and
Foundation Sub Drain Detail” shall be provided for
all residential structures. A sub drain shall also be
provided on all commercial structures that have a
footing which extends less than 4’ below finish grade
if indicated on the geotechnical report for the
property in question more than 4’ below finish grade.
A sub drain may still be required for commercial
Note: Any residential structure not served by a storm
sewer main shall be provided with an acceptable
collection point/pump station adjacent to the
foundation. The design of the collection point/pump
station shall be pre-approved by the Building Official
prior to installation.
History: 06/00,4/07
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
Chapter 4. Stop Work Order Notice shall include location of the work being
stopped, permit number, if issued, and instructions.
Order will have the name of the Building Official or
his representative issuing the order and date.
5-4-1 Stop Work Order
5-4-2 Compliance with a Stop Work Order
5-4-3 Unlawful Continuance History: 2/98, 4/07
5-4-2 Compliance with a Stop Work Order.
Whenever a stop work is posted, no person shall
remain in or enter any building that has been so
posted. No person shall remove or deface any such
notice after it is posted until the required actions have
been completed and the order has been removed by
the Building Official or his representative.
5-4-1 Stop Work Order. Whenever the Building
Official finds any work regulated by the
technical/model codes adopted by the State of Utah,
this ordinance, listing agency or manufacturer being
performed in a manner either contrary to the
provisions outlined, dangerous or unsafe, the
Building Official shall post or cause to have posted a
notice or stop work on the building. The stop work
order will be in the following form:
History: 2/98
5-4-3 Unlawful Continuance. Any person who
shall continue any work after a stop work order has
been posted, except such work as that person is
directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe
condition, shall be in violation of this ordinance,
which is considered a class “C” misdemeanor.
History: 4/07
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
Chapter 5. Relocation of Building
5-5-1 Relocation Permit
5-5-2 Application for Permit
5-5-3 Fees
5-5-4 Relocated Building Must Conform to City
4-5 Ordinances
5-5-5 Requirements for Relocation
5-5-6 Investigation of Application
5-5-7 Conditions of Permit
5-5-8 Foundations to be Completed
5-5-9 Time Limit
5-5-10 Relocation Bond or Cash Deposit
5-5-11 Conditions and Terms of the Bond
5-5-12 Default in Performance of Conditions,
4-6 Notice
5-5-13 Duty of Surety and Principal
5-5-14 Authority of Building Official in Event of
4-7 Default
5-5-15 When Building or Structure may be
4-8 Demolished
5-5-16 Termination of Bond
5-5-17 Right to Enter the Premises
5-5-18 Interference Prohibited After Default
5-5-19 Duty to Notify Police Department
5-5-20 Contractor Required
5-5-21 Duty to Notify Utilities
5-5-22 Exceptions
5-5-1 Relocation Permit. No person shall move
into or relocate any building or structure within the
city without first having obtained a permit from the
community Development Department. Additionally,
a building permit must be first obtained from the
Community Development Department in accordance
with this title.
History: 2/98
5-5-2 Application for Permit. Each application
to move a building into the city or for a relocation of
a building within the city shall be made to the
Community Development Department upon forms
furnished by the Community Development
Department and it shall set forth such information as
required by the Building Official which may
reasonably be required in order to carry out the
purposes of this ordinance.
History: 2/98, 4/07
5-5-3 Fees. Prior to issuing a relocation permit the
Community Development Department shall collect an
“Inspector Costs” fee from the applicant in amounts
to be fixed by resolution of the City Council
determined by the Building Official and based on the
number of inspections required.
History: 2/98, 4/07
5-5-4 Relocated Building Must Conform to City
Ordinances. No relocation permit or building permit
shall be issued to any person to relocate any building
or structure upon another lot or to move a building or
structure into the city unless such use, building, or
proposed conversion thereof conforms to the zoning
laws and the appropriate technical codes adopted by
the State of Utah Building Commission, this
ordinance and other ordinances as adopted by the
Clinton City Council and otherwise complies with
law.
History: 2/98
5-5-5 Requirements for Relocation. No permit
shall be issued to any person to move into or relocate
any building or structure within the city which is so
constructed or in such conditions as to be dangerous
or unsafe or which is infested with pests or is
unsanitary or which, if to be a dwelling or habitation,
is unfit for human habitation, or which is so
dilapidated, defective, unsightly or in such a
condition of deterioration or disrepair that its
relocation at the proposed site would create a safety
or health hazard or would cause appreciable damage
to or be materially detrimental to the property in the
district within the radius of 500 feet from the
proposed site. If, in the opinion of the Building
Official or his appointed representative, the present
use or condition of the building or structure admits of
practical conversion or effective repair or alteration,
he may issue such a relocation permit if plans are
submitted to him in conjunction with the building
permit showing that the improvements and alterations
conform to the appropriate technical codes adopted
by the State of Utah Building Commission this
ordinance and other ordinances as adopted by the
Clinton City Council and are in architectural harmony
with neighboring structures. If a structure is
determined to have asbestos or other hazardous
material, all such materials shall be removed from the
original site. All abandoned utilities which extend
into the public right-of-way must be terminated and
inspected for compliance by the Public Works
Inspector.
History: 2/98;4/07
5-5-6 Investigation of Application. The Building
Official or his representative shall cause an
investigation to be made of the building or structure
to be moved or relocated and of the property upon
which it is to be located in order to determine whether
or not said permit should be granted. The inspector
may require special inspections to be accomplished
by other agencies or professionals. The cost of any
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
such inspections shall be at the expense of the
applicant or his agent and will be in addition to any
fees collected by the city for a relocation permit or
building permit.
History: 2/98
5-5-7 Conditions of Permit. In granting any
relocation permit or building permit, the Building
Official shall impose thereon such terms and
conditions as he may determine reasonable and
proper including, but not limited to, the requirement
of changes, alterations or additions or repairs to be
made to or upon the building, structure or property to
the end that the relocation thereof shall not be
materially detrimental or injurious to public safety or
public welfare or to property within the immediate
district. Such terms and conditions shall be written
upon the permit or appended in writing thereto.
History: 2/98
5-5-8 Foundations to be Completed. The
foundations to be used in connection with any of the
buildings herein referred to shall be fully completed,
inspected and approved by the Building Official or
his representative before any such building is moved
upon any foundation or moved into the lot of the new
location.
History: 2/98
5-5-9 Time Limit. Any such buildings shall be
completed in its exterior and protected from the
elements by the necessary, listed and approved means
and all doors and windows shall be installed within
30 days after the building is placed on its new site.
The entire exterior of the structure must be repaired
or reconstructed to conform to the plans submitted by
the applicant within 30 days of placement of the
building or structure on its new site. All renovation
of the building shall be completed in accordance with
said specifications and be suitable for occupancy
within one (1) year from the date of issuance of the
building permit.
History: 2/98
5-5-10 Relocation Bond or Cash Deposit. No
relocation permit shall be issued unless the applicant
therefore shall guarantee the improvements required
by this ordinance and the appropriate technical codes
adopted by the State of Utah Building Commission
this ordinance and other ordinances as adopted by the
Clinton City Council by one (1) or a combination of
one (1) or more of the methods specified below in an
amount equal to the cost of the improvements or
repairs as estimated by the building inspector:
(1) Performance Bond. The owner or contractor may
furnish and file with the city recorder a corporate
surety bond in the amount equal to the cost of the
required repairs or improvements as estimated or
approved by the Building Official or his
representative.
(2) Deposit in Escrow. The owner or contractor may
deposit in escrow with an escrow holder approved by
the Building Official or his representative an amount
of money equal to the cost of the repairs or
improvements required under an escrow agreement
conditioned for installation of said improvements
within the time required in the relocation permit.
History: 2/98
5-5-11 Conditions and Terms of the Bond. Every
relocation bond filed shall be executed by the owner
of the premises where the building or structure is to
be relocated as principal and by a surety company
authorized to do business in the State of Utah as
surety. Such bonds shall name Clinton City as
obligee and shall be conditioned as follows:
(1) Compliance with Permits. All of the terms and
conditions of the relocation permit and of the building
permit shall be complied with to the satisfaction of
the Building Official or his representative.
(2) Compliance with Requirements. All of the work
required to be done pursuant to the conditions of the
relocation permit and of the building permit shall be
fully performed and completed within the time limit
specified in the relocation permit. Although said time
limit may be extended for good and sufficient cause
by the Building Official, no such extension shall be
valid unless in writing; and such extension shall not
release the surety on the relocation bond.
(3) Expiration of Bond. The surety bond shall not
have a termination date or expiration date either
implied or specified.
History: 2/98
5-5-12 Default in Performance of Conditions,
Notice. Whenever the Building Official shall find
that a default has occurred in the performance of any
term or condition of a relocation permit or of a
building permit written notice thereof shall be given
to the principal and to the surety on the bond and to
the owner and the escrow in the case of a cash
deposit. Such notice shall state the nature of the
default and, in case of work to be done, shall specify
the work to be done and the period of time within
which such work must be completed. Failure to
comply with the notice of the Building Official shall
constitute a default against said cash or surety bond.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
History: 2/98
5-5-13 Duty of Surety and Principal. Upon
receipt of such notice of default from the Building
Official, the surety must within the time specified
therein correct such default and in the case of work
required to be performed, cause said work to be done
within the time specified in said notice and upon its
failure to do so must forthwith pay to the city
treasurer the face amount of its bond.
History: 2/98
5-5-14 Authority of Building Official in Event of
Default. The Building Official shall, upon receipt of
the face amount of said bond from said surety or of
said cash from the escrow, proceed by such mode as
he deems expedient to cause the required work to be
performed, completed by contract or otherwise.
Upon the completion of such work, the balance, if
any of the money so paid to the city treasurer of the
city by said surety, shall be returned to the surety or
in the event of cash in escrow to the applicant after
deducting cost of work plus 25% thereof. Said 25%
being retained by the city treasurer to cover cost of
supervision. The Building Official shall incur no
liability other than for the expenditure of funds
delivered to him for completion of the work.
History: 2/98
5-5-15 When Building or Structure may be
Demolished. When any notice has been given and a
default has occurred either on the part of the principal
or the surety, the building inspector shall have the
option in lieu of completing the work required, to
demolish the building or structure and to clear, clean,
and restore the site as defined in 5-6-4 of this title.
Funds associated with default in performance shall be
available for demolition as outlined in 5-5-14 of this
title.
History: 2/98; 4/07
5-5-16 Termination of Bond. The term of each
relocation bond or of the escrow agreement pursuant
to this ordinance shall begin upon the date of
execution thereof and shall terminate upon the
completion to the satisfaction of the Building Official
of the performance of all of the terms and conditions
of the relocation permit. Such completion shall be
evidenced by a certificate of occupancy and a letter
from the Building Official to the escrow or bonding
agent thereof signed by the Building Official,
authorizing the release of all security funds.
History: 2/98; 4/07
5-5-17 Right to Enter the Premises. In the event
of any default in the performance of any term or
condition of the relocation or building permit, the
surety or any person employed or engaged in its
behalf and the building inspector or any person
employed or engaged in his behalf, shall have the
right to go upon the premises to complete the
required work or to remove or demolish the building
or structure as the case may be.
History: 2/98
5-5-18 Interference Prohibited after Default. It
shall be unlawful for the owner, his agents, or any
other person after a default has occurred in the
performance of the terms or conditions thereto, to
interfere with or obstruct the ingress or egress to or
from any such premises of any authorized
representative or agent of the surety or the city
engaged in the work of completing, demolishing or
removing any building or structure for which a
relocation permit has been issued.
History: 2/98
5-5-19 Duty to Notify Police Department. Before
any building or structure is moved over or on any
public street or highway, the police department shall
be notified by the mover at least 24 hours in advance,
and the police shall direct the moving at the time
designated over the approved route.
History: 2/98
5-5-20 Contractor Required. No building or
structure shall be relocated by other than a contractor
specializing in moving buildings and structures and
licensed as such by the State of Utah.
History: 2/98
5-5-21 Duty to Notify Utilities. Before any
building or structure is moved over or on any public
street or highway, the public utilities, (power, gas,
telephone, Cable TV, etc.) and UDOT shall be
provided notice. Payment of any required fees and
the amount of notice required by the individual
utilities and UDOT shall be complied with. Written
verification that notice and fees have been paid shall
be provided to the Community Development
Department a minimum of 24 hours prior to any
building or structure being moved.
5-5-22 Exceptions. This chapter is not intended to
apply to new, not previously occupied, connected to
utilities or positioned on a previous site, structures
falling under the category of factory built housing
units or modular units covered under the codes
adopted by the State of Utah Building Commission as
provided by the State Code and Zoning Ordinance.
History: 2/98
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
Chapter 6. Demolition or Removal of
Buildings
5-6-1 Demolition Permit
5-6-2 Fees
5-6-3 Utility Disconnection
5-6-4 Site Restoration
5-6-5 Protection of Off-site Improvements
5-6-6 Inspection
5-6-1 Demolition Permit. No person shall
demolish any building or structure within the city
without first having obtained a building permit from
the Community Development Department.
History: 2/98
5-6-2 Fees. The Community Development
Department shall collect a fee from the applicant in
amounts to be fixed by resolution of the City Council.
History: 2/98
5-6-3 Utility Disconnection. All utilities
connected to a building or structure shall be
disconnected as follows:
(1) Sewer. Sewer laterals which meet the existing
requirements of the city standards shall be cut back to
a point ten (10) feet inside the property line, an
approved plug shall be placed in the lateral, and a 2”
x 4” piece of treated lumber shall be placed at the end
of the pipe and extended up to within one foot of final
grade. Laterals which do not meet the requirements
of the city standards shall be removed back to the
sewer main and the main repaired to meet the
requirements of the Clinton City Public Works
Department, or the lateral is to be permanently
plugged with concrete by a means approved by public
works.
(2) Culinary Water. Culinary water laterals which
meet the existing requirements of the city standards
shall be cut back to a point ten (10) feet inside the
property line, an approved plug shall be placed in the
lateral, and a 2” x 4” piece of treated lumber shall be
placed at the end of the pipe and extended up to
within one foot of final grade. Laterals which do not
meet the requirements of the city standards shall be
removed back to the water main and the main
repaired to meet the requirements of the Clinton City
Public Works Department.
(3) Secondary Water. Secondary water laterals shall
be disconnected and inspected to meet the
requirements of Davis and Weber County Canals
Company.
(4) Land Drains. Land drain laterals which meet the
existing requirements of the city standards shall be
cut back to a point ten (10) feet inside the property
line, an approved plug shall be placed in the lateral,
and a 2” x 4” piece of treated lumber shall be placed
at the end of the pipe and extended up to within one
foot of final grade. Laterals which do not meet the
requirements of the city standards shall be removed
back to the land drain main and the main repaired to
meet the requirements of the Clinton City Public
Works Department, or the lateral is to be permanently
plugged with concrete by a means approved by public
works.
(5) Power. Electrical power laterals or overheads
shall be removed and disconnected from the
connection point to the main lines. Any poles or
other structures on the property utilized to support
power lines shall be removed. Underground power
lines utilized as laterals shall be removed.
(6) Telephone and Cable TV. Telephone and Cable
TV underground laterals or overheads shall be
removed and disconnected from the connection point
to the main lines. Any poles or other structures on
the property utilized to support these lines shall be
removed. All underground lines utilized as laterals
shall be removed.
(7) All abandoned utilities which extend into the
public right-of-way must be terminated and inspected
for compliance by the Public Works Inspector.
History: 2/98; 4/07
5-6-4 Site Restoration. Any site where a building
has been demolished or removed shall be cleaned up
of all debris, building material, concrete, and other
items as determined by the Building Official or his
representative upon inspection. The site shall be
graded and if necessary fill shall be brought in to
provide for natural drainage from the site. In no case
shall grade next to sidewalks or on the site present a
hazard to the public or anyone who may be on the
site.
History: 2/98
5-6-5 Protection of Off-site Improvements.
Protection for Off-site improvements shall be
provided for as outlined in section 5-1-11.
History: 2/98, 4/07
5-6-6 Inspection. The person or corporation to
whom a demolition or relocation permit is issued will,
upon completion of all work on the site cause the site
to be inspected by the Building Official or his
representative. The inspector will note on the
inspection report the location of all laterals relative to
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
the property lines and insure that the site is suitable in
accordance with this ordinance.
History: 2/98
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
Chapter 7. Certificate of Notice of Non-
Compliance
5-7-1 Purpose
5-7-2 Notice and Processing of the Certificate of
Notice of Non-Compliance
5-7-3 Recording of the Certificate of Notice of
Non-Compliance
5-7-4 Release of the Certificate of Notice of
Non-Compliance
5-7-1 Purpose. These regulations are established
to provide compliance with the technical codes
adopted by the State of Utah Building Commission,
this ordinance, and other ordinances as adopted by
the City, hereafter referred to as “Building
Regulations.” In the event that the Building Official
or his authorized representative identifies that
construction on a building violates the Building
Regulations, the Building Official or his authorized
representative may cause a Certificate of Notice of
Non-Compliance to be filed at the County Recorder’s
Office against the property where the violation is
being committed.
History: 2/98, 1/09
5-7-2 Notice and Processing of the Certificate of
Notice of Non-Compliance.
(1) Prior to recording a Certificate of Notice of Non-
Compliance with the County, a permanent file will be
developed which will include:
(a) A summary statement of the failure to comply
with the Building Regulations;
(b) Attempts to obtain compliance;
(c) Any correction list; and,
(d) Copies of all attempts to contact the permit
holder/owner of record, hereafter referred to as
“Owner.” Once a file is established, the Building
Official or his authorized representative shall review
the file to determine the proper course of action.
(2) First Notice. The Owner shall be notified in
writing of the failure to comply with the Building
Regulations. The notice will identify the failure to
comply and provide the Owner with a time period to
comply, usually 10 to 30 days depending on the
circumstances. If the matter is one of public safety
immediate compliance will be required. The
Building Official or his authorized representative may
grant an extension of time when compliance cannot
reasonably be obtained by the original date.
(3) Second Notice. If the Owner fails to comply with
the First Notice and/or any extensions, the Building
Official or his authorized representative will prepare
a Second Notice. The Second Notice shall be mailed
by certified mail to the Owner who will be given 10
days to comply. The Second Notice will contain a
copy of the Certificate of Notice of Non-Compliance
and will inform the Owner that the Certificate will be
recorded against the property at the County
Recorder’s Office if he fails to comply with the
Building Regulations.
(4) If the Owner fails to comply with the Second
Notice within the 10 day period, or if the Notice is
returned as being undeliverable at the Owner’s last
known address, then the Certificate of Non-
Compliance with the Building Regulations shall be
processed. Any returned mail will be kept in the file
as evidence of an attempt to serve notice at the last
known address.
History: 2/98; 4/07; 1/09
5-7-3 Recording of the Certificate of Notice of
Non-Compliance. If compliance with the Building
Regulations is not achieved according to Section 5-7-
2, then at the end of the compliance time given in the
Second Notice, the Certificate of Notice of Non-
Compliance shall be recorded at the County
Recorder’s Office. A copy of the recorded Certificate
will be placed in the file and a copy will be mailed to
the Owner. No work may be done on the property
until a new building permit is issued.
5-7-4 Release of the Certificate of Notice of
Non-Compliance. A Certificate of Notice of Non-
Compliance may be removed according to the
following procedures.
(1) To release the Certificate, the Owner shall pay a
fee to the Community Development Department as
set by the City Council in the Consolidated Fee
Schedule.
(2) A new building permit shall be taken out. To
obtain a new building permit, the building plans shall
be reviewed by the City according to the most recent
Building Regulations. The fees assessed for the new
building permit shall be one-half of the building fee
portion of the original permit, plus applicable state
fees, if reactivated within one year of the date the
Certificate of Notice of Non-Compliance is recorded.
After one year, the entire building fee portion of the
original permit along with a plan review fee and all
applicable state fees shall be assessed.
(3) After the required construction is complete and
the building permit has passed final inspection, the
Building Official or his authorized representative will
record a Notice to remove the Certificate of Notice of
Non-Compliance with the County Recorder. A copy
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
of the recorded document shall be mailed to the
Owner and one kept in the City’s file.
History: 2/98; 1/09
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
Chapter 8. Other Building and Construction
Regulations
5-8-1 Trash and Debris Control
5-8-2 Toilet Facilities for Workers
5-8-1 Trash and Debris Control. Every
construction site shall have a means of containing
construction debris and waste (dumpster).
(1) It shall be the responsibility of the general
contractor or individual obtaining the building permit
to provide a dumpster on the construction site for
trash and debris control.
(2) Where a contractor or individual obtaining a
building permit has more than one structure under
construction on adjacent properties dumpsters for
trash and debris control may be so located as to
service adjoining lots or construction sites.
(3) Dumpster facilities are prohibited from being
located within the public right-of-way.
(4) Dumpsters shall not be located:
(a) Within the sight triangle forty (40) feet of an
intersection of two streets;
(b) Within ten (10) feet of a fire hydrant or in such a
manner as to block view or access;
(c) Within ten (10) feet of a public or private
driveway or its approach;
(d) In such a way as to be an obstruction to a Public
Works project.
(e) On a sidewalk;
(f) So as to block a U.S. postal box or any other type
of mail box.
(g) Within thirty (30) feet of the approach to any
flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, regulatory sign,
or traffic control signal located at the side of the
roadway.
(h) In such a manor as to constitute a hazard or
obstruction to the normal movement of traffic or the
public.
(5) Any dumpster which is declared a nuisance, as
defined in Section 5-8-1(4), may be abated under the
direction of or at the request of a police officer of the
city by removing the dumpster to a place of storage or
repair by means of towing.
History: 4/07
5-8-2 Toilet Facilities for Workers. Toilet
facilities shall be provided for construction workers
and such facilities shall be maintained in a sanitary
condition.
(1) On every construction site that does not have
functional, permanently plumbed facilities available
to the workers portable chemical toilet facility(s)
shall be provided.
(2) The number of facilities to be provided for each
sex shall be based upon the number of employees of
that sex for whom the facilities are furnished and
shall be in accordance with the following table.
Where single-occupancy toilet rooms have more than
one toilet facility, only one such facility in each toilet
room shall be counted for the purpose of this table.
* “Serving” refers to the emptying of waste and the
cleaning of the toilet facility.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the general
contractor or individual obtaining the building permit
to provide toilet facilities sufficient for the total
number of workers on a construction site.
(4) It shall be the responsibility of the employer to
insure that all toilet rooms and facilities are
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. If toilet
facilities are of the type that require periodic
servicing, it shall be the responsibility of the
contractor or individual obtaining the permit to
provide sufficient toilet facilities and servicing to
prevent the stated capacity of those faculties from
being exceed; the contractor or individual obtaining
the permit shall also assure ready access to the toilet
facilities by the required servicing equipment.
MINIMUM NUMBER OF TOILET
FACILITIES
Number of
Employees
Minimum number of toilet
facilities
If serviced once per week *
1-10 1
11-20 2
21-30 3
Over 30 1 additional facility for each 10
additional employees
If serviced more than once per week *
1-15 1
16-35 2
36-55 3
Over 55 1 additional facility for each 20
additional employees
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
(5) Toilet facilities for construction sites shall not be
located within an existing or proposed public rightof-
way.
(6) Where a contractor or individual obtaining a
building permit has more than one structure under
construction on adjacent properties toilet facilities
may be so located as to service multiple construction
sites. The total number workers on all of the
construction sites shall determine the number of
facilities.
(7) The requirements of 2 through 7 above do not
apply to mobile crews or to normally unattended
work locations so long as employees working at these
locations have transportation immediately available
to toilet facilities that meet the other requirements of
this section. The determination of whether work
crews are mobile is dependent upon factors such as
worksite, distance to toilet facility.
History: 03/04
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
Chapter 9. Residential Rental Fit Premises
5-9-1 Short Title
5-9-2 Responsibility of Administration
5-9-3 Office of Primary Responsibility
5-9-4 Definitions
5-9-5 Exclusions from Application of Chapter
5-9-6 Identification of Owner and
Representative
5-9-7 Maintenance of Residential Rental Unit
and Premises - Owner’s Duties
5-9-8 Maintenance of Residential Rental Unit
and Premises - Renter’s Duties
5-9-9 Landscaping and Exterior Maintenance
5-9-10 Rules and Regulations
5-9-11 Access
5-9-12 Repair of Specified Failures
5-9-13 Renter Repair and Deduct
5-9-14 Notice
5-9-15 Declaration of a Nuisance
5-9-16 Abatement of Nuisance
5-9-1 Short Title. This chapter shall be known as
the Clinton City Residential Rental Fit Premises
Ordinance and may be referenced as the “Residential
Rental Ordinance”.
5-9-2 Responsibility of Administration. The City
Manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this Title. Any powers granted or
duties imposed upon the City may be delegated by
the City Manager to persons or entities acting in the
beneficial interest of or in the employ of the City.
5-9-3 Office of Primary Responsibility. The
Clinton Community Development Department is the
Office of Primary Responsibility for review and
proposing changes to this Title. The Community
Development Director may call on other departments
for assistance in reviewing this Chapter.
5-9-4 Definitions. The following definitions are
applicable to this chapter:
“Building Code” means the applicable model codes
adopted by the State of Utah.
“Owner Occupied” means:
(1) A person who possesses fifty percent (50%)
ownership or more in the dwelling and the dwelling is
the primary residence of the person; or,
(2) A family trust created for the primary purpose of
estate planning by one or more trustees who create
the trust, place the dwelling in a trust, and whose
primary residence is a dwelling.
“Primary Residence” means a person's primary
residence is the dwelling where they usually live,
typically a house or an apartment. A person can only
have one primary residence at any given time, though
they may share the residence with other people. A
primary residence is considered as a legal residence
for the purpose of income tax and/or acquiring a
mortgage. Criteria for a primary residence consist
mostly of guidelines rather than hard rules, and
residential status is often determined on a case-bycase
basis. Possible factors include:
(1) Mailing address;
(2) Telephone listing;
(3) Time spent at residence per year;
(4) Voting registration;
(5) Location of personal effects; and,
(6) Stated purpose of residence on insurance policies.
“Owner” means the owner of record at the Davis
County Recorder’s Office of a residential rental unit.
A managing agent, leasing agent, or resident
manager is considered an owner for the purposes of
notice and other communication required or allowed
under this chapter unless the agent or manager
specifies otherwise in writing in the rental agreement.
“Renter” means any person entitled under a rental
agreement to occupy a residential rental unit to the
exclusion of others.
“Residential Rental Unit” means a renter’s principal
place of residence and includes the appurtenances,
grounds, and facilities held out for the use of the
residential renter generally, and any other area or
facility provided to the renter in the rental agreement.
It does not include facilities contained in a boarding
or rooming house or similar facility, mobile home lot,
or recreational property rented on an occasional basis.
“Rental Agreement” means any agreement, written
or oral, which establishes or modifies the terms,
conditions, rules, or any other provisions regarding
the use and occupancy of a Residential Rental Unit.
“Rental Property” means any legally subdivided lot
or parcel of property containing one or more
Residential Rental Units.
5-9-5 Exclusions from Application of Chapter.
(1) The following arrangements are not governed by
this Chapter:
(a) Residence at a medical, geriatric, educational,
counseling, religious institution, or a government
operated detention institution;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
(b) Occupancy under a bona fide contract of sale of a
Residential Rental Unit if the occupant is the
purchaser;
(c) Occupancy by a member of a bona fide nonprofit
fraternal or social organization in a building operated
for the benefit of the organization;
(d) Transient occupancy in a hotel or motel or
lodgings subject to § 59-12-301, Utah Code
Annotated; and,
(e) Occupancy by an owner of a condominium unit.
(2) Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
affect the rights and duties established under Utah
Code Title 57, Chapter 22, Utah Fit Premises Act, or
to restrict the City’s ability to enforce its generally
applicable health ordinances or building code, a local
health department’s authority under Utah Code title
26A, Chapter 1, local Health Departments, or the
Utah Department of Health’s authority under Title 26,
Utah Health Code.
5-9-6 Identification of Owner and
Representative.
(1) An owner shall disclose to the renter, in writing,
at or before the commencement of the tenancy, the
name, address, and telephone number of:
(a) The owner or representative of the premises; and,
(b) A resident residing or management business
located in either Davis or Weber Counties authorized
to represent the owner for the purpose of receiving
notices and demands and performing the owner’s
obligations under this chapter and the rental
agreement if the owner resides outside of Davis or
Weber County, Utah.
(2) A person who, acting in the capacity of or on
behalf of the owner, enters into a rental agreement
and fails to comply with the requirements of this
section becomes an agent of the owner for the
purposes of:
(a) Receipt of notices under this chapter; and,
(b) Performing the obligations of the owner under
this chapter and under the rental agreement.
(3) The owner is responsible to insure that the
information required in § (1) above is furnished to the
City and that it be kept current. An owner can
require an agent maintain this contact but this does
not relieve the owner of the ultimate responsibility to
the City.
(4) Every property rented without a rental agreement
shall have a notice posted in a conspicuous place
inside of the unit with the name, address, and
telephone number of the owner, manager and local
agent as required by § (1) above.
(a) The notice shall not be removed unless authorized
to do so under City Code or the residence becomes
owner occupied.
(b) The notice shall state: “This Notice is required by
Clinton City Ordinance § 5-9-6 and shall be
maintained current and shall not be removed.”
5-9-7 Maintenance of Residential Rental Unit
and Premises - Owner’s Duties. Property owners
shall meet the requirements of § 57-22-4 Utah State
Code Annotated, and comply with the requirements
of applicable building, housing, health codes, and
City Codes, and not rent the premises unless they are
safe, and fit for human occupancy.
5-9-8 Maintenance of Residential Rental Unit
and Premises - Renter’s Duties. Renters shall meet
the requirements of § 57-22-5 Utah Code Annotated,
and comply with all appropriate requirements of
applicable provisions of state and local building,
housing, health codes, and City Codes.
5-9-9 Landscaping and Exterior Maintenance.
(1) Owner shall maintain the landscaping and exterior
features of the property in good repair, including
maintaining:
(a) Paint, siding, stucco, etc., in good repair free from
peeling, large holes or cracks;
(b) Landscaping of entire yard;
(c) Landscaping free from weeds, dead plants, litter,
refuse, or debris and adequate water provided for
landscape maintenance;
(d) Lawns mowed and maintained;
(e) Sprinkler systems maintained in good repair or, if
no underground sprinkling system is installed,
provide garden hoses and sprinklers sufficient for
maintaining the yard;
(f) Landscaping maintained as approved on a site
plan submitted when the Residential Rental Unit was
approved by the City (for those projects where a site
plan was required or submitted) unless a subsequent
landscaping plan was approved by the Community
Development Director, or his representative, in
writing;
(g) Curbs and gutters clean and in good repair;
(h) Sidewalks, driveways and walkways in good
repair free from large holes, cracks or other unsafe
conditions;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
(i) Fences in good repair, free from graffiti, peeling
paint, holes, and able to stand upright as designed
without propping or additional support;
(j) Carport areas (where applicable) clean and free
from boxes, junk, debris, or other storage; and,
(k) Yards free of vehicles, waste, debris, or other
storage.
(2) Owner may contract with a third party or renter to
provide the maintenance required under this section,
however owner shall remain responsible and liable
for any deficiencies or violations of this section.
5-9-10 Rules and Regulations.
(1) An owner may adopt rules or regulations
concerning the renter’s use and occupancy of the
premises, which become a part of the rental
agreement, if they apply to all renters in the premises
in a nondiscriminatory manner, do not conflict with
the lease, federal or state law, or City Code, and are
provided to the renter in writing before the renter
enters into the rental agreement. Rules, regulations,
or lease terms can, by rental agreement between the
parties, be more favorable to the renter than allowed
by federal or state law or City Code, but cannot be
more restrictive. Rules may be modified from time to
time by the owner. However, no rule adopted after
the commencement of any rental agreement shall
substantially modify the existing terms, conditions, or
rules without written consent of the renter.
(2) Nothing in this ordinance is intended to imply or
give to an owner authority to violate or otherwise go
against CC&R’s that are properly recorded against a
property.
5-9-11 Access.
(1) A renter shall not unreasonably withhold consent
to the owner to enter into the Residential Rental Unit
in order to make necessary or agreed inspections,
repairs, decorations, alterations, improvements, or
exhibit the Residential Rental Unit to prospective
purchasers, renters, or repairmen.
(2) An owner may enter the Residential Rental Unit
without consent of the renter only in cases of
emergency.
(3) Except in cases of emergency, the owner shall
give the renter at least twenty-four (24) hours’ notice
of plans to enter, and may enter only between eight
o’clock (8:00) a.m. and eight o’clock (8:00) p.m.
(a) An owner may also have access rights and if the
renter has abandoned the premises as defined in
section 78B-6-815, Utah Code Annotated, or any
successor provision.
5-9-12 Repair of Specified Failures.
(1) In the event of the failures specified in Table 5-9-
11 the City has indicated what it has determined is a
reasonable time after receipt of notice by the owner,
otherwise the owner shall take steps as established in
§ 55-22-7 Utah State Code Annotated.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
Table 5-9-11
Failure Repair Within
Broken Stair or Balustrade Upon notice, if the condition causes a
safety hazard or prevents access to the
premises; otherwise 24 hours
Broken or leaking water pipes causing an imminent threat to life,
safety or health
24 hours
Other broken or leaking water pipes or fixtures 72 hours
Disconnection of electrical, water, or natural gas service caused by
owner
24 hours
Failure Repair Within
Inoperable or missing smoke detector required by code or this chapter 24 hours
Inoperable required fire sprinkler system (if smoke detectors are not
present or operating)
24 hours
Inoperable toilet 24 hours
Nonfunctioning heating or air conditioning (during a period where
heat or air conditioning is reasonably necessary) or electrical system
24 hours
Tub, shower, or kitchen and bathroom sink with inoperable drain or
no hot or cold water
24 hours
Broken exterior door or inoperable or missing exterior door locks 48 hours if the premises is otherwise
secured from the elements and unwanted
entry; otherwise 24 hours
Broken window with missing glass 48 hours if the premises is otherwise
secured from the elements and unwanted
entry; otherwise 24 hours
Inoperable refrigerator or cooking range or stove 48 hours
Inoperable electric fixture 72 hours
Inoperable exterior lighting 96 hours
Inoperable required fire sprinkler system (if smoke detectors are
installed and operable)
96 hours
(2) The renter shall grant the owner reasonable access
as required under § 5-9-11 of this chapter to perform
the repairs required in this section.
5-9-13 Renter Repair and Deduct.
(1) If the owner fails to begin making the repairs
required by § 57-22-6 Utah State Code Annotated,
and the renter has followed the notification
requirements outlined in § 57-22-6 Utah State Code
Annotated and is current on all rent and other
payments to the owner, the renter may take action
authorized in § 57-22-6 Utah State Code Annotated.
(2) Renter Caused Damages: The repair and deduct
provisions of this section shall not be applicable to
any damages caused or repairs necessitated by actions
of the renter or the renter’s invited guests or other
occupants of the dwelling until.
5-9-14 Notice. Notices required under this chapter
may be served;
(1) By delivering a copy to the owner personally or
by leaving a copy of the notice at the residence or
owner’s place of business with a person of suitable
age and discretion;
(2) By sending a copy through registered or certified
mail addressed to: the owner at the owner’s address
listed on the rental agreement; or, addressed to the
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
owner at the owner’s address listed with the County
Recorder’s Office or Tax Assessor;
(3) As provided in the rental agreement, or,
(4) As otherwise provided by Utah law.
5-9-15 Declaration of a Nuisance. A residential
rental dwelling not in compliance with this Title is
declared a nuisance to the City on the respective
parcel containing the unit.
5-9-16 Abatement of Nuisance.
(1) In addition to any other penalties and remedies set
forth in this code, failure to maintain, repair or correct
any violation of this Chapter or other action not in
compliance with the requirements set forth here, the
responsible party or owner shall, at his own expense,
correct the offending condition upon notice by the
City as established in;
(a) Title 18, of the Clinton City Code of Revised
Ordinances; or,
(b) §5-3-2, of the Clinton City Code of Revised
Ordinances; or,
(c) § 10-11-4 of the Utah State Code Annotated.
(2) If either option §(1)(a)or (1)(b) above is followed
and the owner fails to comply within the time set in
the notice from the City, the Authorized Officer shall
so report to the City Manager and the City Manager
may instruct the Authorized Officer to:
(a) Abate the nuisance as a hazardous or inconvenient
condition in the manner provided by law; or,
(b) The condition may be recorded with the Davis
County Recorder’s Office as a Certification of Notice
of Non-Compliance as established in Title 5, Chapter
7 of the Clinton City Code of Ordinances.
Each violation of any provision of this chapter shall
be a separate offense.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
Chapter 10. Penalties
5-10-1 Violations
5-10-2 Penalties
5-10-3 Enforcement
5-10-1 Violations. It shall be unlawful for a
person, firm or corporation to erect, construct,
enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert
or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any
building, structure or building service equipment, or
cause or permit the same to be done in violation of
this code and the technical codes.
History: 2/98
5-10-2 Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation
who erects, constructs, enlarges, alters, repairs,
moves, improves, removes, converts or demolishes,
equips, uses, occupies or maintains any building,
structure or building service equipment, or causes or
permits the same to be done in violation of this code
and the technical codes shall be deemed guilty of a
class C misdemeanor and subject to punishment
therefore as provided by law.
History: 2/98
5-10-3 Enforcement. Enforcement and referral to
the courts may be through means of a “Fix-it-Ticket”
as outlined in the Code of Revised Ordinances of
Clinton City, a Stop Work Order, or written referral
or any combination of these means.
History: 2/98, 3/04
*Editor's Note: Ordinance 98-1, adopted February
10, 1998 and incorporated herein, repealed in to, the
previous Title
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
Chapter 11. Vacant Buildings
5-11-1 Applicability
5-11-2 Purpose and Intent
5-11-3 Definitions
5-11-4 Obligation to Register Vacant Buildings
5-11-5 Registration of Vacant Buildings
5-11-6 Vacant Building Plan
5-11-7 Review, Approval or Modification of
Vacant Building Plan
5-11-8 Standards Governing Review
5-11-9 Change of Ownership
5-11-10 Distribution of Vacant Building Registry
5-11-11 Maintenance Standards
5-11-12 Failure to Maintain
5-11-13 Existing Boarded Buildings
5-11-14 Appeals and Appeals Procedure
5-11-15 Building Permits and Inspections
Required
5-11-16 Enforcement of Other Laws or Notice and
Orders
5-11-17 Recovery of Cost of Boarding, Repair or
Demolition
5-11-18 Enforcement, Prohibited Activities
5-11-19 Emergencies
5-11-1 Applicability.
(1) This ordinance shall apply to all vacant buildings
or structures within the city now existing or hereafter
becoming vacant.
(2) Buildings that are vacant at the time this
ordinance is established shall comply with the time
requirements established within as if the building
became vacant on that date.
5-11-2 Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose and
intent of this chapter to protect the public health,
safety, welfare, and preserve the aesthetic efforts of
the City by establishing a registration process for
vacant buildings. This requires responsible parties to
implement a vacant building plan for buildings to
remedy any public nuisance, prevent deterioration,
unsightly blight and consequent adverse impact on
the value of nearby property, and to establish
minimum maintenance standards for vacant
buildings. To this end, it is the specific purpose and
intent of this ordinance:
(1) To minimize the period of time a building is
boarded;
(2) To provide procedures for the maintenance, repair
or abatement of vacant buildings;
(3) To prevent vacant buildings from becoming a
public nuisance; and,
(4) To improve the aesthetic appearance of vacant
buildings in order to protect surrounding properties.
5-11-3 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter,
certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives
shall be construed as specified in this chapter, or
where terms are not defined within this chapter or in
the applicable code, they shall have their ordinary
accepted meanings within the context they are used.
As used in this chapter the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings given:
“Boarding or Boarded” means a secured covering
of openings to a building or structure to prevent
entrance.
“Building Code” means the International Building
Codes as adopted by chapter 3 of this Title, together
with all other technical codes adopted therein.
“CD Director” means the duly appointed Director of
the Community Development Department or an
appointed staff member.
“Occupant” means any person who has a legal or
equitable interest in a parcel of real property other
than a fee interest, including a life tenant, tenant,
lessee, tenant at will, tenant at sufferance, or adverse
possessor, as well as a person in possession or a
person who has charge, care or control of the parcel
of real property, as the agent or personal
representative of the person(s) holding legal Title to a
fee interest.
“Open” means the condition of a building or
structure when not secured against unauthorized or
unlawful entry.
“Owner” means any person who, alone or jointly or
severally with others, has legal Title to a fee interest
in the parcel of real property, with or without
accompanying actual possession.
“Vacant” means empty.
5-11-4 Obligation to Register Vacant Buildings.
(1) Except as provided in § (2) of this section,
whenever a building is vacant for more than ninety
(90) days, or whenever any building is vacant and the
building or premises contains one or more "public
nuisance violations" as defined in Title 18 the owner
of the building shall, within ten (10) days of
notification, register the building as a vacant building
and submit a vacant building plan, unless a stay is
granted under § (5) of this section.
(2) Whenever any building designed as a singlefamily
dwelling is vacant and the building or
premises contains one or more "public nuisance
violations" as defined in Title 18 the owner of the
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
building shall, within ten (10) days of notification,
register the building as a vacant building and submit a
vacant building plan, unless a stay is granted under §
(5) of this section.
(3) Notification of the registration requirement shall
be made in writing to the property owner either
personally or by mailing notice first class, postage
prepaid, addressed to the owner at his last known
address as disclosed by the records of the county
assessor, or at another address as is known by the CD
Director.
(4) For purposes of this chapter, "public nuisance
violations" includes:
(a) A building or structure in violation of one or more
provisions of § 5-3-2(2) of this Title; and
(b) Property maintenance violations of Titles 18 and
Title 28 of this code.
(5) If repair or demolition of the building is required
under a notice and order issued following § 5-3-2(2)
of this Title, the CD Director, may grant a stay of the
registration requirement for a reasonable period of
time, not to exceed ninety (90) days, while the owner
diligently investigates abatement options and
prepares plans for abatement. The maintenance
standards imposed in § 5-11-11 of this chapter shall
be applicable during the stay period.
(6) It is not the intention of this chapter to require the
initial registration of a building being actively and
diligently constructed or renovated, with a valid
building permit issued by the city, where persons
responsible for the construction or renovation are
present in the building on a regular basis.
5-11-5 Registration of Vacant Buildings.
(1) The owner registering a vacant building shall
supply the following information on a form provided
by the Community Development Department:
(a) The address of the vacant building;
(b) The name, address, and telephone number of the
owner;
(c) The name, address and telephone number of a
person authorized to act as an agent for the owner for
performing the owner's obligations under this chapter,
who lives within forty (40) miles of the city;
(d) Legal description and tax parcel identification
number of the premises on which the building is
situated;
(e) Date on which the building became vacant;
(f) The vacant building plan;
(g) A description of the condition of the building and
the landscaping of the surrounding property.
(2) Registration of a vacant building shall be valid for
multiple years (not more than five [5] years), ending
December 31st of the fifth (5th) year.
(3) If the requirements of the vacant building plan,
see § 5-11-6, are not completed, or have not
otherwise been met, then the owner shall re-register
the building, after the corrections of any violations to
the Vacant Building Plan or maintenance standards.
(4) It is the owner’s responsibility to keep current all
fees and contact information regarding owner or his
appointee with the Davis Weber Canal Company.
5-11-6 Vacant Building Plan. When a building is
registered the owner or agent shall submit a vacant
building plan. The plan shall contain the following:
(1) A plan of action to repair any doors, windows, or
other openings. The proposed repair shall result in
openings secured by conventional methods used in
the design of the building or by methods permitted
for new construction.
(2) For buildings and premises which are identified as
being or containing public nuisance violations
unrelated to improperly secured openings, a plan of
action to remedy the public nuisance violations.
(3) For each required plan, a time schedule shall be
submitted identifying a date of commencement of
repair and date of completion of repair for each
improperly secured opening and identified public
nuisance violations.
(4) If the owner proposes to demolish the vacant
building, then the owner shall submit a plan and time
schedule for the demolition, and acquire the
appropriate permits.
(5) If the owner proposes to repair the vacant
building, then the owner shall submit a plan and time
schedule for the repairs, and acquire the appropriate
permits.
(6) A plan of action to maintain the building and
premises (Landscaping, hardscape, etc.) in
conformance with the provisions of this chapter.
(7) A plan of action to maintain:
(a) The building against unlawful entry; and
(b) The site against undesired vehicle access.
(8) Removal of all signs as outlined in Title 24.
5-11-7 Review, Approval or Modification of
Vacant Building Plan.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
(1) The CD Director shall have sole discretion to
approve the vacant building plan in accordance with
the standards and requirements of this chapter.
(2) The CD Director shall, upon notice to the vacant
building owner or agent, have the authority to modify
the vacant building plan by altering the dates of
performance or the proposed methods of action.
(3) If the owner or agent of the vacant building
objects to the modifications made by the CD
Director, the owner may have the right to appeal in
accordance with § 5-11-14.
5-11-8 Standards Governing Review. In
considering the appropriateness of a vacant building
plan the CD Director may consider the following:
(1) The purpose and intent of this chapter to minimize
the period of time a building is boarded or otherwise
vacant.
(2) The effect of the proposed plan on adjoining
property.
(3) The general economic conditions of the
community.
(4) The financial resources of the owner.
(5) The cost to implement the proposed plan.
(6) The length of time the building has been vacant.
(7) The presence of any public nuisances on the
property.
(8) The relative hardship on or gain to the public as
contrasted and compared to the hardship or gain of
the owner resulting from approval or modification of
the proposed plan.
(9) Condition of premises (Landscaping, hardscape,
etc.).
5-11-9 Change of Ownership. The approved
vacant building plan shall remain in effect
notwithstanding a change in ownership and the
selling owner is responsible for maintenance of the
plan until a formal notice is given to the city of the
change of ownership. The new owner is required to
file a revised registration form with the Community
Development Department for the applicable
registration period, and supply the name and address
and telephone number of the new owner(s), agent or
local representative. The revised registration shall be
in the same form as the original registration and shall
remain in effect for the remainder of the registration
period applicable to the original registration.
5-11-10 Distribution of Vacant Building Registry.
The CD Director may provide a registry of vacant
buildings to the police department, the fire
department, and to other officials in the city who may
provide services to owners of vacant buildings.
5-11-11 Maintenance Standards. Any vacant
building, whether or not subject to a vacant building
plan, shall be maintained in accordance with all of the
following maintenance standards:
(1) Boarding: If a building is boarded, the building
shall be boarded in the following manner:
(a) Plywood Sheathing; Exterior Grade Chipboard:
All openings in the structure on the first two (2)
floors, other openings easily accessible from the
ground, and openings with broken glass, shall be
secured either by erecting a single one-half inch
(1/2") thick layer of exterior grade plywood
sheathing, or exterior grade chipboard or equivalent,
covering over all exterior openings, overlapping the
opening on every edge by three inches (3"), nailed by
8d type nails or screwed along the edges equally
spaced every six inches (6");
(b) Wood Frame Construction: Alternately, the
openings may be secured by conventional wood
frame construction. The frames shall use wood studs
of a size not less than two inches by four inches (2" x
4") (nominal dimension) placed not more than twenty
four inches (24") apart on center. The frame stud
shall have the four inch (4") sides or the wide
dimension perpendicular to the face of the wall. Each
side of the frame shall be covered with exterior grade
plywood sheathing of at least one-half inch (1/2")
thickness or equivalent lumber nailed by 8d type nails
or screwed over the opening equally spaced every six
inches (6") on the outside edges and every twelve
inches (12") along intermediate stud supports;
(c) Painting: All coverings shall be painted with
exterior grade paint and use the same color as the
building or its trim and maintained in accordance
with § (4) of this section.
(2) Exterior Doors; Secured: Exterior doors or
windows of a vacant building shall be adequately
locked to preclude entry of unauthorized persons, or
shall be covered as an opening described in § (1)(a)
aboveor § (1)(b) above of this section.
(3) Landscaping; Existing landscaping on the
premises of a vacant building shall be maintained in
the manner that will keep all vegetation healthy and
trimmed per approved landscaping plan or as
otherwise required by law.
(4) Exterior Walls; Surfaces: Exterior walls and
surfaces of a vacant building must be properly
maintained. Any exterior surface which has
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
previously been treated with a weather coating
material such as paint or stain shall be maintained in
good condition free from faded or peeling paint or
other coating material. Severely weathered, peeling or
unpainted wood or damaged siding or roofing must
be replaced or repaired with similar materials and
colors. Any and all graffiti that appears on any
portion of the building must be removed in
accordance with § 18-2-4.
(5) Snow Removal: Snow must be removed from
public sidewalks surrounding the premises of a
vacant building in the manner otherwise required by
law.
(6) Utility Connections: Although service may be
discontinued and meters locked off during vacancy,
all preexisting meters and service lines for water,
sewer, and gas shall be maintained on the premises of
a vacant building, unless eliminated or replaced as
part of the approved vacant building plan. Electrical
power must be maintained to the property.
(7) Exterior lighting:
(a) Building Façade Surfaces – Shall have at least
50% of all lighting on each façade must continue to
work, However at no point can there be less than one
(1) light on any given façade surface.
(b) Parking lot – Shall have at least 50% of the
parking lot light fixtures must continue to work.
(8) Interior Maintenance: The interior of a vacant
building shall be kept free from any accumulation of
rubbish or garbage, and shall be maintained in a clean
and sanitary condition.
(9) Property Maintenance Violations: The exterior
premises of a vacant building shall be maintained in
accordance to any site plan approval and/or all
ordinances of the city regarding the maintenance of
property, including but not limited to, the
requirements of Titles 18 and 28 of this code.
(10) Obscuring Of Windows: The windows and glass
exterior doors of a vacant building shall not be
painted or otherwise obscured in a manner which
obstructs visibility into the interior of the building
unless the CD Director, orders that windows or glass
doors be obscured with a solid coat of paint as part of
maintenance work to be performed under this
ordinance.
(11) Storm Water Detention: All storm water
infrastructures shall be maintained and remain
functional. Storm water fees will still be collected by
the city.
5-11-12 Failure to Maintain.
(1) Notice to maintain; Action By City: If the CD
Director, determines that a vacant building is not
being maintained in accordance with § 5-11-11 of this
chapter, either in whole or in part, the CD Director,
may send a notice to the owner or the owner's agent
by first class mail, prepaid, requiring compliance with
the building maintenance standards within ten (10)
days. If the maintenance work is not performed
within the required time or the owner has not
contacted the CD Director to set a schedule, the CD
Director, may cause the maintenance work to be done
by city personnel or by a contractor hired by the city.
The notice to maintain may occur whether or not the
vacant building is subject to an approved vacant
building plan, and may be sent in conjunction with a
notice to register the building as a vacant building
under § 5-11-4 of this chapter.
(2) Charges To Property Owner:
(a) If the CD Director causes maintenance work to be
done pursuant to Title 18 of this code the city shall
charge the property owner:
(i) An administrative fee which is set by resolution by
the City Council Title published as the Consolidated
Fee Schedule to recover the city's costs in
administering or contracting for the maintenance of
the building and/or premises; and,
(ii) The actual costs of maintaining the building
and/or the premises.
(b) The costs shall be collected as provided under §
5-11-17 of this chapter.
5-11-13 Existing Boarded Buildings.
(1) Compliance Required: Owners of vacant
buildings, prior to July 27, 2010, shall register the
building and comply with the new requirements of
this chapter; provided, that the owner of any vacant
building shall still be subject to the maintenance
standards imposed in § 5-11-11 of this chapter.
(2) Notification to Owners: The CD Director may
take reasonable actions to notify the owners of
buildings subject to a boarded building permit as of
July 27, 2010, informing the owner of the enactment
of this chapter, the revised maintenance standards,
and the requirement to register as a vacant building
upon expiration of the permit.
5-11-14 Appeals and Appeals Procedure.
(1) Any person aggrieved by a decision of the CD
Director, regarding a vacant building plan may appeal
the decision in accordance with the appeals
procedures as outlined in § (2).
(2) Appeals procedures:
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
(a) If the owner or agent of the vacant building
objects to the decision made by the CD Director, the
owner shall have the right to appeal to the Planning
Commission. The appeal shall be filed with the
Community Development Department within ten (10)
days of receipt of the CD Director’s notice of
decision, along with payment of appropriate fees.
(b) The Planning Commission, after considering the
testimony of the CD Director, the building owner,
and any other interested person, shall render its
decision on the owner's appeal of the CD Director’s
decision to the proposed vacant building plan. The
Planning Commission shall have the authority to
fashion its own vacant building plan or approve the
plan submitted by the owner or the decision by the
CD Director.
(c) The decision of the Planning Commission shall be
final and constitute the approved vacant building
plan.
(d) If the owner or agent of the vacant building
objects to the vacant building plan approved by the
Planning Commission, the owner shall have the right
to appeal to the 2nd District Court. The appeal shall
be filed within thirty (30) days of receipt of the
Planning Commission’s notice of decision.
5-11-15 Building Permits and Inspections
Required. Whenever a property owner, agent of the
owner, manager or tenant intends to conduct repairs,
renovates, to re-open or to re-occupy a building that
is registered as a vacant building, the building is to be
inspected and reviewed to determine if a permit must
be issued by the CD Director, prior to the building
owner, agent, manager, or tenant initiating any of the
above actions. Any person conducting any work on a
building that is registered as a vacant building must
have a copy of the permit, if issued, on the site at all
times. Any person conducting work without an issued
permit on the site will be considered in violation of
Building Code. A stop work order will be issued and
will be evicted from the premises. This is not
intended to restrict activities as outlined in § 5-11-11.
5-11-16 Enforcement of Other Laws or Notice and
Orders.
(1) This chapter shall not be construed to prevent the
enforcement of other laws, codes, ordinances, and
regulations which prescribe standards other than
those provided in this Title, and in the event of
conflict, the most restrictive provision shall apply.
(2) Registration of a vacant building shall not stay
enforcement of any existing notice and order
requiring repair or demolition of the building; or
prevent issuance of subsequent or supplemental
notice and orders, requiring the securing, repair or
demolition of the building in accordance with the
provisions and standards of this chapter.
5-11-17 Recovery of Cost of Boarding, Repair or
Demolition.
(1) Itemized Statement; Preparation And Delivery:
The CD Director, and the other officers and
employees of the city responsible for performing or
contracting for the performance of abatement work,
shall prepare an itemized statement of all expenses
incurred by the city in the performance of abatement
work authorized under the provisions of this chapter,
together with all administrative costs incurred by the
city, and shall mail a copy to the property owner
demanding payment within thirty (30) days of the
date of mailing. The notice shall be considered
delivered when mailed by certified mail addressed to
the property owner's last known address.
(2) Failure To Make Payment: In the event the
property owner fails to make payment to the CD
Director of the amount set forth in the statement
described in § (1), within thirty (30) days of the date
of mailing, the CD Director may cause a tax lien to be
placed on the property as set forth in Utah Code 10-
11 for abatement of nuisance.
5-11-18 Enforcement, Prohibited Activities.
(1) Nuisances: It shall be unlawful for any owner or
occupant of any lot, tract or parcel of land to cause or
permit any nuisance as defined in Title 18-1-8, to be
created or remain, upon the premises; and it shall be
the duty of the owner or occupant to abate and
remove any nuisance from the premises.
(2) Buildings In Violation: It shall be unlawful for
any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair,
move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip,
use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or
cause or permit the same to be done in violation of
this chapter.
(3) Unlawful Entry: No person shall remain in or
enter any building which has had a notice posted in
accordance to § 5-3-2(2) of this chapter, except that
entry may be made to repair, demolish or remove the
building under permit. No person shall remove or
deface any notice after it is posted until the required
repairs, demolition or removal have been completed
and a certificate of occupancy issued in accordance to
the provisions of the Building Code.
(4) Refusal To Comply: It shall be unlawful for any
person to fail, neglect or refuse to obey any order
made in accordance to this chapter.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
(5) Noncompliance With Vacant Building
Requirements: It shall be unlawful for an owner of a
vacant building to fail to:
(a) Register or reregister any vacant building in
accordance with the provisions of this chapter;
(b) Comply with the approved vacant building plan
for any building, in accordance with the requirements
of this chapter;
(c) Maintain the building in accordance with the
standards imposed under § 5-11-11 of this chapter;
or,
(d) Maintain a “Knox Box” as required by the Fire
Marshall.
5-11-19 Emergencies. Whenever a nuisance as
enumerated in Title 18 or as defined in this Title
creates an emergency requiring immediate action to
protect the public health, safety or welfare, the CD
Director may issue an immediate order directing the
owner, occupant or other person in charge of the
premises to take any and all action necessary to
correct or abate the immediate emergency.
(1) Notice: The CD Director shall attempt to make
contact through a personal interview or by telephone
with the owner or the person, if any, occupying or
otherwise in real or apparent charge and control of
the property. In the event contact is made, the CD
Director shall notify the person of the danger
involved and require that any and all conditions be
immediately removed, repaired or isolated so as to
preclude harm to any person or property.
(2) Abatement: In the event the CD Director is unable
to make contact as noted above, or if the appropriate
persons after notification by the CD Director, do not
take action as specified by the official within seventy
two (72) hours, the CD Director may take all steps
deemed necessary to remove or isolate any and all
conditions as outlined in § 18-1-8(4).
History 08/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
Chapter 12. Off-site Improvement
Agreements and Repayment for City
Installed Improvements
5-12-1 Applicability
5-12-2 Purpose and Intent
5-12-3 Definitions
5-12-4 Recoupment of Costs by the City for
Improvements
5-12-5 Off-site Improvement Required
5-12-6 Dedication of Right-of-Way and
Easements Required
5-12-7 Off-site Improvement Agreement
5-12-8 Conditions for an Off-site Improvement
Agreement
5-12-9 Off-site Improvement Agreements –
Denial
5-12-10 Contents of an Off-site Improvement
Agreement
5-12-11 Activation of an Off-site Improvement
Agreement
5-12-12 Corner Lot Exemptions
5-12-13 Appeal to the Decision of the Community
Development Director
5-12-14 Declaration of Needed Improvements
5-12-15 Timing of a Declaration of Needed
Improvements
5-12-16 Procedures for Establishing a Declaration
of Needed Improvements
5-12-17 Conduct of the Council Meeting in
Determining a Declaration of Needed
Improvements
5-12-18 Contents of a Declaration of Needed
Improvements
5-12-19 Longevity of a Declaration of Needed
Improvement
5-12-20 Recording of an Off-site Improvement
Agreement or Declaration of Needed
Improvements
5-12-21 Failure to Acquire a Permit
5-12-22 Fees
5-12-1 Applicability. This ordinance shall apply to:
(1) All vacant lands within the city now existing or
hereafter becoming vacant;
(2) All buildings and structures within the city; and,
(3) All lands that may be annexed into the city at a
future date.
5-12-2 Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose and
intent of this chapter is to protect the public health,
safety, welfare, and insure that needed public
improvements are installed within the public right-ofway.
To this end the City Council has determined
that every property, home, and business owner is
responsible for the installation of improvements
fronting their property.
5-12-3 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter,
certain terms, phrases, words and their derivatives
shall be construed as specified in this chapter, or
where terms are not defined within this chapter or in
the applicable code, they shall have their ordinary
accepted meanings within the context they are used.
As used in this chapter the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings given them:
“Community Development Director” or
“Director” means the Community Development
Director or authorized representative unless
specifically stated.
“Declaration of Needed Improvements” or
“Declaration” means a Resolution passed by the
majority of the City Council indicating that public
improvements are required in the public right-of-way,
outlining the needs associated with the
improvements, the cost of the improvements, and the
obligation of the property owner to repay the City for
the improvements based upon a schedule outlined in
the Resolution. The Resolution is to be recorded at
the Davis County Recorder’s Office against the
property where the improvements are accomplished.
“Improvements upon Property” means any
modifications made to the land or structures upon the
land that adds real or intrinsic value to the property.
“Off-site Improvement(s)” means any improvement
which traditionally increases the value of a lot, tract,
or parcel of land or benefits it and is usually not
located directly on the property and includes such
items as:
(1) Right-of-way;
(2) Street grading and surfacing;
(3) Sidewalks and, where required, walkways;
(4) Curbs and gutters;
(5) Sanitary sewers, including laterals to each lot line;
(6) Street drainage structures;
(7) Foundation drainage system, where required;
(8) Water lines, including laterals and meters to each
lot line;
(9) Fire hydrants;
(10) Streetlights;
(11) Storm sewers;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
(12) Secondary water lines, including laterals to each
lot line;
(13) Underground utilities; and
(14) All other improvements deemed necessary by
the City.
“Off-site Improvement Agreement” or
“Agreement” means a legally binding document
created between the City and a property owner
obligating and binding the property owner, their
successors or assigns.
“Value of Improvements” means the value of
improvements as determined by the City based upon
the calculated valuation of a building permit,
engineer’s estimates, contractor’s estimates or actual
costs.
5-12-4 Recoupment of Costs by the City for
Improvements. The City shall be entitled to collect
from new development, prior to the issuance of any
permit or approval, the costs of any improvements or
portion of improvements that the City has paid for
and constructed or caused to be constructed, that
would constitute a project improvement to the
development activity proposed in a permit. The
project improvements shall include any improvement
that specifically benefits the development activity by
providing improvements that have to be installed by
the developer or property owner prior to
development. The costs shall be calculated by the
City Engineer, based on the City's cost of design and
construction. The City may then, by resolution of the
City Council, require that those costs be paid by the
development activity proposed in a permit. The City
may withhold the issuance of a permit, final approval,
final acceptance or certificate of occupancy until such
time as the costs are paid.
5-12-5 Off-site Improvement Required.
(1) Where Off-site improvements are not installed
within the public right-of-way the property owner is
responsible for installing all or part of the
improvements as established in Titles 9, Engineering
Standards, and 26, Subdivisions, of the Clinton City
Code of Revised Ordinances.
(2) Property owners making improvements upon their
property equaling or exceeding three thousand dollars
($3,000.00) in value shall install Off-site
improvements including, but not limited to those
defined in this chapter, to meet the city standards, on
streets adjacent to the property. Any requests for a
building permit, road cut permit, compliance permit,
or other permit is sufficient to require the applicant to
fulfill these requirements.
(3) The City Council, by resolution and upon
fulfilling the requirements outlined in § 5-12-14, may
direct the installation of Off-site improvements, as
defined in this chapter, within a dedicated right-ofway
by means of a Declaration.
5-12-6 Dedication of Right-of-Way and
Easements Required. Whenever Off-site
improvements are required, as established in § 5-12-
5, to be installed, or in the event that an Agreement is
to be established, the property owner is required to
deed the necessary public right-of-way for street, curb,
gutter, sidewalk and public utility and drainage
easements, as required by Titles 9, Engineering
Standards, and 26, Subdivisions, of the Clinton City
Code of Revised Ordinances.
5-12-7 Off-site Improvement Agreement. The
Director is authorized to enter into an Agreement for
postponement of the requirements of § 5-12-5(2) as to
the installation of Off-site improvements.
Agreements shall be attested to by the City Recorder
prior to recording.
5-12-8 Conditions for an Off-site Improvement
Agreement. The Director may issue an Agreement
after receiving a recommendation from the City
Engineer and Public Works Director. The City may
enter into an Agreements as follows:
(1) Where it is determined that the placement of any
isolated sidewalk would constitute a threat to public
safety, such as the proximity to open ditches, canals,
or similar hazards.
(2) Agreements for curb, gutter, and/or sidewalk may
be granted where the improvements from a utility
company, irrigation company, or similar service
provider prohibit the installation of the curb, gutter,
or sidewalk.
(3) Agreements may be granted to any parcel that is
traversed by a street that has not been constructed but
is shown on the Clinton City Transportation master
Plan and/or is included in the Capital Improvements
Plan.
(4) Agreements may be granted where it is
determined that, by delaying placement of Off-site
improvements, it serves the needs of the city when
evaluating the need for the improvements in a small
area of the city within a larger area that requires
similar improvements.
(5) The construction of all required improvements
shall be guaranteed by placing cash in the Clinton
City Surety Account or in escrow with an approved
institution, as outlined in Title 9, in an amount equal
to the cost of the improvements.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
5-12-9 Off-site Improvement Agreements -
Denial. Agreements shall not be issued under the
following circumstances:
(1) For any required service lateral to a subdivided
parcel or property to be otherwise developed. Service
laterals include, but are not limited to sewer, water,
drainage, secondary water, etc.
(2) For any commercial or industrial developments.
5-12-10 Contents of an Off-site Improvement
Agreement. Contained within an Agreement an
applicant property owner shall agree to, as a
minimum, the following items:
(1) The name and address of the current property
owner.
(2) That it is the purpose of the agreement to permit
the applicant to delay installing Off-site
improvements subject to the statements within the
Agreement.
(3) That the timing of the installing of the
improvements is solely up to the Council.
(4) A legal description of the property for which the
Agreement is being created.
(5) A requirement that the City notify the current
property owner of a parcel stating that the Council
has made the determination improvements are to be
installed on the streets adjacent to a parcel with a
recorded Agreement.
(6) Notice to the property owner of options on how they
are to accomplish the improvements which may include
but not be limited to:
(a) Special improvement district;
(b) Join a city project in the area; or,
(c) Independent contractor engaged by the property
owner.
(7) The timeline expected.
(8) A statement that the property owner will refrain
from objecting either formally or otherwise to the
creation of an improvement district or to the making
or installing of the Off-site improvements.
(9) That the Agreement is to be recorded against the
parcel of property described in the Agreement.
(10) That the Agreement will be binding upon the
current owner, their successors or assigns.
(11) That if any person fails to comply with the
notice from the City to install Off-site improvements
within the timeline specified the, the City Manager
may instruct the Director declare the lack of Off-site
improvements a nuisance, hazardous or inconvenient
condition in the manner provided by law.
(12) That, should the services of an attorney be required
to enforce this agreement, the defaulting party agrees to
pay a reasonable attorney's fee.
5-12-11 Activation of an Off-site Improvement
Agreement.
(1) Upon receipt of notice that the City Council has
made the determination improvements are to be
installed on the streets adjacent to a parcel with a
recorded Agreement the Director shall notify the current
owner of the property and provide information outlined
in the agreement.
(2) The City Council is to give as much notice to a
property owner, of a pending project, as possible.
(3) The City Council may offer to a property owner
the opportunity to participate in an area wide project,
payment schedules for reimbursement of up front
costs, or other assistance intended to assist the
property owner in affording the improvements.
5-12-12 Corner Lot Exemptions. If a special
improvement district is created to activate an
agreement or group of agreements or if the property
owner is paying back the City for participation in a
City project the linear measurements may be reduced
by the following exemptions for corner lots:
(1) For curb, gutter, and sidewalk, forty feet (40')
linear feet;
(2) For street paving, sixty feet (60') linear; and
(3) For sanitary sewers, eighty feet (80') linear feet.
5-12-13 Appeal to the Decision of the Community
Development Director. In the event that an
applicant does not agree with the determination of the
Director to allow or deny of a request for an
Agreement the applicant may appeal the decision to
the City Council. The decision of the City Council is
final.
5-12-14 Declaration of Needed Improvements. In
order to insure that improvements are installed as part
of new development the Council is hereby authorized
to establish a Declaration, by Resolution, on any
property fronting an established right-of-way where
the Council finds that Off-site improvements are
required to protect the health, welfare, and safety of
the citizenry.
5-12-15 Timing of a Declaration of Needed
Improvements. It is not necessary for the Council to
establish a Declaration prior to improvements being
installed within an existing right-of-way. In the
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
interest of notice the Council is to provide the current
owner written notice of the meeting where a
Declaration is to be discussed and that the owner will
be afforded the opportunity to address the Council
prior to a Declaration being recorded against a
property.
5-12-16 Procedures for Establishing a Declaration
of Needed Improvements. Prior to the City Council
establishing a Declaration the Community
Development Director shall prepare a staff report for
the Council containing the following.
(1) A description of the proposed project(s), and the
impacts of such project(s).
(2) Ascertain, by public record, the owner of the
property being considered.
(3) Evidence that the property owner has been
notified, in writing by certified mail of:
(a) The address or approximate address and tax ID
number of the property;
(b) Notice that Off-site improvements are required
and what those improvements are;
(c) The date of the meeting of the City Council when
the item will be discussed;
(d) The anticipated timeline for completion of the
needed improvements; and,
(e) A cost estimate for the improvements, if available.
(4) A Resolution establishing a Declaration.
5-12-17 Conduct of the Council Meeting in
Determining a Declaration of Needed
Improvements. During the Council Meeting the
property owner will be given the opportunity to:
(1) Address the Council regarding any concerns
related to the proposed action;
(2) Stay the Declaration by committing to the Council
that the required improvements will be installed, by
the property owner, within the timeline required by
the Council;
(3) The decision of the Council is final.
5-12-18 Contents of a Declaration of Needed
Improvements. Format of a Resolution shall be as
established by State Law and Clinton City Code. In
addition a Declaration shall contain:
(1) The name and address of the current property
owner.
(2) The date, findings, and the decision made at the
Council Meeting where the owner was afforded the
opportunity to appear and the Declaration was voted
upon, along with any delayed actions or meetings.
(3) The improvements that will be made to the
property.
(4) That the City shall be entitled to collect from any
new development prior to the issuance of any permit
or approval, the costs of improvements installed by
the City and outlined in the Declaration.
(5) A legal description of the property for which the
Agreement is being created.
(6) A statement outlining that the property may not be
subdivided or developed in any way without the prior
notice and payment to the City.
(7) Any timeline established related to the expected
payback or expiration of the Declaration.
(8) Signatures of the Mayor and City Recorder.
(9) That the Declaration will be binding upon the
current owner, their successors or assigns.
(10) That the Declaration is to be recorded against the
parcel of property described in the Declaration.
(11) That, should the services of an attorney be required
to enforce this agreement, the defaulting party agrees to
pay a reasonable attorney's fee.
5-12-19 Longevity of a Declaration of Needed
Improvement. The value of improvements installed
adjacent to a parcel may vary greatly depending upon
the type of improvement, material of which it is
constructed, and age of the improvements. Upon
activation of a Declaration by application for a permit
the Director may review all recorded Declarations on a
parcel proposed for development to evaluate the value
of a Declaration prior collection of funds or issuance of
a permit. Prior to requiring payment the following may
be considered in evaluating the value of an
improvement to a developer.
(1) Generally the full value of an improvement will be
considered to be 10 years with a depreciated value for
an additional 5 years.
(2) If a developer is required to replace, upsize or
otherwise make significant improvements to an
improvement installed previously by the city the
developer shall not be expected to reimburse the city for
those improvements.
(3) Consideration for collection of impact fees must be
given when calculating charges.
(4) The decision of the Director may be appealed to the
Council prior to the issue of a permit. After a permit is
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 5 Building Regulations
issued the decision of the Director is final, the decision
of the Council is final if a decision is appealed.
5-12-20 Recording of an Off-site Improvement
Agreement or Declaration of Needed
Improvements.
(1) Recording at the Davis County Recorder’s Office:
(a) Upon creation of an Agreement the Director shall
cause the document to be recorded;
(b) Upon direction of the Council the Director shall
cause the Declaration to be recorded.
(2) A copy of the recorded document shall be mailed
to the property owner of record at the address on file
with the County Recorder’s Office.
(3) The City Recorder shall retain the original
document and the Director shall keep a copy of the
recorded document in an address file for the parcel.
(4) Upon completion of the obligation created by an
Agreement or Declaration the Director may record a
document stating that the obligations are fulfilled.
5-12-21 Failure to Acquire a Permit. Failure to
obtain a required permit, from the City, necessary for
any improvements made to an owner’s property does
not relieve an individual of the obligations outlined in
this chapter.
5-12-22 Fees. The Clinton City Council may set the
amount of fees required to facilitate the actions
outlined in this Chapter, from time to time, by
resolution and published in the Clinton City
Consolidated Fee Schedule. Consideration of fees
may include but not be limited to those needed to
cover the cost of administration, inspections, reviews,
publications, and related issues.
History: 8/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
TITLE 6. CEMETERIES*
Chapter 1. In General
Chapter 2. Cemetery Superintendent
Chapter 3. Regulation of Cemetery and
Burials
Chapter 4. Fees and Charges
Chapter 5. Sale of Burial Spaces
Chapter 6. Cemetery Maintenance and
Decorations
Chapter 7. Perpetual Care
Chapter 8. Indigents
Chapter 1. In General
6-1-1 Definitions
6-1-2 The Name
6-1-3 Cemeteries Covered
6-1-1 Definitions. The following words or
phrases shall have the following meanings unless the
context otherwise clearly requires:
"burial Space Owner" or "purchaser" and "grave
owner or purchaser" shall mean the owner or
purchaser of burial privileges or the collateral right of
use of any burial space evidenced by a deed or burial
right for a described burial space or by proved and
recognized descent or devise from the original owner.
“Burial Space” means a legal and authorized
gravesite generally measuring four feet by eight feet,
for which one Right of Burial may be sold.
“Lot” means an area generally containing eight burial
spaces.
“Block” means an area generally containing 8 lots.
“Plat” means an area containing multiple Blocks,
namely Plat A, B, C and D.
“Resident” means any person who is a legal resident
of Clinton City defined as follows:
(a) Any person who had a permanent home within the
corporate limits of Clinton City, Utah at the time of
death, regardless of the actual place of death.
(b) Any person owning real property within the
corporate limits of Clinton City, Utah at the time of
death, regardless of the residence of such person.
(c) Any person who had a permanent home in the
corporate limits of Clinton City, Utah immediately
prior to moving from the City for the purpose of
receiving medical or residential care.
(d) Any married person who owns burial rights in two
adjacent spaces and buries his or her spouse in one of
those spaces while both are residents, regardless of
his or her residence at the time of death.
“Infant” means a fetus or a child up to two (2) years
of age.
History: 9/84, 02/15
6-1-2 The Name. The burial ground of this city
shall be known and designated by the name of Clinton
City Cemetery.
History: 9/84
6-1-3 Cemeteries Covered. All cemeteries
owned and/or maintained by the City or which may
hereafter be acquired by the Municipality wherever
situated are hereby declared subject to the provisions
of this chapter.
History: 9/84, 02/15
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
Chapter 2. Cemetery Superintendent
6-2-1 Office of Cemetery Superintendent
6-2-2 Duties of Cemetery Superintendent
6-2-1 Office of Cemetery Superintendent.
There is hereby created the position of cemetery
superintendent.
History: 9/84
6-2-2 Duties of Cemetery Superintendent. The
Cemetery Superintendent shall have the general
supervision and administration of the Municipal
Cemetery including but not limited to:
(1) Recommending to the City Manager such
additional rules and regulations as may be necessary
for the operation, maintenance, use and protection of
the Cemetery.
(2) Subdividing the Cemetery into burial spaces.
(3) Maintaining a record of the location of the graves
and preventing any burial space from being used
beyond its capacity.
(4) Keeping a duplicate plat of the Cemetery and, at
the request of any person wishing to purchase a burial
space, indicating available burial spaces for sale.
(5) Opening any graves in the Cemetery upon
application being made by the City Manager,
Recorder or by any person having the right to make
such application and being responsible for closing all
graves.
(6) Keeping the streets, alleys, walks and avenues in
the Cemetery in good order and unobstructed.
History: 9/84, 02/15
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
Chapter 3. Regulation of Cemetery and
Burials
6-3-1 Interments – Interment Order – Duties of
Cemetery Superintendent – Records of
Interments – Information Filed with Local
Registrar
6-3-2 Burials and Disinterment
6-3-3 Infant Burials
6-3-4 Burial of Cremains
6-3-5 Orientation of Graves
6-3-6 Hours of Burials
6-3-7 Vaults Required
6-3-8 Sale Subject to Rules
6-3-9 Care Reserved
6-3-10 Orders and Responsibilities for Errors
6-3-11 Traffic Rules
6-3-12 Children
6-3-13 Animals Prohibited
6-3-14 Decorum
6-3-15 Injury to Cemetery Property Prohibited
6-3-16 Landscaping by Private Persons
6-3-17 Placement of Markers – Ownership of
Markers – Care and Maintenance of
Markers
6-3-18 Marker Size – Marker Material – Marker
Interference with Excavation
6-3-19 Additional Rules and Regulations
6-3-1 Interments-Interment Order-Duties of
Cemetery Superintendent--Records of Interments-
-Information Filed with Local Registrar.
(1) A licensed funeral director or family
representative can arrange for a grave opening. An
interment order for a burial must be filled out and
fees paid, prior to the opening of a grave. The family
representative or the funeral director should give the
necessary information and the fees to the Cemetery
Clerk.
(2) The Cemetery Clerk shall keep a record of all
interments made in the premises under his charge,
stating the name of the decedent, place of death, date
of burial, and name and address of the funeral
director or other person making the interment. This
record shall be open to public inspection. A city
clerk shall maintain the interment records.
(3) Not later than the tenth (10th) day of each month
the Cemetery Clerk shall send to the Davis County
Health Department a list of all interments made in the
Clinton City Cemetery during the preceding month.
The list shall be on forms provided by the state
registrar.
History: 9/84, 02/15
6-3-2 Burials and Disinterment.
(1) It is a class C misdemeanor for any person to:
(a) Disinter any body buried in any cemetery, except
under the direction of the Cemetery Superintendent
who shall, before disinterment, require a written
permission from both the County Health Officer and
the owner of the burial space or his or her heirs,
which written authorization shall be filed and
preserved in a record kept for such purposes.
(b) Disinter or remove the body of a person who has
died from a contagious disease within two (2) years
after the date of burial, unless the body was buried in
a hermetically sealed casket or vault and is found to
be so encased at the time of disinterment.
(c) It is a class C misdemeanor to inter anything other
than the remains of human bodies and their interment
containers in cemeteries.
(d) It is a class C misdemeanor to bury the body of
any person within this city except in the City
Cemetery or a private cemetery, unless by special
permission of the governing body under such rules
and regulations that it may prescribe.
History: 9/84, 05/99, 02/15
6-3-3 Infant Burials. The possibility exists for
Infants to be buried (stacked) on top of an existing
burial vault owned by the family. This is dependent
upon the depth of the original burial. Limited to two
per space. Half spaces (4’x4’) limited to two infant
burials may be purchased. A special section of the
Cemetery has been established for the burial of
infants. Spaces in this section are 1/4th the size of the
full size spaces. Headstones in the infant section
must be confined to the individual space, a maximum
size of 24” wide including the 4” mow strip.
6-3-4 Burial of Cremains. Full spaces (8’ X 4’)
limited to 4 Cremain burials may be purchased. Half
spaces (4’X 4’) limited to 2 Cremain burials may be
purchased. Cremains may also be buried (stacked) on
top of an existing burial vault owned by the family,
limited to 2 per space.
6-3-5 Orientation of Graves. By convention,
burial spaces are laid in rows with the head of the
grave at the West and the foot to the East. Individual
full size grave spaces measure four feet wide by eight
feet long. Traditional burial custom has the wife
placed to the left side of the husband, (determined by
standing at the head of the grave) however placement
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
is a matter of choice. The Superintendant will help in
the decision as necessary.
6-3-6 Hours of Burials. Burials are accepted
Monday-Saturday from 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. Burial
services extending past 3:00 p.m. on weekdays will
be assessed an overtime fee. Saturday burials will
also be assessed an overtime fee. No interments are
allowed on Sundays, or the following holidays: New
Years, Memorial Day (between 12:00 noon the
Friday before Memorial Day and 12:00 noon the
Tuesday after Memorial Day), Independence Day,
Pioneer Day, Thanksgiving Day, and Christmas Day.
All other minor Holidays will be charged the Special
Rate as established by the Clinton City Council.
6-3-7 Vaults Required. Vaults are required for
all burials except cremains contained in urns. Vaults
constructed out of materials other than concrete or
steel must be approved by the Superintendant.
History 9/84, 02/15
6-3-8 Sale Subject to Rules. Every burial space
or single grave sold is subject to rules and regulations
that have been or may be adopted. The rules and
regulations shall be subject to such changes as are
found necessary for the protection of burial space
owners, the remains of the dead, and the preservation
of the Cemetery
History: 9/84
6-3-9 Care Reserved. The City reserves the right
to enter upon any grave and to perform all work
necessary for the care and upkeep of all lots and
graves in its cemeteries
History: 9/84
6-3-10 Orders and Responsibilities for Errors.
Under no circumstances will the city assume
responsibilities for errors in opening graves when
orders are given by telephone.
History: 9/84
6-3-11 Traffic Rules.
(1) The provisions of the City traffic ordinances
relative to the operation of vehicles and conduct of
pedestrians shall be in effect in the Cemetery, except
as herein otherwise modified by this ordinance.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to ride or drive
within the City cemetery at a speed greater than ten
(10) miles per hour.
History: 9/84
6-3-12 Children. Children under the age of 14
years shall not be allowed in cemeteries unless
accompanied by their parents or other adults, except
for the purposes of attending authorized funerals or,
in the company of adults, placing flowers on the
grave of a deceased relative or friend, or performing
any other customary evidence of respect in
accordance with their religious principles.
History: 9/84
6-3-13 Animals Prohibited. Domestic animals are
not permitted on Cemetery grounds, except for
service animals to assist the disabled. Owners are
responsible for cleaning up after their animal.
History: 9/84, 02/15
6-3-14 Decorum. Cemetery grounds are sacredly
devoted to the interment and repose of the dead.
Strict observance of decorum due such a place shall
be required of all persons. Neither alcoholic
beverages nor smoking are permitted on Cemetery
grounds.
History: 9/84, 02/15
6-3-15 Injury to Cemetery Property Prohibited.
(1) It shall be a Class C misdemeanor for any person
to injure, deface, break, destroy or remove any
headstone, tombstone, monument, tree, shrub, or any
other property in the Cemetery.
History: 9/84, 05/99, 02/15
6-3-16 Landscaping by Private Persons. Except
as provided by the rules and regulations of the
governing body, it shall be unlawful for any person to
erect or maintain any fence, corner post, coping or
boundary of any kind, to plant any vegetation upon
any burial space, street, alley or walk in the Cemetery
or to grade the ground or land thereof. The Cemetery
Superintendent shall, whenever required, furnish the
true lines of any lots according to official survey,
shall prevent and prohibit any markings of the same
except by official landmarks, and shall prevent and
prohibit any grading thereof that might destroy or
interfere with the general slope of the land. All work
in the Cemetery including, interments, placement of
markers, plantings, landscaping, grounds keeping,
construction, all maintenance, improvements and
beautifying of the grounds will be done under the
supervision of the Superintendant.
History: 9/84, 02/15
6-3-17 Placement of Markers – Ownership of
Markers – Care and Maintenance of Markers. It
shall be unlawful for any person to erect, place or
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
cause to be placed any marker or monument on any
burial space in the Cemetery in violation of this
ordinance.
(1) Memorials will be placed in an orderly manner in
pre-designated rows as directed by the
Superintendant. Flat markers not protruding more
than ½ inch above ground level with the lawn, are
approved for any Plat of the Cemetery. Raised
markers are only allowed in Plat “A” and “B” of the
Cemetery. Patrons wishing to place more than one
marker per space must have permission from the
Cemetery Superintendant. Family monuments must
comply with this section. When cremains and/or
infants are placed on top of an existing occupied
space, an additional marker will be allowed on the
space but it must be a flat marker.
(2) Headstones are personal property. All monuments
within the Cemetery are the property of the space
owners, their heirs, or the responsible party that
ordered and placed them. Repairing or replacing
markers or memorial structures is the responsibility of
the space owner except when the need for repair or
replacement is directly caused by the City.
(3) The Cemetery is maintained by City crews, who
exercise great care in keeping the grounds groomed.
The City will not be responsible for inadvertent
scratches and chips that occur from routine
maintenance. Such happenings are a condition that
will go with the privilege of placing markers in the
Cemetery.
History: 9/84, 02/15
6-3-18 Marker Size – Marker Material – Marker
Interference with Excavation.
(1) All headstones or markers must have a concrete
border (four inches) wide installed flush with the
surface of the lawn. The combined length of the mow
strip and grave marker shall not exceed (40”) forty
inches for a single space; or (80”) eighty inches for a
double space. Headstones in the infant section must
be confined to the individual space, a maximum size
of 24” wide including the 4” mow strip.
(2) Except for veteran’s markers, all
monuments/markers/headstones shall be made of
granite or marble and shall be set in concrete or
granite unless approved by the Cemetery
Superintendent.
(3) Markers are subject to temperature extremes,
snow, ice, sprinkler irrigation, water, and occasional
nicks and chips from mowing equipment. It is
recommended that raised markers have a rough nosed
base or edge rather than a polished smooth surface.
(4) The owner or responsible party is responsible for
the removal and replacement of a marker that must be
moved for the excavation of a grave or for the
expense of such services to be undertaken. If the
owner or responsible party wishes, the City can also
arrange for this service with a local monument dealer,
pre-payment is required.
History, 02/15
6-3-19 Additional Rules and Regulations.
(1) The governing body may promulgate by
resolution such additional rules and regulations
concerning the care, use, operation and maintenance
of the Cemetery as it shall deem necessary.
(2) The City Manager may from time to time as the
governing body deems necessary direct and publish a
booklet of rules and regulations for the convenience
of the purchasers of burial space in the City
Cemetery. Such rules and regulations shall constitute
a part of the terms and conditions under which
owners and users may utilize the Cemetery and shall
form a supplement to this ordinance after they have
been adopted as official by resolution of the
governing body.
(3) Any changes in the rules and regulations shall be
adopted by the governing body before such changes
shall be official.
History: 9/84, 02/15
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
Chapter 4. Fees and Charges
6-4-1 Collection of Fees
6-4-2 Fee to be Paid for Opening Grave
6-4-3 Fee to be Paid for Perpetual Care
6-4-4 Fee to be Paid for Disinterment
6-4-5 Purchaser Price and Fees
6-4-1 Collection of Fees. The Cemetery Clerk
and such other persons as the City Manager may
designate, are hereby authorized and required to
collect in advance fees for the opening and closing of
graves, perpetual care of graves, disinterment of
bodies and other services. The fees shall be such
amounts as are determined by the governing body
from time to time by resolution.
History: 9/84, 02/15
6-4-2 Fee to be Paid for Opening Grave.
(1) No grave shall be opened in the City Cemetery
until payment of the fee for the labor and expense for
the opening the grave shall be paid.
(2) The presentation of a receipt of pre-payment to
the Cemetery Clerk shall be authority to open a grave
for the burial of a deceased person.
(3) An after hours fee will be assessed for burials
after 3:00 p.m. Monday thru Friday. Saturday burials
will also be assessed an overtime fee.
History: 9/84, 02/15
6-4-3 Fee to be paid for Perpetual Care.
(1) No grave shall be opened in the City Cemetery
until the perpetual care fee for the space where the
grave is to be opened shall have been paid.
(2) Care Included. The essential perpetual care that
the City agrees to give shall consist of care of the
Cemetery generally, and shall include, mowing of all
burial spaces at reasonable intervals, re-sodding,
seeding and filling in sunken graves, sodding the
surface of the graves to level, removing dead flowers
and trimming trees and shrubbery when necessary,
raking and cleaning the graves and straightening of
tilting stones or markers.
History: 02/15
6-4-4 Fee to be paid for Disinterment.
(1) No grave shall be re-opened or disinterred in the
City Cemetery until payment of the fee for the labor
and expense for the opening of the grave and
restoring the grounds shall have been paid.
History: 02/15
6-4-5 Purchaser Price and Fees. The governing
body shall from time to time by resolution fix the size
of burial space, the price at which burial rights shall
be sold and the fees which shall be charged for the
various cemetery services to be provided.
History: 9/84
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
Chapter 5. Sale of Burial Spaces
6-5-1 Sale
6-5-2 Conveyed Rights
6-5-3 Restrictions of Resale
6-5-4 Reversion of Unused Lots
6-5-1 Sale.
(1) The Cemetery Clerk, and such other person as the
City Manager may designate, is hereby authorized to
sell the use of burial spaces in the City Cemetery for
burial purposes only, and, to collect all sums arising
from the sale. Only permissive burial rights are sold.
The City retains title to the Cemetery property. The
Cemetery Clerk shall keep a complete record of all
sales, which record shall describe the location of the
burial space purchased and the price paid therefore.
The Cemetery Clerk shall deliver to each purchaser a
certificate of burial rights for each burial space
purchased, which certificate shall, among other
things, describe the location of the burial space, the
purchase price, and the type of maintenance services
which are to be provided, e.g., perpetual care.
(2) A certificate and rights to burial shall be exempt
from execution, taxation or assessment for care and
maintenance from and after full payment of the
purchase price and fees. Payments made pursuant to
this section shall not be construed to be in payment
for cemetery services other than perpetual care or
prepaid maintenance.
(3) The Cemetery Master File is the correct record.
Any discrepancy between the Master File and the
certificate of burial will be considered a clerical error.
The Superintendant reserves the right to recall,
correct and reissue the correct certificates.
History: 9/84, 02/15
6-5-2 Conveyed Rights. Upon the death of a
burial space owner, the burial space passes to those
named in his or her will or to his or her heirs
perpetually as designated by law. Clinton City shall in
no way be held responsible for failure to properly
determine the legal successorship of any burial space.
The heirs are entitled to the same use of the burial
space as the original owners and are bound by the
same rules and regulations. No person, except the
owner of the burial rights on a space will be buried on
that space, unless a form provided by the Cemetery
Clerk has been signed by the owner or legal heirs to
those rights giving permission for the use of the
space. The permission slip must be turned in before
the grave opening and will be kept as a permanent
record.
History: 9/84, 02/15
6-5-3 Restrictions of Resale.
(1) All burial spaces sold by the City shall not be
further sold, transferred, conveyed or assigned to any
person other than living heirs or back to the City of
Clinton. The City may also buy back unused cemetery
plots upon request from the owner, or by all living
heirs, at the buyback price established by resolution
of the City Council.
(2) Whenever a certificate to burial rights or burial
spaces is assigned to any living heirs, reverts to the
City, as provided for in this section, or becomes
vested in the City for any reason, before new
certificates are issued, the original certificate shall be
cancelled and the record shall be so changed by the
Cemetery Clerk.
(3) The certificates shall be issued and signed by the
City Recorder. All burial spaces as provided in this
section, together with all improvements, shall be
exempt from execution and from taxation and
assessment for care and maintenance charges from
and after said payment.
History: 9/84, 9/05, 02/15
6-5-4 Reversion of Unused Lots. Cemetery
burial spaces purchased after the adoption of these
rules will revert to the City if such have not been used
within sixty (60) years of issuance of the Burial
Rights Certificate. No such reversion shall occur,
however, until the City has sent written notice to the
Owner’s last known address as set forth in the City
records. Such notice will be sent at least sixty days
prior to the date of reversion. If the owner of the
burial space notifies the City Recorder in writing
within sixty days from the City’s mailing of the
aforementioned notice, that he or she still intends to
use the burial rights certificate, the reversion of such
burial space will be extended for another sixty (60)
year period. If the City does not receive this written
notification, the burial space shall revert back to the
City. All Burial Rights Certificates for burial spaces
are issued subject to this right of reversion and the
City’s reservation of a perpetual right of ingress and
egress over burial spaces for the purpose of operation
and maintenance.
History: 02/15
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
Chapter 6. Cemetery Maintenance and
Decorations
6-6-1 Mowing Schedule
6-6-2 Decorations
6-6-3 General Instructions for Flowers and other
Decorations
6-6-4 Memorial Day
6-6-5 Spring General Cleanup
6-6-6 Winter General Cleanup
6-6-1 Mowing Schedule. The mowing schedule
will begin on the first business day of April and run
until October 31st. City maintenance crews will
normally mow and trim the Cemetery each Thursday
during the summer schedule, weather permitting.
6-6-2 Decorations. Properly displayed flowers
and other decorations add to the beauty and character
of the Cemetery. Flowers and other decorations
should be dignified and tasteful. Decorating must be
done in a way that does not create a safety hazard,
impede proper maintenance, infringe on other graves,
diminish the character of the Cemetery or offend
others. Decorations that are in violation will be
removed without notice. The Cemetery
Superintendent will not contact individual families if
decorations are not in keeping with cemetery
regulations.
(1) Responsibility for Decorations. Clinton City and
the Cemetery staff will not be responsible for flowers
or other personal property left in the Cemetery.
6-6-3 General Instructions for Flowers and
Other Decorations. Flowers and other decorations
must be confined to the headstone and its cement
apron so that they do not interfere with mowing and
trimming operations. All decorations that are properly
placed upon the headstone or its surrounding concrete
apron will remain, or in the case of flat headstones
(ground level) will be removed and replaced after the
mower has passed over. Wilted flowers or other
unsightly decorations will be removed and disposed
of. Different rules apply for Memorial Day and New
Burial.
(1) Fresh Cut Flowers. Fresh cut flowers are
permitted when placed in sunken vases, or in movable
containers or loosely without containers as long as
they are confined to the headstone or its cement
apron. City mowing crews will dispose of fresh cut
flowers as they become wilted or if they are blown off
of the marker and interfere with mowing.
(2) Artificial Flowers. Artificial flowers placed on
any marker or its apron will remain until they become
faded and unsightly at which time City mowing crews
will dispose of them.
(3) Other Decorations. Holiday decorations,
shepherd hooks, solar lights, pinwheels and other
ornaments are permitted as long as they are located
on the headstone or its surrounding cement apron.
Wire anchors and glass jars can damage mowing and
trimming equipment and are not allowed; mowing
crews will remove and dispose of them.
(4) Flowers and Decorations Following a New Burial.
Special mementos should be removed at the
conclusion of services by the family. Flowers will be
removed from new graves after they have become
unsightly, normally after (7) seven days.
6-6-4 Memorial Day. Memorial Day is observed
on the last Monday of May. On the Thursday prior to
Memorial Day City crews perform a thorough cleanup
preparing the Cemetery for this important day.
After the cleanup, decorations may be placed
anywhere on the burial space including the grass or
headstone where they may remain until the 2nd
Thursday following Memorial Day at which time
another general clean-up will take place during which
all remaining natural flowers will be disposed of and
all decorations will be removed and stored at the
Clinton City Public Works Building for 2 weeks
where they may be claimed by the owners. Patrons
should remove flowers and decorations they wish to
keep prior to this general clean-up.
6-6-5 Spring General Clean-Up. Since mowing
is not necessary during the winter months, flowers
and decorations are allowed to remain or be removed
by the patrons. On the first Thursday in April mowing
crews perform a Spring clean-up where all flowers
and decorations are removed and disposed of with the
exception of shepherd hooks and vases that are
attached to the monument.
6-6-6 Winter General Clean-Up. The winter
clean-up schedule starts on November 1st and is in
effect until the first Thursday in April. On the first
Thursday of each month during this period and as
weather permits, crews will remove unsightly
decorations.
History: 02/15
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
Chapter 7. Perpetual Care Fund
6-7-1 Perpetual Care Fund Created
6-7-2 Duties of Treasurer and City Manager
6-7-3 Duty of Governing Body
6-7-4 Income
6-7-1 Perpetual Care Fund Created.
(1) There hereby is established a perpetual care fund
according to the laws of the State of Utah and this
chapter. All funds received from the sale of perpetual
care services shall be placed in a special perpetual
care fund, invested in compliance with the laws of the
State of Utah and used for the purposes herein
provided.
(2) The income from the perpetual care fund shall be
used to pay the upkeep and development of the
Cemetery. The City may borrow from the fund from
time to time, but any funds borrowed shall be repaid
to the fund with interest thereon at the rate set by the
City Council by resolution.
(3) If the City borrows from the fund, it shall pay into
a fund for the operation of the cemeteries the interest
accrued upon money annually. Should it be found
that the interest returned upon the perpetual care
funds shall be more than is required to pay for the
operation and upkeep of the City Cemetery, then the
surplus shall be added to the principal amount of the
perpetual care fund herein created, and shall be so
handled until changed by resolution to provide for the
use of such accumulated interest.
History: 9/84
6-7-2 Duties of Treasurer and City Manager. It
shall be the duty of the Treasurer and the City
Manager to monitor the records of the Perpetual Care
Fund account to see that the principal portion thereof
is properly invested in accordance with the directions
of the City Council and the laws of the State of Utah.
The Treasurer, with the advice and consent of the
City Manager, shall ensure the investments are legally
maintained and as productive as possible.
History: 9/84, 03/10, 02/15
6-7-3 Duty of the Governing Body. It shall be
the duty of the City Council to provide by resolution,
from time to time as needed, directions to the City
Manager and Treasurer on handling the Perpetual
Care funds and provide investment authorization as
needed. As part of the annual City budget, the City
Council shall decide how much of the Perpetual Care
fund interest shall be utilized in that fiscal year’s
operation and maintenance of the City Cemetery.
History: 9/84, 03/10, 02/15
6-7-4 Income. All income from investments of the
Perpetual Care fund, except those funds allocated for
the current fiscal year, shall be re-invested
immediately for maximum Perpetual Care fund
productivity.
History: 9/84, 03/10, 02/15
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 6 Cemeteries
Chapter 8. Indigents
6-8-1 Burial of Indigents
6-8-1 Burial of Indigents.
(1) The City Council may by resolution designate a
portion of the City cemetery to the burial of indigents.
Whenever it is made to appear to the Mayor by proof
submitted to him by the Recorder that any person
who has died does not have an estate sufficient to pay
the purchase price of a burial space in the Cemetery,
and that the nearest relative or representative of such
deceased person desires to have the body of such
deceased interred in the Cemetery, the Mayor may
grant burial space for such deceased person at the
request made to him by the recorder.
(2) The Mayor shall communicate his decision to
both the recorder and the Cemetery Superintendent.
The Mayor shall give report of his decision, whether
affirmative or negative, to the City Council at its next
regular meeting. All strangers without funds or other
persons who may die in the City may be granted the
privilege granted herein.
History: 9/84, 02/15
*Editor's note: Title 6 repeals, in Toto, Ordinance
No. 2-77
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 7 Criminal Code
TITLE 7. CRIMINAL CODE
Chapter 1. General
Chapter 2. Minors
Chapter 3. Unlawful Intoxicating Chemical
Compounds
Chapter 1. General
7-1-1 Utah Criminal and Traffic Code Adopted
7-1-2 Reference Meaning
7-1-3 Utah Criminal Code not Conclusive
7-1-4 Limitations
7-1-5 Citation to Code
7-1-1 Utah Criminal and Traffic Code
Adopted. The Utah Code, 2010 edition, et.seq., as
compiled, prepared, and published as a code in book
form, Utah Criminal and Traffic Code, 2010, as
amended, and as the same has been and may be from
time to time amended and superseded, a copy of
which has been filed for use and examination by the
public in the office of the City Manager/Recorder, is
herby approved and adopted as the Criminal and
Traffic Code of this city insofar as the same is or can
be applicable to the city, unless otherwise provided in
this act.
History: 9/84, 9/10
7-1-2 Reference Meaning. Unless the context
requires otherwise, all references in the Utah
Criminal Code to "state" shall mean this city.
History: 9/84
7-1-3 Utah Criminal Code not Conclusive. The
adoption of the Utah Criminal Code shall not be
conclusive of criminal acts. Therefore, other acts may
be declared violations of the health, safety, and peace
of the inhabitants of Clinton City.
History: 9/84
7-1-4 Limitations. All offenses under this act
shall be limited to class B and C misdemeanors and
infractions. An offense designated a misdemeanor,
either in this act or in another law, without
specification as to punishment or category, is a class
C misdemeanor.
History: 9/84, 05/99
7-1-5 Citation to Code. Where a citation or
information is issued pursuant to a violation of the
Utah Criminal Code, it shall be sufficient to use the
section of the Utah Criminal Code followed by the
words, "Clinton City Code, Title 7."
History: 11/79, 9/84
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 7 Criminal Code
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 7 Criminal Code
Chapter 2. Minors
7-2-1 Curfew
7-2-2 Curfew - Daytime
7-2-3 Defenses
7-2-4 Curfew Enforcement Procedures
7-2-1 Curfew.
(1) Curfew for minors under eighteen. Except as
provided in § (3) below, it shall be unlawful for any
person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be in
or upon any sidewalk, street, alley or public place
between the hours of 11:00 o’clock p.m. and 5:00
o'clock a.m. on any day.
(2) Parents and Guardians. It shall be unlawful for
any parent, guardian or other person having legal
care, and custody of any minor, to allow or permit or
suffer any such minor to go or be in or upon any of
the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in
Clinton City within the times provided in § (1) above.
(3) Exceptions. The provisions of § (1) above shall
not apply when any person regulated therein is:
(a) Accompanied by an adult having the care and
custody of such person.
(b) Attending or directly returning home from a
function of any school or church.
(c) Attending or directly returning home from a
lawful entertainment, amusement or commercial
activity.
(d) On an emergency errand or specific business or
activity directed by his parent, guardian, or other
adult having custody or care of him/her.
(e) Engaged in legitimate employment which requires
his/her presence at the public places during the
prohibited hours.
(4) Minors on business premises. No person owning
or operating a business, shall permit to be or to
remain on the premises where said business is
conducted any minor person under the age of
eighteen years, between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m.,
unless in the immediate presence of the parent or
other adult person having legal care and custody of
said minor. This section, however, shall not apply to
any minor who is lawfully employed on the premises.
(5) Aiding Minor to Violate Curfew. It is unlawful
for any person to assist, aid, abet, or encourage any
minor to violate the provisions of this Section. It is
unlawful for any person to use any influence or
otherwise to entice or persuade any minor, under the
age of 18 years, from his/her parents, guardians or
other persons having charge or custody of such minor
without the consent of such parents, guardians or
custodians.
(6) Penalty. A violation of this ordinance shall be a
Class C Misdemeanor.
7-2-2 Curfew - Daytime.
(1) Minors Subject to Compulsory Education;
Daytime. It is unlawful for any minor subject to
compulsory education to loiter or remain in any
public place, any restricted dwelling, or any
unsupervised place within the Clinton City limits
during the normal school hours for the school said
minor is required to attend.
(2) Minors Subject to a Compulsory Alternative
Education Program; Daytime. It is unlawful for any
minor subject to a compulsory alternative education
program to loiter or remain in any public place, any
restricted dwelling, or any unsupervised place within
the Clinton City limits during the normal school
hours for the school said minor would normally be
enrolled.
(3) Parents, Guardians, and Teachers; Daytime. It is
unlawful for any parent, guardian, teacher, or other
person having legal care and custody of any minor
dealt with respectively in § (1) and (2) above to
permit or allow, whether willfully or by exercise of
insufficient control, any such minor to remain or
loiter in any public place or in any other restricted
place, except as provided in § 7-2-3 below.
7-2-3 Defenses. It shall be a defense to a violation
of § 7-2-2(1) above 7-2-2(2) above that at the time
the minor was stopped by a peace officer, the minor
was:
(a) A minor fourteen (14) years or older, emancipated
by marriage.
(b) Accompanied by the minor’s parent, guardian, or
other adult person having care, custody, or
supervision of said minor.
(c) In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel.
(d) On an errand at the direction of the minor’s parent
or guardian, without detour or stop.
(e) Acting in response to an emergency.
(f) Going to, or returning from, a medical or dental
appointment.
(g) Permitted to leave the school campus for lunch or
any school approved activity.
(h) Attending, or without any detour or stop, was
going to, or returning from, a school approved,
recreational, or educational activity, supervised by
adults, and sponsored by the local school district,
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 7 Criminal Code
another school district, or any civic, religious, or
other government organization.
(i) Going to, or returning directly from, a compulsory
alternative education program.
(j) Going to, or returning directly from, the minor’s
place of school approved employment.
(k) Granted an exemption for "home schooling" as
prescribed by the local board of education.
(l) Otherwise granted an exemption to compulsory
education by the local board of education, under
Section 53A-11-102 Utah Code, as amended or any
successor provision.
7-2-4 Curfew Enforcement Procedures. Before
taking any enforcement action under the provisions
of this Section, a police officer shall ask said minor’s
age and reason for being in the public place or other
restricted place. The police officer should not take
enforcement action under this Section if the police
officer has reasonable cause to believe that any
defense under § 7-2-3 above applies.
(1) Upon any violation of § 7-2-1and 7-2-2:
(a) A peace officer may take the minor into
temporary custody and/or issue a citation to the
minor.
(b) If the peace officer takes the minor into
temporary custody, the peace officer, without
unreasonable delay, shall:
(i) Transport the minor to the school from which the
minor is absent, releasing the minor to the principal
or other designated school official,
(ii) Release the minor to any individual who has been
designated by the local school board to receive and
return the minor to school, or
(iii) Transport and release the minor to a receiving
center established and designated by the local school
board.
(c) If the minor refuses to return to school or go to
the receiving center, or the peace officer is unable to
otherwise release the minor to the appropriate school
official or designated receiving center, as provided in
§ (b)(iii) above, the peace officer may release the
minor to the minor’s parent or guardian, and shall
notify the appropriate school officials of the
violation. If a parent or guardian cannot be reached or
is unable to accept custody, the minor shall be
referred to the Division of Child and Family Services,
in the manner required under State law.
(d) If cited, the minor shall appear, along with a
parent or guardian, in the applicable youth court or in
Juvenile Court as directed in the citation.
(e) A parent or guardian shall not be cited for a
violation of § 7-2-2(3) above, unless the minor in
question was previously cited for a violation of this
Section and the parent or guardian was warned or
advised by a peace officer, school official, receiving
center, or court official of such violation.
(f) Penalty. First time offenders of this Section may
be offered to go to Clinton City Youth Court,
otherwise a violation of this Section shall be a Class
“C” Misdemeanor and sent to Juvenile or District
Court.
History:6/69,7/81,9/84
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 7 Criminal Code
Chapter 3. Unlawful Intoxicating Chemical
Compounds
7-3-1 Unlawful Intoxicating Chemical
Compounds
7-3-1 Unlawful Intoxicating Chemical
Compounds.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, including a
corporation or other entity, to manufacture, distribute,
dispense, ingest, use, possess, purchase, attempt to
purchase, sell, publicly display for sale, attempt to
sell, give, trade or barter, any one or more of the
following chemical compounds and/or substances,
including their salts, isomers, homologues and salts
of their isomers and homologues:
(a) Salvia Divinorum or Salvinorum A; all parts of
the plant presently classified botanically as Salvia
Divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds
thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and
every compound, manufacture, salts derivative,
mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or
extracts;
(b) pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as
JWH-018);
(c) (6ar,10ar)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6-dimethyl-3-(2-
methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]
chromen-1-ol (also known as HU-210 or 1,1-
dimethylheptyl-11-hydroxy-delta8-
tetrahydrocannabinol);
(d) 2-(3-hydroxycyclohexyl)-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)
phenol(also known as CP-47,497), and the
dimethylhexyl, dimethyloctyl and dimethylnonyl
homologues of CP-47,497;
(e) 1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as
JWH-073);
(f) 1-(2-(4-(morpholinyl)ethyl))-3-(1-naphthoyl)
indole (also known as JWH-200);
(g) 1-Pentyl-3-(2-methoxyphenylacetyl)indole (also
known as JWH-250);
(h) 1-Hexyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole (also known as
JWH-019);
(i) 1-Pentyl-3-(4-chloro-1-naphthoyl)indole (also
known as JWH-398);
(j) N-benzylpiperazine (also known as BZP);
(k) 1-(3-trifluoromethylphenyl) piperazine (also
known as TFMPP);
(l) Any similar structural analogs of the above
chemical compounds;
(m) Any other synthetic cannabinoids.
(2) Some of the above chemical compounds and
substances above are sometimes marketed as or
known as Spice, Black Mamba, K-2, Puff, Sugar
Sticks and other brand names.
(3) It is not an offense under subsection (1) of this
section if the person was acting at the direction of an
authorized agent of the City of Clinton to enforce or
ensure compliance with this law prohibiting the sale
of the aforementioned intoxicating chemical
compound.
(4) If any of the aforementioned intoxicating
chemical compounds are found in the possession of
any person, they may be confiscated and destroyed
by law enforcement officials.
(5) This section shall not apply to drugs or substances
lawfully prescribed or to drugs or substances which
have been approved by the federal Food and Drug
Administration or which are specifically permitted by
Utah law.
(6) Any person found to be in violation of this section
will be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and/or
subject to a term of imprisonment not to exceed six
months and a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or
both. Each day during which a violation of subsection
(1) occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
(7) The City of Clinton shall have the authority to
seek an injunction to compel compliance of any
business which fails to or refuses to comply with this
Section.
History: 9/84, 9/10
Clinton Code of Ordinances Title 8 Elections
TITLE 8. MUNICIPAL ELECTIONS
Chapter 1. Election of Governing Body
8-1-1. Adoption of the Utah State Code
8-1-2. Declaration of Candidacy
8-1-1 Adoption of Utah State Code: All
elections of city officers and other elections
conducted within the city shall be in accordance with
the Utah Election Code, as set out in Utah Code
Annotated Title 20A.
8-1-2 Declaration of Candidacy: In addition to
the requirements found in Utah Code 20A-9-203,
candidates may be nominated by either filing a
Declaration of Candidacy and paying a $25.00 fee,
OR, by submitting a petition signed by at least 25
Clinton residents who are at least 18 years of age.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 9 Engineering and Standard
Specifications and Standard Drawings
TITLE 9. ENGINEERING AND
STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND
The Engineering and Standard Specifications and
Standard Drawings, adopted as Ordinance 01-1 and
as the same has been and may be from time to time
amended and superseded, three (3) copies of which
have been filed in booklet form in the office of the
Community Development Director for use and
examination by the public, is hereby incorporated by
reference into this code and shall become the code
applicable to the city.
History: 4/63, 9/84, 6/96, 8/01, 8/15
TITLE 9:
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD
SPECIFICATIONS AND STANDARD
DRAWINGS
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
i
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS
AND STANDARD DRAWINGS
FOR
CLINTON CITY CORPORATION
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROJECT REQUIREMENTS
CHAPTER 2: DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 3: CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS
CHAPTER 4: TRENCH EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL
CHPATER 5: PRESSURE PIPE CULINARY WATER
CHAPTER 6: CONCRETE PIPE
CHAPTER 7: PVC PLASTIC PIPE
CHAPTER 8: POLYETHYLENE CORRUGATED PIPE
CHAPTER 9: POLYETHYLENE CORRUGATED PIPE WITH WATER TIGHT JOINTS
CHAPTER 10: MANHOLES
CHAPTER 11: VALVES, COUPLINGS, AND FIRE HYDRANTS
CHAPTER 12: EARTHWORK
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
ii
CHAPTER 13: PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE
CHAPTER 14: REINFORCING STEEL
CHAPTER 15: RESTORATION OF SURFACE IMPROVEMENTS
CHAPTER 16: ROADWAY CONSTRUCTION
CHAPTER 17: CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER AND SIDEWALK
CHAPTER 18: STORM DRAINS
CHAPTER 19: UTAH DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATIONRIGHTS-OF-WAY
CHAPTER 20: CASINGS
CHAPTER 21: STREET EXCAVATION/ROAD CUTS
CHAPTER 22: ROADWAY LIGHTING
CHAPTER 23: STREET SIGNAGE
CHAPTER 24: OTHER REQUIREMENTS
CHAPTER 25: AMENDMENTS
CHAPTER 26: VALIDITY, NOTICES AND EFFECTIVE DATE
CHAPTER 27: TELECOMMUNICATION TABLE
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1—1
1. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1.01 Administration
1.02 Purpose of Documents
1.03 Permit, Fees and Bonding Required
1.04 Contractor and Construction Plan
Approval
1.05 Pre-Construction Conference
1.06 Timely Compliance with the Issued
Permit
1.07 Electronic and Record Drawings
1.08 Temporary Services
1.09 Codes and Standards
1.10 State and Local Laws
1.11 Compliance With Governmental
Regulations
1.12 Federal, State, and Local Inspecting
Agencies
1.13 Public Safety and Convenience
1.14 Confinement of Work and Access to
Right-of-Way and Easements
1.15 Notification of Residents
1.16 Weather Conditions
1.17 Land Monuments
1.18 Source of Materials
1.19 Operation and Maintenance Manuals
1.20 Interfering Structures, Utilities and
Facilities
1.21 Soil Analysis
1.22 Material and Compaction Testing
1.23 Deviation from the Standard
1.24 Construction Specification
Tolerances
1.25 Enforcement
1.26 Powers and Duties of the Public
Works Inspector
1.01 Administration:1 This ordinance consists
of the engineering and standard specifications
and the standard drawings for the City of
Clinton. The ordinance may be referred to as
“The City Standards” and the drawings may be
referred to as the “Standard Drawings”. All
construction within the City that will or may
eventually become the responsibility of the City
shall be constructed to meet these standards
unless in the opinion of the City Engineer more
stringent standards are required.
(1)Amending:
(a) Amendments to this ordinance shall be made
by the City Council during a regularly scheduled
Council Meeting.
(b) The ordinance shall be amended by
ordinance numbered with the format of: yearsequential
number E such as 02-01E meaning the
ordinance was the first adopted in 2002. The “E”
indicates the ordinance is specifically related to the
engineering standards.
(c) The drawings may be amended from time to time
upon recommendation by the City Engineer to stay in
compliance with good engineering practices or to
agree with changes made to the written ordinance. If
a drawing is changed such that it does not agree with
the written ordinance a change to the ordinance shall
be processed within a practical time period.
(2)Responsibility for Current Publication: It is the
responsibility of each engineer, contractor, developer,
person, corporation or representative of any entity
doing work within the City to have a current copy of
this ordinance and the standard drawings.
1.02 Purpose Of Documents:
(1)The purpose of these Standard Specifications and
Standard Drawings is to govern any work done or
improvements installed within Public right-of-ways
or across easements. Developers/ Contractors should
thoroughly read and understand these specifications
and standards before constructing public
improvements.
(2)The Developer/Contractor shall contact the
Clinton City Community Development Department at
2267 North 1500 West, Clinton, UT 84015, for all
matters dealing with construction work within a City
right-of-way or with any work connecting onto a City
utility. SPECIAL PERMITS AND BONDING ARE
REQUIRED FOR ALL SUCH WORK.
1.03 Permit, Fees And Bonding Required:
(1)It shall be unlawful to do any construction,
excavation work on any street, curb, gutter, sidewalk,
sewer line, water line, pressure irrigation line, storm
drain or other infra-structure addition or
improvement or to dig in any right-of-way for any
reason in the City of Clinton without a permit from
the City to do such work. The City of Clinton and all
utility companies are bound by these standard
specifications. No work shall be started until a
permit is secured. In order to obtain a permit, the
Developer’s/Contractor’s authorized signature is
required and all fees shall be paid. If a Subdivision
Improvement Agreement with Clinton City or a
contract to do such work for the City has been
finalized, the agreement and/or contract fulfills the
permit requirement.
(a) Applications:
(i) All permit applications shall include but not be
limited to:
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1—2
(A) Start and completion dates of the project;
(B) The exact address or location of the work to
be done;
(C) The type of work to be done;
(D) A request to locate water, land drain, storm
drain and sewer lines, notification 48 hours
previous to start date of work;
(E) A request for all utility companies to be
contacted through Blue Stakes 1-800-662-4111.
(b) Fees:
(i) Before a permit is issued, a permit fee and an
inspection fee shall be paid to the City. These
fees will be set by Council resolution. Fees may
be assessed on the following items:
(A) Public works inspections associated with the
improvements installed as part of any
development;
(B) Sewer, Land Drain and Water Lateral
Installation Inspection;
(C) Pressure irrigation service connection, as
established by DWCC;
(D) Re-inspection (When an inspection has been
requested, the inspection is performed and the
work is not complete, a re-inspection fee may be
assessed.);
(E) Barricades (provided by, or called out by the
City); and
(F) Bonds.
(c) Bonds:
(i) Public improvement projects, under contract
with the city shall be bonded as established in
the competitive contract. Each contractor doing
work in the City is required to maintain a bond
with the City in the amount of $1000.00 or such
amount set from time to time by the City Council
and established in the Consolidated Fee
Schedule. In cases where the actual replacement
cost is greater than that set as a minimum the
bond shall be established in an amount needed to
protect City infrastructure within the
construction area. Bond requirements are to
guarantee the following:1
(A) Construction work is completed;
(B) Final inspection is conducted;
(C) Repairs and/or replacement of required
public improvements are finished and accepted.
(D) Repairs and/or replacement of private property
damaged during construction.
(ii) The bonds shall be in the form of an irrevocable
letter of credit from a bank, a bond from a surety
company, or a cash bond paid directly to the City.
The City shall approve all bonds submitted. No bond
shall be released until all improvements are
completed and accepted by the City.
1.04 Contractor and Construction Plan Approval:
(1)Before a Contractor performs any work within the
City, the City shall approve the Contractor. Approval
is granted for a period of one (1) year upon
submission of the following:
(a) License: A current Utah State Contractor’s
License. Work will be restricted to that authorized
by the license;
(b) Insurance: Proof of comprehensive general
liability insurance. Bodily injury insurance will be in
an amount of not less than three hundred thousand
dollars ($300,000.00) for any one occurrence.
Property damage insurance will be in an amount of
not less than two hundred thousand dollars
($200,000.00) for any one occurrence and shall
include underground exposure. Combined liability
insurance will be in an amount of not less than five
hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) for any one
occurrence;
(c) Bond: Bond shall be established as outlined
elsewhere in this ordinance;1
(d) Inspection: The Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer shall approve construction plans
and cut sheets before any work begins. Plans shall be
stamped “Approved for Construction” by the
Director and distributed at the preconstruction
meeting. Developers/Contractors proceeding with
work without such approvals shall have the project
shut down until such approvals are obtained.
Repeated offenses may result in the Contractor
loosing its pre-qualification to perform work in the
City.
1.05 Pre-Construction Conference: A preconstruction
meeting with the Developer and the
Contractor(s) involved in the subdivision
construction shall be held with the Director/Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer and prior to
commencement of any work. Representatives from
the public utilities within the construction area will
be invited to the pre-construction conference. The
location of the meeting shall be at the Clinton City
Center, 1906 W. 1800 N., Clinton, Utah 84015. The
following items shall be furnished at the meeting:
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1—3
(1)Construction Outline: A detailed outline
showing the sequences of construction of
principle items of work. The outline shall show
the beginning and ending dates of the major
items of work on the Project.
(2)Contact List: A list of names, titles,
addresses, and telephone numbers of the
Developer/Contractor's responsible personnel,
indicating those who may be reached outside
normal working hours.
(3)Sub-Contractors List: A list of Sub-
Contractors and Materials Suppliers to be
involved with the project and the items of work
they are going to perform or furnish materials
for. The City will notify the
Developer/Contractor of any concerns or prequalification
deficiencies of the companies they
plan to use.
(4)Minutes: Other items may be discussed at
this pre-construction conference as determined
by the Director/Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer. Official minutes of this
meeting as prepared by the Community
Development Department shall become part of
the project file for the project.
1.06 Timely Compliance with the Issued
Permit: The Developer/Contractor shall
perform in accordance with the terms of the
permit and the Standard Specifications and
Standard Drawings in effect at the date of the
permit. The work shall be done in a timely
manner. Time limits may be a condition of the
permit and may be shortened because of safety
concerns. Permits may be suspended if
compliance is not met.
(1)Inspections: All work covered by a Public
Works’ permit or as part of an “Approved for
Construction” set of plans shall be inspected by
the Public Facilities Inspector prior to the
following:
(a) Digs referencing construction staking;
(b) Backfilling and compacting;
(c) Fill or cover of rough and final grades;
(d) Placing concrete and asphalt;
(e) Placing or covering any underground piping;
(f) Pipe integrity testing, (e.g. camera, camera);
(g) Making or covering any connection into a
city utility line;
(h) Work done in a public right-of-way;
(i) Other inspections outlined during the
preconstruction meeting; and
(j) After completion of construction and prior to
leaving the construction site.
(2)Public Works shall also be notified prior to
starting any Public Works project.
(3)Notification of Needed Inspections:
(a) Inspection performed during regular working
hours requires at least two working days prior
notification.
(b) Inspections needed after 3:30 p.m., require
notification be given and fees paid, in advance for
after hours inspections.
(c) Inspections needed on the weekend require that
notification is given and fees paid, in advance for
after hours inspections.
(d) A charge shall be assessed for inspection
callbacks.
(e) The Clinton City Council shall set all inspection
fees, from time to time by resolution.
(4)Responsibility of the Developer: The developer is
responsible for the complete development, including
construction of the entire subdivision/project, until it
is finalized and accepted by the City.
(5)Conflict: These Standard Specifications and
Standard Drawings are the minimum requirements of
the City of Clinton. In the event that any provisions
herein conflict with general industrial standards,
“Approved Drawings”, or with other requirements
specified by the City, the more stringent of the
standards will apply. Deviations from these
standards are to be approved by the Clinton City
Public Works Director upon review with the City
Engineer. Authorization of deviation is to be
obtained in writing; it is the developer’s
responsibility to insure that copies of authorization
letters are filed in the permanent file maintained in
the Community Development Department.
1.07 Electronic and Record Drawings:
(1)All drawings shall reference Davis County
Coordinates.
(2)When the Developer’s Engineer has the capability,
plat and improvement drawings shall be furnished
electronically in MicroStation Format (.dgn),
AutoCAD format (.dwg) or Data Exchange Format
(.dxf). These electronic files shall be provided to the
City after final approval but before recording of the
Plat.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1—4
(3)After completion of all public works
improvements the Developer shall provide the
City with a set of sepia (reproducible) “record
drawings” which have been corrected to show
the constructed improvements. Final payment
from the bond shall not be made until these
records are received.
1.08 Temporary Services: Any temporary
services and utilities such as telephone,
electrical, water toilet facilities, etc., shall be the
responsibility of the Developer/Contractor.
1.09 Codes And Standards: Where codes and
standards are referred to they shall be current,
approved copies. It shall be the duty of the
supplier of any material on this work to submit
evidence, if requested, that its material is in
compliance with the applicable codes and
standards.
1.10 State And Local Laws:
(1)The Developer/Contractor shall conform to all
applicable state and local laws in carrying out its
obligations under the Contract.
(2)This shall include, but is not limited to,
compliance by the Developer/Contractor with the
requirements of Chapter 30, of Title 34, of the
Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as Amended. If the
provisions of Section 34-30-1, of the Utah Code
Annotated, 1953 as amended, are not complied
with, this Contract shall be void.
1.11 Compliance With Governmental
Regulations: The Developer/Contractor's
personnel, equipment, and operations shall
comply fully with all applicable standards,
regulations, and requirements of existing
Federal, Utah State, and local governmental
agencies. This shall include, but not necessarily
be limited to, the following:
(1)United States Occupational Safety and Health
Administration Regulations: Title 29 of the
Code of Federal Regulations, Part 1926 (29 CFR
Part 1926), Safety and Health Regulations for
Construction.
(2)Utah State Industrial Commission
Regulations: The Utah Occupational Safety and
Health Act (1973) and Employer-Employee Safe
Practices for Excavations and Trenching
Operations (Jan. 1, 1974), as published by the
Utah State Industrial Commission, including any
and all amendments or revisions effective prior
to performance of the work.
(3)City Ordinances: The Developer/Contractor shall
be required to comply with all Clinton City
Ordinances.
(4)UDOT Requirements: When crossing or working
within Utah Department of Transportation rights-ofway
the Developer/Contractor shall be responsible to
obtain all necessary permits and comply with all
appropriate UDOT regulations including applicable
sections in "State of Utah Standard Specifications for
Road and Bridge Construction," latest edition and in
accordance with Chapter 19 of this Ordinance.
(5)Permits: The Developer/Contractor is responsible
to obtain all required business licenses and building
permits applicable to this project.
Developer/Contractor shall be subject to the
conditions of all permits and agreements between the
Owner and the permitting agencies. See Chapter 18,
UDOT Rights-of-Way.
1.12 Federal, State, and Local Inspecting
Agencies: The site of construction is to be open at
all reasonable times and places for periodic
observation by accredited representatives of the
Federal, State, and local agencies who have
regulatory or supervisory authority over any part of
the work proposed or regulated thereto.
1.13 Public Safety and Convenience: The
convenience of the general public and the protection
of persons and property are of prime importance and
shall be provided for by the Developer/Contractor
during this project. The Developer/Contractor shall
use every reasonable precaution to safeguard persons
and property. Failure of the Owner or the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer to notify the
Developer/Contractor of any deficiencies in
providing for public safety and convenience shall not
relieve the Developer/Contractor from its
responsibility. The Developer/Contractor shall be
required to comply with the requirements of the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD).
(1)Compliance with Rules and Regulations: The
Developer/Contractor shall comply with all rules and
regulations of the City, County, and State authorities
regarding the closing of public streets, or highways,
to the use of public traffic. If conditions justify, the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer may authorize
the Developer/Contractor to close general traffic to
not more than one (1) city block at any given time.
No such closure shall be made without authorization
of the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer. Closure
of streets or highways shall be in conformance with
the (MUTCD).
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1—5
(2)Road Closures and Obstructions: No road
shall be closed by the Developer/Contractor to
the public except by express permission of the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer. The
Developer/Contractor shall, at all times, conduct
its work so as to insure the least possible
obstruction to traffic and normal commercial
pursuits.
(3)Road Closures Notification: No road shall be
closed by the Developer/Contractor to the public
without prior notification to the Clinton City
Police Department. Prior notification shall be a
minimum of forty-eight (48) hours. At the time
of notification the Developer/Contractor shall
provide the address, times of closure, and a
phone number and name of a contact person
working at the site of the closure. Notification
shall be given to local residents as outlined in
Section 1.14.
(4)Protection of the Traveling Public: Signs,
barricades, and lights shall protect all
obstructions within traveled roadways where
necessary for the safety of the traveling public.
All barricades and obstructions shall be protected
at night by signal lights that shall be suitably
distributed across the roadway and kept burning
from one-hour prior to sunset to one-hour after
sunrise the next day. Barricades shall be of
substantial construction. Failure of the Owner or
the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer to notify
the Developer/Contractor to maintain barricades,
barriers, lights, flares, danger signals, or guards
shall not relieve the Developer/Contractor from
its responsibility.
(5)Hazardous Conditions: Whenever the
Developer/Contractor's operations create a
hazardous condition, it shall furnish flaggers and
guards to give adequate warning to the public of
any dangerous conditions to be encountered. It
shall furnish, erect, and maintain fences,
barricades, signs, lights, and other devices that
may be necessary to prevent injury and damage
to persons and property. Flaggers and guards
shall be UDOT trained and shall hold current
certification and shall be equipped with signs,
flags, etc. as required by the Utah State
Department of Transportation (UDOT)
regulations.
(6)Dust and Debris Control: The
Developer/Contractor shall control dust and
debris that originates in the construction right-ofway
or site. Dust, trash, and other debris shall be
controlled on a daily basis by methods that shall
include, but not be limited to, the use of a dust
setting spray, a “pick-up broom or street sweeper and
trash disposal. The Developer/Contractor shall
maintain on the project site or have readily available
a water truck with a minimum two thousand (2,000)
gallon capacity to be used for dust control. The
Developer/Contractor shall be responsible to secure a
source of water and shall obtain the necessary
permission for its use. Failure by the
Developer/Contractor to adequately control dust and
debris may result in the Owner initiating dust and
debris control measures and deducting the cost from
payment due to the Developer/Contractor.
(7)State Requirements: The Developer/Contractor
shall be responsible for complying with the Utah
Administrative Code, Rule R307-309. “Davis, Salt
Lake and Utah Counties, Ogden City and any
Nonattainment Area for PM10: Fugitive Emissions
and Fugitive Dust.”
1.14 Confinement of Work and Access to Right-of-
Way and Easements: The Developer/Contractor
will be required to confine construction operations
within the dedicated right-of-way for public
thoroughfares or within areas for which construction
easements have been obtained unless it has made
special arrangements with the affected property
owners in advance. The Developer/Contractor will be
required to protect stored materials, lawn, trees, and
other features located adjacent to the proposed
construction site. During construction operations, the
Developer/Contractor shall construct and maintain
such facilities as may be required to provide access
by all property owners to their property. No person
shall be cut off from access to their residences or
places of business for a period exceeding eight (8)
hours, unless the Developer/Contractor has made
special arrangements with the affected persons prior
to commencing work in the area.
1.15 Notification of Residents:
(1)All property owners and residents adjacent to the
streets or easements affected by the construction shall
be notified by the Developer/Contractor at least fortyeight
(48) hours in advance of the time construction
is planned to begin. The Developer/Contractor can
satisfy this requirement by placing a written notice on
the door of each residence or business reading:
"Notice of Construction Operation.
(Developer/Contractor) will be
working on the construction of street
improvements on your street starting
about (time and date) . Any
questions may be called into the
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1—6
project contractor at (phone
number) .”"
(2)The Developer/Contractor shall provide a
copy of the notification form at the preconstruction
meeting and the method to be used
(hang on door, etc.)
(3)If an interruption of services is expected due
to construction the Developer/Contractor shall
notify residents affected by the interruption at
least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the
interruption begins. The Developer/Contractor
can satisfy this requirement by placing a written
notice on the door of each residence or business
reading:
"Notice of Construction Operation.
(Developer/Contractor) will be
working on the construction of street
improvements on your street starting
about (time and date) . Services
disrupted may include (list, i.e.
water, accessibility to property, etc)
this condition is expected to continue
until (time and date) . Any
questions may be called into the
project contractor at (phone
number) .”
1.16 Weather Conditions: In the event of
temporary suspension of work, or during
inclement weather, the Developer/Contractor
will, and will cause its
SubDeveloper/Contractors to, protect any project
work or materials against damage from the
weather. If, in the opinion of the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer, any Project work or
materials become damaged by reason of failure
on the part of the Developer/Contractor or any of
its SubDeveloper/Contractors to so protect its
work, such work or materials shall be removed
and replaced at the expense of the
Developer/Contractor.
1.17 Land Monuments: The
Developer/Contractor shall preserve existing
City, County, State, and Federal land monuments
whenever possible. When these monuments
cannot be preserved, the Developer/Contractor
shall notify Davis County Surveyor at least two
(2) weeks in advance of the proposed
construction in order that the Davis County
Surveyor will have ample opportunity to reference
these monuments for later replacement. Proof of
notification shall be provided to the Community
Development Department for inclusion in the
permanent record.
1.18 Source Of Materials:
(1)All materials furnished or incorporated in this
project shall conform to the requirements of these
Specifications.
(2)The Developer/Contractor shall acquire the
necessary rights, at its own expense, to take material
from aggregate sources and to use properties for plant
site, hauling roads, and other purposes.
(3)The Developer/Contractor may select areas for
disposal of surplus materials; however, the
Developer/Contractor will be responsible for
acquiring the necessary right, at its own expense, to
use the property for such purpose. No materials shall
be buried on the construction site or disposed of
within Clinton City without written permission of the
Community Development or Public Works Director.
1.19 Operation and Maintenance Manuals: The
Developer/Contractor shall furnish the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer with two (2) sets of all
operation and maintenance manuals, drawings,
diagrams, etc., for all pumps, motors, control panels,
valves, meters, etc., for use in the Operation and
Maintenance Manual.
1.20 Interfering Structures, Utilities and
Facilities:
(1)The Developer/Contractor shall exercise all
possible caution to prevent damage to existing
structures and utilities, whether above ground or
underground. While these structures and utilities may
be shown on the improvements plans, the information
has been compiled from the best available sources, its
completeness and accuracy cannot be guaranteed, and
it is presented simply as a guide to possible
difficulties. The Developer/Contractor shall notify all
utility offices concerned at least forty-eight (48)
hours in advance of construction operations in which
a utility agency's facility may be involved.
Notification to blue stakes does not necessarily cover
all buried lines. This shall include, but not be limited
to, irrigation, water, telephone, electric, sewer, storm
drain, gas, and cable television. The
Developer/Contractor shall be responsible for any
and all changes to, relocation of, or re-connection to
public utility facilities encountered or interrupted
during the prosecution of the work, and all costs
relating thereto shall be at the Developer/Contractor's
expense. The Developer/Contractor shall contract
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
1—7
with and pay Public Utility Agencies for work
required in connection with all utility
interference’s and handle all necessary
notifications, scheduling, coordination and
details.
(2)It shall be the responsibility of the
Developer/Contractor to relocate and expose all
existing underground structures and utilities in
such a manner as to prevent damage to the same.
Any structure or utilities damaged by the Work
shall be repaired or replaced at the
Developer/Contractor's expense.
(3)If the Developer/Contractor encounters
existing structures that will prevent construction,
it shall notify the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer before continuing with the
construction in order that the Developer’s
Engineer or Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer
may make such field revisions as necessary to
avoid conflict with the existing structures.
1.21 Soil Analysis: The necessity of a soil
analysis will be determined by the Director
and/or City Engineer. If no soil analysis is
submitted by the developer or required by the
City, all minimum specifications herein shall be
applicable. Should a soil analysis for a specific
subdivision be requested by the City, or
submitted by the developer under his own
initiative, the minimum standards, or design
equal contained herein shall be the minimum
acceptable to the City. Only soil analysis
submitted by recognized, reputable soils
engineers would be acceptable to the City.
1.22 Material and Compaction Testing:
(1)During the course of the work, a Geotechnical
Engineer/Testing Company may perform such
tests as are required to identify materials, to
determine gradation, to determine compaction
characteristics, to determine moisture, to
determine density of fills in place, to determine
concrete strength, to determine density and
mixture of asphalt. These tests will be used to
verify that the construction conforms to the
requirements of the specifications. Such tests are
not intended to provide the Developer/Contractor
with the information required by it for the proper
execution of the work and their performance
shall not relieve the Developer/Contractor of the
necessity of completing the construction in
accordance with these specifications and
Standard Drawings.
(2)The cost of such testing will be included in
the Developers bond posted with the City.
Public Works shall contract with a geotechnical or
certified testing company to perform the necessary
tests. The Developer will pay for the cost of these
tests from the bond. Copies of the test will be
furnished to the Developer/Contractor upon request.
1.23 Deviations from The Standards: The City
Public Facilities Inspector may grant deviations from
the Standards and Specifications in individual cases.
These deviations must not lessen the intent of the
design requirement, or the level of safety, service,
and quality intended by the Standards and
Specification’s minimum requirements.
1.24 Construction Specification Tolerances: A
document entitled CONSTRUCTION
SPECIFICATION TOLERANCES listed under
Appendix 1 of this document contains the allowable
tolerances for construction of facilities. These
tolerances will be the guideline used by the Public
Facilities Inspector for accepting, rejecting, or
granting deviations of installed facilities.
History: 07/17 - Ord 17-02E
1.25 Enforcement: Enforcement of the provisions
of this ordinance is the responsibility of the Public
Works Department. Specifically the Public Works
Director or his designee be it the Public Facilities
Inspector or other city employee/representative.
However, any city employee knowledgeable in the
procedures and properties outlined in this ordinance
is empowered to bring to the attention of a
contractor/developer conditions that are in violation
of this ordinance. That same employee is also
responsible to notify the Public Works Director for
follow up and any additional action that may be
needed.
1.26 Powers and Duties of The Public Facilities
Inspector: It shall be the duty of the Public Works
Inspector to inspect or cause to be inspected at
regular intervals and at required inspections all
improvements being done in the city. Where it is
determined by the Public Facilities Inspector that
improvements are not proceeding in compliance with
the provisions of this Ordinance, he shall notify the
developer/contractor of said deficiency. The Public
Facilities Inspector in enforcing the provisions of this
ordinance and in performance of this duty may enter
actions in the court where necessary. Failure on the
part of the Public Facilities Inspector to perform his
duties shall not legalize any violation of such
provisions.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
DEFINITIONS
2—1
2. DEFINITIONS
2.01 General
2.02 Definitions
2.01 General: For the purpose of these
regulations certain numbers, abbreviations, terms,
and words shall be used, interpreted, and defined as
set forth in this Chapter 2. Unless the context clearly
indicates to the contrary, words used in the present
tense include the future tense and words used in the
plural include singular.
2.02 Definitions:
“Applicant” means any Person who makes
application for a permit.
“Business” means any place in the City in which
there is conducted or carried on principally or
exclusively any pursuit or occupation for the purpose
of gaining a livelihood.
“City” means Clinton City, a municipal corporation
of the State of Utah.
“City Engineer” means the City Engineer, or his
/her authorized representative.
“Development Standards” mean the latest version
of the Clinton City Corporation Development
Standards or criteria published or adopted by the City
Engineer.
“Director” means the Community Development
Director, or Community Development staff and
others as designated by the Community Development
Director.
“Emergency” means any unforeseen circumstances
or occurrence, the existence of which constitutes an
immediate danger to persons or property, or which
causes interruption of utility or public services.
“Excavation” means any digging into or under the
surface of any street, sidewalk or public way, and
includes any breading or undermining of the surface
of any street, sidewalk or public way, any tunneling
under such surface and any other activity affecting
the physical characteristics of any street in a manner
adverse to the common use of such street.
“Failure” means a Work Site Restoration which fails
to meet Development Standards, or which results in a
deteriorated or substandard condition within the
duration of the warranty period. Failure may be
settlement of surfaces, deterioration of materials, or
other surface irregularities. Measurement of Failure
shall be further defined in the Development
Standards.
“Infrastructure Provider” means a Person
providing to another, for the purpose of providing
Telecommunication services to customers, all or part
of the necessary System that uses the right-of-way.
“Lateral Excavation”
“Operator” means any Person who provides service
over a Telecommunications System and directly or
through one or more affiliates owns a controlling
interest in such System, or who otherwise controls or
is responsible for the operation of such a System.
“Permittee” means any Person that has been issued a
permit and thereby has agreed to fulfill the
requirements of this Chapter.
“Person” means and includes any natural Person,
partnership, firm, association, Provider, corporation,
company, organization, or entity of any kind.
“Pipe Driveway” means a driveway approach that
uses a pipe or other means to bridge the gutter.
“Property Owner” means Person or Persons who
have legal title to property and/or equitable interest in
the property, or the ranking official or agent of a
company having legal title to property and/or
equitable interest in the property.
“Provider” means an Operator, Infrastructure
Provider, Reseller, System Lessee,
Telecommunications Company or Public Utility
Company.
“Public Facilities Inspector” or “Inspector” means
the appropriately appointed Clinton City employee
designated to inspect and pass or fail work
accomplished in a Public Way.
“Public Utility Company” means any company
subject to the jurisdiction of the Utah State Public
Service Commission, or any mutual corporation
providing gas, electricity, water, telephone, or other
utility product or services for use by the general
public.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
DEFINITIONS
2—2
“Public Way” means and includes all public rightsof-
way and easements, public footpaths, walkways
and sidewalks, public streets, public roads, public
highways, public alleys, and pubic drainage ways. It
does not, however, include utility easements not
within Public Ways of the City.
“Private Drain Line” means a pipe installed solely
for the transmission of water collected or generated
on private property such as drainage, spring, or storm
water, or condensate into the public drainage system.
“Storm Drain” means a dedicated pipe, conduit,
waterway, or ditch installed in a right-of-way or
easement for the transmission of storm and drainage
water. This term does not include Private Drain
Lines.
“Street” includes not only any street but also any
road, sidewalk or way, the title of which is held by
Clinton city.
“Work Site Restoration” means and includes the
restoring of the original ground or paved hard surface
area to comply with Development Standards, and
includes but is not limited to repair, cleanup,
backfilling, compaction, and stabilization, paving and
other work necessary to place the site in acceptable
condition following the conclusion of the work, or
the expiration or revocation of the permit.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS
3—1
3. CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS
3.01 General
3.02 Standard Drawings
3.03 Inspection Fees
3.04 Standards for Construction Drawings
3.05 Drawings to Be Submitted
3.06 “Approved for Construction” Drawings
3.07 Drawings of Record
3.08 Preconstruction Conference
3.01 General: Complete and detailed construction
plans and drawings of all improvements shall be
submitted to the City for review prior to receiving final
plat approval or site plan approval from the City and
commencing construction. No construction shall be
started until plans have been checked and approved by
all responsible parties.
3.02 Standard Drawings: As part of this
ordinance the Clinton City Standard Drawings are
attached. These drawings are to be utilized in the
development of construction plans. Deviation from
these Standard Drawings shall only be upon approval
of the City and as indicated on the “Approved for
Construction” drawings or in written documentation
approved by the City.
3.03 Required Drawings: The Director and City
Engineer shall determine the minimum type and style
of drawings necessary to be processed for a
development. As a guide the requirements established
in the Clinton City Subdivision Ordinance and those
outlined here may be followed.
3.04 Standards For Construction Drawings:
(1) The following instructions are for the purpose of
standardizing the preparation of drawings to obtain
uniformity in appearance, clarity, size, and style.
These plans and designs shall meet the standards
defined in the specifications and drawings outlined in
this Ordinance.
(2) General Requirements:
(a) All drawings and/or prints shall be clear and
legible, drawn with ink on approved mylar sheets and
conform to good engineering and drafting room
practice. Size of drawings shall be 24” x 36” with ½-
inch border on top, bottom, and right sides, and 1 ½”
on the left side.
(b) In general, the following shall be included on all
drawings:
(i) North arrow (plan);
(ii) Scale and elevations referenced to Davis county
Datum;
(iii) Stationing and elevations for profiles;
(iv) Title block, located in the lower right corner of
the sheet to include:
Name of City;
Project title (subdivision, etc.)
Specific type and location of work;
Name of the engineer or firm preparing drawings
with license number, stamp and signature;
Revision date;
Drawing number (1 of 14)
(3) Drawings Are To Show:
(a) Curb and gutter, surface drainage structures,
sidewalks and street surfacing drawings shall show:
(i) Scale: 1”=20’ or 40’ horizontal; 1”=2’ or 4’
vertical;
(ii) Both plan view and profiles must be shown for
each side of the street, street centerline profile must
be shown;
(iii) Stationing and top of curb elevations with curve
data must be shown at 50-foot intervals.
(iv) Flow direction and type of cross drainage
structures at intersections with adequate flow line
elevations;
(v) Bench Mark (B.M.) location and elevation (Davis
county Datum);
(vi) Typical cross section for all street sizes and
variations; and,
(vii) Site location of specific drawing relative to the
overall project.
(b) Sewer, Storm Drain, and Land Drain drawings
shall show:
(i) Scale: 1”=20’ or 40’ horizontal; 1”=2’ or 4’
vertical;
(ii) Location, size and slope of mains;
(iii) Manhole size, location, and flow line elevation;
(iv) Type of pipe;
(v) B.M. location and elevation (Davis county
Datum);
(vi) An overall development plan view of the sewer
(horizontal scale 1”=100’);
(vii) Site location of specific drawing relative to the
overall project.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
CONSTRUCTION DRAWINGS
3—2
(4) Non-Standard Details:
(a) Each set of plans shall be accompanied by a
separate sheet of details for structures that are to be
constructed as part of a development. All structures
shall be designed in accordance with minimum
requirements established by this ordinance.
(b) As a minimum the drawings shall have all
information contained in the Clinton City Standard
Drawings and include:
(i) Drawings size is to be 24” x 36” with ½-inch
border on top, bottom, and right sides, and 1 ½” on
the left side.
(ii) Scale of each detail;
(iii) Completely dimensioned and described;
(iv) Title block, located in the lower right corner of
the sheet to include as in Section 2.04.1.4 above.
3.05 Drawings to Be Submitted: The number of
sets of drawings to be submitted shall be no less than
seven (7), however this number may be adjusted by the
Director to fill the requirements of a specific project.
(1) Sketch Plat: The sketch plat is a tool utilized by the
developer to gather input from the Community
Development Department. Information may include
sizes of existing infrastructure, proposed streets,
acceptability of initial design, and any master planned
infrastructure or other city requirements that are
planned for the proposed development area.
(2) Preliminary Plat: The preliminary plat is to be
presented to the Planning Commission for approval of
the overall plan. The preliminary plat is to be a three
page, 24” x 36” standard drawing presentation. The
three pages are to represent:
(a) Page One is to contain all information that would
normally be on a plat of a subdivision to include: legal
description; name and location of subdivision;
addresses; street numbers; lot sizes and dimensions; lot
numbers; phase lines; and any other information
determined necessary by the Director.
(b) Page Two is to be a survey of the property and
adjacent area designed to show existing conditions to
include: topographic lines; irrigation structures; utilities
and infrastructure with sizes; streets; structures; rightsof-
way; easements; and any other information
determined necessary by the Director.
(c) Page Three is to show the streets, lot design and all
additions to be made as part of the subdivision to
include: street numbers; lot numbers; utilities and
infrastructure with sizes; disposition of existing
structures, utilities, infrastructure, easements and rightsof-
way; and any other information determined
necessary by the Director.
(3) Final Plat and Drawings: The final plat and
drawings are to be prepared for presentation to the
Planning Commission and City Council for approval.
The plat is to meet the requirements of the Davis
County Recorders Office and engineering drawings are
to meet the requirements of Section 3.04 above as well
as any requirements determined necessary by the
Director.
3.06 “Approved for Construction” Drawings:
Once reviewed and approved through the required
processes the Director will return one set of drawings to
the developer marked “Approved for Construction”.
Approved drawings may contain notes and or redline
corrections specific to the approval. The approved set
shall be kept available at the construction site, copies of
the approved set may be made, however it is the
original set, with all notes and comments attached that
will be the reference set of record.
3.07 Drawings of Record: The City may require
a developer/contractor to provide a set of “Drawings
of Record” containing all information that is different
from the “Approved for Construction” drawings.
These drawings may be submitted with neat and
readable redline corrections. If, in the opinion of the
Director the drawings are not clear or neat the
developer shall have his engineer provide corrected
drawings.
3.08 Preconstruction Conference: A
preconstruction conference shall be held before any
excavation or other work is begun in the
development. The meeting will be held at Clinton
City Hall and will include, when possible
representatives from the utilities, Clinton City
Community Development, developer, developer’s
contractor, and representatives from Clinton City
Public Works. Additionally, representatives from the
City Engineer and other subcontractors may be
required to attend.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
TRENCH EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL
4—1
4. TRENCH EXCAVATION AND
BACKFILL
4.01 General
4.02 Barricades
4.03 Blasting
4.04 Sheeting, Bracing And Shoring of
Excavations
4.05 Control of Groundwater
4.06 Trench Excavation
4.07 Trench Backfill
4.08 Trench Crossings and Easements
4.09 Restoration of Construction Site
4.10 Developer/Contractor's Responsibility
4.01 General: This section covers the
requirements for trenching and backfilling for
underground pipelines. Unless otherwise shown or
ordered, pipe shall be laid in an open trench. All
incidental clearing, preliminary grading, structure
removal, and benching shall be considered a part of
the trenching operation.
4.02 Barricades: Barriers shall be placed at each
end of all excavations, and at such places as may be
necessary along excavations, to warn all pedestrians
and vehicular traffic of such excavations. Lights shall
also be placed along excavations from one hour
before sunset each day to one hour after sunrise of
the next day, until such excavations are entirely
refilled, compacted, and surfaced or final graded. All
excavations shall be barricaded in such a manner as
to prevent persons from walking into, falling into, or
otherwise entering those excavations.
4.03 Blasting: Blasting will not be allowed
except by permission from the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer. The Developer/Contractor shall
comply with all laws, regulations, ordinances, and
safety codes relative to the handling, storage, and use
of explosives. The Developer/Contractor shall be
fully responsible for all damage to life and property
attributable to its blasting operations. Excessive
blasting or overshooting will not be permitted. The
Developer/Contractor shall remove any material
outside the authorized cross section, which may be
shattered or loosened by blasting.
4.04 Sheeting, Bracing and Shoring of
Excavations:
(1) Excavations shall be sheeted, braced, and shored
as required to support the walls of the excavations.
These measures shall be taken to protect the workers,
the work in progress, existing utilities, structures, and
improvements, from damage due to sliding and
settling of trench walls. All such sheeting, bracing,
and shoring shall comply with the regulations of the
Utah State Industrial Commission, and accident
prevention and safety provisions of the Contract.
(2) The Developer/Contractor shall be fully
responsible for the adequacy of methods and
materials used in trench sheeting, bracing, shoring,
and other systems provided to protect workers. Injury
to or death of workers resulting from inadequate
trench safety measures shall be the full and complete
responsibility of the Developer/Contractor. All
damages resulting from lack of adequate sheeting,
bracing and shoring shall be the responsibility of the
Developer/Contractor, and the Developer/Contractor
shall affect all necessary repairs or reconstruction at
its own expense resulting from such damage.
(3) Sheeting or shoring that does not extend below
the centerline of the pipe may be removed at the
discretion and responsibility of the
Developer/Contractor after the pipe embedment has
been placed and compacted to a level twelve inches
(12") above the top of the pipe. Following removal of
the sheeting or bracing, the trench shall be
immediately backfilled and compacted or
consolidated.
4.05 Control of Groundwater: All trenches
shall be kept free from water during excavation, fine
grading, pipe laying and jointing, and pipe
embedment operations. Where the trench bottom is
mucky or otherwise unstable because of the presence
of groundwater, and in all cases where the static
groundwater is above the bottom of any trench or bell
hole excavation, such groundwater shall be lowered
to the extent necessary to keep the trench free from
water and the trench bottom stable when the work
within the trench is in progress. The discharge from
excavation dewatering shall be conducted to natural
drainage channels, gutters, drains, or storm sewers.
The discharge from excavation dewatering shall be
filtered through straw bails or other median, to
remove silts and debris prior to entering natural
drainage channels, gutters, drains, or storm sewers.
No sanitary sewer shall be used for disposal of trench
water. Surface water shall be prevented from entering
trenches.
4.06 Trench Excavation: Excavation for
pipelines shall be located as shown on the Drawings
or as staked in the field. Trenches shall be excavated
to the depths and widths required to accommodate
the construction of the pipelines, as follows:
(1) Normal Excavation: Except in ledge-rock,
cobbles, stones, or water-saturated earth, mechanical
excavation of trenches shall not extend below the
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
TRENCH EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL
4—2
bottom of the pipe after placement in its final
position.
(2) Authorized Over-Excavation:
(a) Where ledge-rock, cobble rock, stones or other
material render the trench material unsuitable for pipe
bedding, as determined by the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer, bedding material shall be
imported and placed. The trench shall be excavated to
a minimum of four-inches (4”) below the bottom of
the pipe after placement in its final position.
(b) Where unstable material is encountered in the
excavation, foundation material may be required, as
determined by the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer. In such cases, a minimum of
eight inches (8") below the bottom of the pipe after
placement in its final position shall be removed.
Over-excavation not ordered, specified, or shown
shall be considered to be unauthorized excavation.
(3) Unauthorized Over-Excavation: Any excavation
carried below the elevation required to install the
pipe as specified in these Specifications, or directed
by the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer, shall be
considered to be unauthorized. Such excavation shall
be backfilled in accordance with these Specifications
for "Imported Granular Material" and "Gravel
Foundation for Pipelines and Pipeline Structures," all
at the Developer/Contractor's expense.
(4) Trench Width:
(a) The trench shall be excavated such that the pipe is
always centered in the trench. The minimum clear
trench width at the horizontal diameter of the pipe
must not be less than the outside diameter of the pipe
plus twelve inches (12"). The maximum clear width
of trench at the top of the pipe must not be more than
the outside diameter of the pipe plus eighteen inches
(18"). If a trench is excavated to a greater width, the
Developer/Contractor will be required to restore the
trench to an acceptable condition by following the
steps outlined in these Specifications for "Trenches in
Embankments."
(b) Trench width for pipeline structures, valves, or
other accessories shall be sufficient to leave at least
twelve inches (12") clear between their outer surfaces
and the trench. Backfill with earth under structures or
valves will not be permitted. Any unauthorized
excess excavation below the elevation indicated for
foundation of any structures shall be backfilled in
accordance with these specifications for "Imported
Granular Materials," and "Gravel Foundation for Pipe
& Pipeline Structures," at the Developer/Contractor's
expense.
(5) Trenches in Embankments: Before laying pipes
that are to be in fill or embankment areas, the
embankment shall first be placed and compacted to
the specified density to a depth of not less than two
feet (2') above the top of the proposed pipe. After
placing and compacting the embankment, the trench
for the pipe or conduit shall be excavated through the
fill and fine graded and the pipe installed as
specified.
(6) Placement of Excavated Material:
(a) All excess material shall be hauled away from the
construction site and disposed of in an area obtained
by the Developer/Contractor and approved by the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer. The
Developer/Contractor shall be responsible for all
rights-of-way, easements, and access associated with
the disposal of excess excavated material. It shall
further be responsible to obtain permission from the
property owner or person controlling the property
where the Developer/Contractor plans to dispose of
excavated material. No compensation will be made to
the Developer/Contractor for disposal of excess
excavated material.
(b) Non-excess excavated material shall be piled in a
manner that will not endanger the work and will
avoid obstructing sidewalks and driveways. Gutters
and irrigation ditches shall be kept clear or other
satisfactory provisions shall be made for street
drainage and continuity of irrigation.
(c) Grading of the area surrounding the trenches,
including excavated materials, shall be performed as
necessary to prevent surface water from flowing into
trenches, or other excavations. Control of
groundwater shall be as specified in section 3.05,
Control of Groundwater.
(7) Fine Grading the Trench Bottom: The bottom of
the trench shall be accurately graded and prepared to
provide uniform bearing and support on undisturbed
soil or compacted granular bedding at every point
along the entire length of the pipe. Bell holes shall be
hand excavated after the trench bottom has been fine
graded. Bell holes shall be only large enough to
permit making the joints and to assure that any
portion of the joint or bell does not support the pipe.
4.07 Trench Backfill:
(1) Trench backfill for piping consists of four zones:
foundation, bedding, initial backfill, and final
backfill. “Pipe embedment” is a commonly used
term that refers to the region including the bedding
and initial backfill zones, or any region within one
foot (1’) of any pipe, pipeline structure, or accessory.
The foundation is defined as the region below four
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
TRENCH EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL
4—3
inches (4”) below the bottom of the pipe. The
bedding is defined as the region between four inches
(4”) below the bottom of the pipe and the bottom of
the pipe. The initial backfill is defined as the region
between the bottom of the pipe and twelve inches
(12”) above the top of the pipe. The final backfill is
defined as the region above twelve inches (12”)
above the pipe.
(2) All fill materials shall be compacted as specified
in this section.
(3) Excavated materials are not satisfactory for
foundation, bedding, or backfill, when located within
the public right-of-way or where established during
the plan review process. The Developer/Contractor
shall be responsible for providing imported granular
material.
(4) Use of excavated materials as backfill shall
require that a proctor be accomplished on excavated
materials. Due to the constant changing nature of the
soil within the area the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer may require a new proctor be
accomplished anytime there is an apparent change in
the composition of the soil. The
Developer/Contractor shall be responsible for paying
for all soils engineering and testing.
(5) Imported Granular Material: Imported granular
material for foundation, bedding, and backfill shall be
cleaned crushed rock or gravel, free from sod,
vegetation, and other organic or deleterious material.
Slag will not be allowed in the pipe embedment.
(a) Imported granular material shall conform to the
following gradation specifications:
(i) Foundation Material: One hundred percent
(100%) less than one and one half-inch (1 ½”) and
maximum of five percent (5%) less than one-halfinch
(1/2”).
(ii) Embedment Material:
(A) Ductile-iron pipe - One hundred percent (100%)
less than one and one half-inch (1 ½”) and maximum
of five percent (5%) passing a No. 200 sieve.
(B) PVC or polyethylene pipe – Sand and maximum
five percent (5%) passing a No. 200 sieve.
(C) One hundred percent (100%) less than two-inch
(2”) and maximum of fifteen percent (15%) passing a
No. 200 sieve.
(b) Foundation Placement:
(i) When the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer
authorizes over-excavation, foundation material shall
be placed in the foundation zone. The foundation
material shall be placed so that the trench can be
properly fine graded as specified. The foundation
material shall be deposited over the entire trench
width and compacted in layers. The layers shall have
a maximum uncompacted thickness of six-inches
(6”).
(ii) The material shall then be fine graded in
accordance with the specification for Fine Grading in
§ 4.06(7) above.
(c) Pipe Embedment: Embedment material for other
than PVC pipe shall have no material larger than one
and one half-inch (1 ½”) in any dimension. For PVC
pipe, the material must be sand.
(i) Bedding: The bedding material shall be deposited
over the entire trench width to a compacted thickness
of no less than four inches (4”). The material shall
have a maximum uncompacted thickness of six
inches (6”).
(ii) Initial Backfill: After the pipe is in place, initial
backfill material shall be placed at any point below
the mid-point of the pipe simultaneously and
uniformly on both sides of the pipe in un-compacted
layers not to exceed ten-inches (10”) or one-half the
diameter of the pipe, whichever is less. Initial backfill
material shall be placed with care to prevent
displacement of or damage to the pipe during the
embedment process. Initial backfill material shall be
scattered alongside the pipe and not dropped into the
trench in compact masses.
(iii) That section of the pipe zone from the mid-point
of the pipe to twelve inches (12”) above the top of the
pipe shall then be filled with initial backfill materials
and compacted.
(d) Final Backfill: Final backfill shall be from twelve
inches (12") above the top of the pipe to the level
shown on the Drawings. Excavated materials
consisting of fines, sand, and gravel shall be used for
final backfill. No oil cake, bituminous pavement,
concrete, rock, or other lumpy material shall be used
in the final backfill unless these materials are
scattered and do not exceed six inches (6") in any
dimension. Perishable or spongy material shall not
be used in final backfilling.
(e) Compaction: Backfill shall be compacted by
means of sheepsfoot rollers, pneumatic tire rollers,
vibrating rollers, or mechanical tampers.
(i) Under pavements or other surface improvements
the in-place density shall be a minimum of ninety-six
percent (96%) of laboratory standard the maximum
dry density as determined by AASHTO T-99. In
shoulders and other areas the in-place density shall be
a minimum of ninety percent (95%) of the maximum
dry density as determined by AASHTO T-99.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
TRENCH EXCAVATION AND BACKFILL
4—4
(ii) Fill material shall be placed at a moisture content
and un-compacted lift thickness such that after
compaction the required densities will be produced.
In no event will the material be placed in lifts that,
prior to compaction, exceed six inches (6”) for
foundation and embedment and twelve inches (12”)
for final backfill.
(iii) Prior to compaction each layer shall be evenly
spread, moistened, and worked by disk harrowing or
other equivalent means.
(iv) If the required density is not attained, test
sections will be required to determine any
adjustments in compaction equipment, thickness of
layers, moisture content and compactive effort
necessary to attain the specified minimum density.
(v) Approval of equipment, thickness of layers,
moisture content, and compactive effort shall not be
deemed to relieve the Developer/Contractor of the
responsibility for attaining the specified minimum
densities. The Developer/Contractor, in planning its
work, shall allow sufficient time to perform the work
connected with test sections and to permit the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer to make tests for
relative densities.
4.08 Trench Crossings and Easements:
(1) At road crossings or where existing driveways
occur on a road, the Developer/Contractor shall make
provisions for trench crossings either by means of
backfill, tunnels, or temporary bridges.
(2) Any disturbance to property caused by the
Developer/Contractor’s activity within easements
shall be restored to the satisfaction of the owner of
the property. If necessary, shrubs, fences, or other
objects shall be removed carefully. If work must
occur on a lawn, the lawn shall be cut to a width of
two feet (2’) wider than the intended work area (one
foot (1’) on each side). The lawn sod shall be
stacked separately from and shall not be mixed with
other excavated material.
(3) After the sod is removed, if excavation is
necessary, the topsoil shall be removed to a depth of
twelve inches (12”), or the actual depth of the topsoil,
whichever is less. The topsoil shall be stored
separately from and shall not be mixed with other
excavated material.
(4) Following completion of the backfilling and the
compaction of the trench, the Developer/Contractor
shall replace topsoil, lawn sod, shrubs, fences, and
other items that may have been removed from within
the easement area and shall clean up and remove any
rocks, dirt or any other debris that remain from the
construction work. The Developer/Contractor shall
obtain a release from the property owner stating that
the repairs have been made to the satisfaction of the
Owner. A copy of said release shall be delivered to
the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer.
4.09 Restoration of Construction Site: During
the progress of the Work, the Developer/Contractor
shall clean up all construction debris, excess
excavation, and excess materials, and shall restore all
fences, irrigation structures, ditches, culverts, and
similar items. The Developer/Contractor shall
stockpile the excavated trench material so as to do the
least damage to adjacent grassed areas, or fences,
regardless of whether these are on private property or
public rights-of-way. All excavated materials shall
be removed from grassed and planted areas and these
surfaces shall be left in a conditions equivalent to
their original surface and free from all rocks, gravel,
boulders, or other foreign materials.
4.10 Developer/Contractor's Responsibility:
The Developer/Contractor will be responsible to see
that the backfilling and compaction are properly and
adequately done. Settlement of trenches within a
period of two- (2) years after final acceptance of the
project shall be considered incontrovertible evidence
of inadequate compaction, and the Developer/
Contractor shall be responsible for correcting the
condition in accordance with the provisions of these
Specifications. This includes the replacement of
sidewalk, curb and gutter, and other surface
improvements.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PRESSURE PIPE CULINARY WATER
5—1
5. PRESSURE PIPE CULINARY
WATER
5.01 General
5.02 Ductile Iron Pipe
5.03 PVC Pipe
5.04 Pipe Installation
5.05 Water Service Laterals
5.06 Flushing, Disinfecting, and Testing Of
Main Lines
5.01 General: This Chapter covers furnishing and
installing pressure pipe to the lines and grades shown
on the drawings and/or established in the field, and
all flushing, testing, and repairing required ensuring
adequate and safe operation of the water system.
Either PVC C-900 200 DR-14 or ductile iron pipe
shall be used in all areas east of 2000 West and PVC
C-900 200 DR-14 pipe will be used in all areas west
of 2000 West unless soil corrosivity evaluation, as
reviewed and approved by the City Public Works
Director/Engineer/Public Facilities Inspector dictates
otherwise. All fittings shall be brass or brass and
stainless steel construction. No galvanized, epoxy
coated or similar fittings shall be allowed.
5.02 Ductile Iron Pipe:
(1) Materials:
(a) Ductile iron pipe shall conform to all
requirements of ANSI/AWWA C151/A21.51,
"American National Standard for Ductile Iron Pipe,
Centrifugally Cast in Metal Molds or Sand-Lined
molds, for Water or Other Liquids." Minimum
pressure Class will be 250 for pipes larger than 12-
inch diameter. Pipes of 12-inch diameter and smaller
shall be pressure Class 350. If thickness class pipe is
used, pipes of diameters from 4-inches through 10-
inches shall be minimum Class 51 and pipe from 12-
inch diameter and larger shall be minimum Class 52.
(b) All pipe shall be made of good quality Ductile
Cast Iron and of such chemical composition and
structure as is required to meet the physical and
mechanical property requirements of the standard.
(2) Joints:
(a) Mechanical Joints: All mechanical joints shall
meet requirements of ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11.
All gasket surfaces shall be smooth and free from
imperfections. Gaskets shall conform to tests in
accordance with specifications and shall be less than
one year old.
(b) Push-on Joints: All push-on joints shall meet the
requirements of ANSI/AWWA C111/A21.11.
Gaskets shall be free from defects and not over one
year old. Lubricants shall be non-toxic and have no
deteriorating effects on gasket materials. It shall not
impart taste to water in a pipe. It shall conform in
every way to ANSI 21.1
(c) Flanged Joints: Flanges shall meet the
requirements of ANSI/AWWA C110/A21.10,
"American National Standard for Ductile Iron and
Gray Iron Fittings, 3-inch through 48-inch for Water
and Other Liquids." Flanged joints shall be bolted
firmly with machine, stud or cap bolts of proper size.
Flange maybe cast integrally with the pipe or may be
screwed on threaded pipe. Flanges shall be faced and
drilled and of proper dimensions for size and pressure
required. Bolts and nuts, unless otherwise specified,
shall be made of the best quality refined iron or metal
steel and have clean, well-fitting threads. Bolts will
be provided with standard hexagonal nuts and
standard hexagonal heads. Bolts shall be of the
diameter required for each flange and when installed
shall be of length so that no more than 3/8-inch nor
less than 1/8-inch extends past face of nut. All buried
fittings having steel bolts shall be coated with a nonoxide
wax and wrapped with polyethylene. Gaskets
shall be rubber, either ring or full face, and are 1/8thinch
thick. A gasket for each flanged joint of proper
size as shown on the drawings.
(3) Coatings and Linings for Ductile Iron Pipe:
(a) All exterior surfaces of pipe and fittings shall be
coated with hot coal tar approximately 1 mil thick.
All interior surfaces shall be cement mortar lined
with a standard thickness according to ANSI/AWWA
C104/A21.4-80.
(b) All interior surfaces or coatings shall consist of
products that are certified to comply with ANSI/NSF
Standard 61. This requirement applies to any pipes
and fittings, protective materials (e.g. paints,
coatings, concrete admixtures, concrete release
agents, concrete sealers), joining and scaling
materials (e.g. adhesives, caulks, gaskets, primers and
sealants) and mechanical devices (e.g. electrical wire,
switches, sensors, valves) that are located so as to
come in contact with the drinking water.
(4) Corrosion Protection and Soil Tests: When the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer determines that a
potential for corrosive conditions exists such as poor
drainage or reactive soils, pipe and fittings shall be
incased in polyethylene wrap. Polyethylene
encasement of ductile iron pipe shall meet the
requirements of ANSI A21.5 or AWWA C105.
(5) Flanges: Flanges when required shall conform to
ANSI/AWWA C115/A21.15-83.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PRESSURE PIPE CULINARY WATER
5—2
(6) Fittings: Fittings for Ductile Iron Pipe shall
conform to the provisions of ANSI/AWWA
C110/A21.10-82 or C153/A21.53-58.
(7) Magnetic Locator Tape:
(a) All pipe shall include a 3-inch magnetic locator
tape installed in the pipeline trench approximately
12-inches below the ground surface.
(b) Identification tape shall be furnished with white
or black printing on a colored field having the words:
(c) CAUTION: POTABLE WATER - BELOW.
5.03 PVC Pipe:
(1) Materials: Pipe for the transmission and
distribution of water shall be manufactured in
accordance with AWWA C900 (latest edition),
"AWWA Standard for Polyvinyl Chloride (PVC)
Pressure Pipe, 4-inch through 12-inch, for Water".
The PVC pipe shall have a cast-iron-pipe-equivalent
outside diameter. PVC pipe 14-inches and larger
shall be manufactured in accordance with AWWA
C905-88, "AWWA Standard for Polyvinyl Chloride
(PVC) Water Transmission Pipe, Nominal Diameters
14-inch through 36-inch" all PVC pipe 4-inch and
larger shall be DR. 14 with a working pressure of 200
PSI. Pipe smaller than 4-inch shall be schedule 40
PVC.
(2) Joints: Joints shall be push on rubber gasket type.
Lubrication shall be water soluble, non-toxic, nonobjectionable
in taste and odor imparted to the water,
non-supporting of bacteria growth, and have no
deteriorating effect on the PVC pipe or rubber
gaskets.
(3) Fittings: All fittings to be used with the PVC
pipe shall be the same as fittings for Ductile Iron Pipe
and shall conform to the provisions of ANSI/AWWA
C110/A21.10-82 or C153/A21.53-58.
(4) Magnetic Locator Tape:
(a) All pipe shall include a 3-inch magnetic locator
tape installed in the pipeline trench approximately
12-inches below the ground surface.
(b) Identification tape shall be furnished with white
or black printing on a colored field having the words:
(c) CAUTION: POTABLE WATER - BELOW.
5.04 Pipe Installation:
(1) Cutting: Cutting of pipe for closure pieces or for
other reasons shall be done in a neat and
workmanlike manner by a method recommended by
the manufacturer. After cutting, the pipe shall be
beveled and filed to prevent gasket damage in joint
assembly.
(2) Dewatering of Trench: Where water is
encountered in the trench, it shall be removed during
pipe laying operations and the trench so maintained
until the ends of the pipe are sealed. See "Control of
Groundwater" in Chapter 3 Trench - Excavation and
Backfill.
(3) Laying of Pipe:
(a) The pipe and pipe coating (where applicable)
shall be inspected for defects before installation. Any
defects shall be repaired or the pipe shall be replaced,
whichever the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer
deem necessary.
(b) All pipe shall be laid and maintained to the
required lines and grades with fittings and valves at
the required locations. The pipes shall be installed
with a 48-inch minimum cover from finished road
surface for culinary water. The Developer/Contractor
shall be responsible to install the pipeline to the
alignment set by the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer or as shown on the Approved
Drawings.
(c) All pipes, fittings and valves shall be carefully
lowered from the truck when unloading or when
installing into the trench. This should be done one
piece at a time in order to prevent damage to pipe
materials and protective coatings and linings. Under
no circumstances shall materials be dropped or
dumped from the truck or into the trench.
(d) The Developer/Contractor shall take the
necessary precautions such that foreign materials do
not enter into the pipe. No debris, tools, or other
materials shall be placed in the pipe during laying
operations. When laying of pipe is not in progress, a
watertight plug shall close the pipe.
(e) Maximum deflections at pipe joints shall not
exceed the joint specifications of AWWA C900 of
latest revision, or the recommendations of the pipe
manufacturer.
(f) Deflections in PVC pipe shall be made by
longitudinal bending of the barrel of the pipe rather
than deflecting the pipe joints. Longitudinal bending
shall be limited to eighty percent (80%) of the
manufactures recommended minimum-bending
radius.
(4) Pipe Bedding:
(a) All pipes shall be protected from lateral
displacement and possible damage resulting from
impact or unbalanced loading during backfilling
operations by being adequately bedded.
(b) In the event trench materials are not, in the
judgment of the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer,
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PRESSURE PIPE CULINARY WATER
5—3
satisfactory for pipe bedding, imported granular
bedding will be required. See Chapter 3 of these
specifications.
(5) Thrust Blocking: Thrust blocking shall be
applied at all tees, valves, plugs, caps and at bends
deflecting 11 1/4 degrees or more. The fitting shall
be encased in a 12 mil protective plastic wrap before
the thrust block is poured. Reaction blocking shall be
concrete having a compressive strength of not less
than 4000 pounds per square inch at 28 days.
Blocking shall be placed between undisturbed soil
and the fitting to be anchored. The area of bearing on
the pipe and on the ground shall be as shown in the
Drawings. The blocking shall be so placed that the
pipe and the fittings will be accessible for repair.
(6) Connections to Existing Water Lines:
Information on the drawings regarding existing water
lines is taken from "record" drawings from the city or
utility company files and may or may not be accurate
as to size, type of material or location. The
Developer/Contractor will be responsible to
determine the proper fittings and materials required,
obtain the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer's
approval of the planned connection, and perform the
construction in a suitable fashion. Where fitting
sizes, such as tees and crosses, are shown on the
plans, those sizes will be used. However, no attempt
has been made to show all needed fittings or
materials.
(7) Separation:2 The horizontal distance between
pressure water mains and sanitary sewer lines shall
be at least ten feet. Where a water main and a sewer
line must cross, the water main shall be at least 18
inches above the sewer line. Separation distances
shall be measured edge-to-edge (i.e. from the nearest
edges of the facilities). Water mains and sewer lines
shall not be installed in the same trench.
5.05 Water Service Laterals: Water service
laterals shall be constructed with materials specified
and at the locations shown on the Standard Drawings.
(1) Laterals: Pipe for water service laterals shall be
three-quarter-inch (3/4”) Type K-soft copper tubing
or larger and shall comply with ASTM Specification
B88.
(2) Extent of Laterals:
(a) New water service laterals shall extend from the
water main to ten-feet (10’) past the property line.
Type K-soft copper tubing water services shall not
have any joints between the corporation stop at the
main and the meter setter.
(b) Water service laterals relocated during
construction of new pipelines shall extend from the
water main to the water meter shall not have any
joints between the corporation stop and the meter
unless approved by Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer. If the existing service is other
than copper or is in poor condition the service shall
be replaced with Type K-soft copper tubing from the
main to the meter setter. Corporation stops and or
saddles shall be replaced unless approved by the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer.
(3) Excavation and Backfill: Trench excavation and
backfill shall conform to the applicable paragraphs of
Chapter 3. Bedding shall meet the requirements of
§4.07(5)(a)(ii) above.
(a) Connection to Main:
(i) Connections of services to main lines shall be
direct tap on ductile iron mains and through an OD
controlled bonze service saddle on PVC mains,
corporation type stop and 24-inch gooseneck formed
with the tubing. All connections shall be made using
compression type fittings. The service saddle shall be
a Mueller service saddle with three-quarter-inch
(3/4”) IPT outlet or equivalent. The corporation stop
shall be a three-quarter-inch (3/4”) Mueller H-15008
"CC" thread for direct tap and a Mueller H15028 IP
threaded for a service saddle tap.
(ii) On existing services the existing connection to
main will be used unless damaged or leaking.
(b) Meter Setter, Box and Cover:
(i) Residential:
(A) Meter sets shall be three-quarter-inch (3/4”) Iron
Yoke assemblies with an angle meter valve, Mueller
110 or equivalent conductive compression connection
for CTS O.D. tubing.
(B) The outlet coupling shall be a top entry dual
check device with a conductive compression
connection for CTS O.D. tubing. It must also be on
the Utah Division of Drinking Water approved
Backflow Prevention Assemblies/Devices list.
(C) The meter box shall be eighteen-inches (18”) in
diameter by thirty-inches (30”) high corrugated
plastic with grooves to fit over the inlet and outlet
lines. The meter cover is to be a D&L eighteen-inch
(18”) ring cover with a two-inch (2”) hole in a raised
cast center rim.
(D) The cover is to be three-eighths-inch (3/8”)
above top back of curb centered two-and-onequarter-
feet (2.25’) from the back of curb.
(ii) Non-residential Meter Sets: Water main sizes
and meter sets will be approved during the sight plan
and building permit approval processes. General
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PRESSURE PIPE CULINARY WATER
5—4
specifications for non-residential meter setter, box
and cover are outlined in the following table.
CLINTON CITY CORPORATION WATER
SERVICE INFORMATION
Service Size
Meter Box Size
Type of material
for Meter Box
Water Meter
Connection Type
Bypass
¾”
18” Dia
Concrete,
Corrugated,
Polyethylene
By
City
Compress No
1”
24” Dia
Concrete,
Corrugated,
Polyethylene
By
City
Compress No
1 ½”
48” Dia
Concrete By
City
Flange Yes
2”
48” Dia
Concrete By
City
Flange Yes
3”
60” Dia
Concrete By
City
Flange Yes
4”
4’x6’ Box
Concrete By
City
Flange Yes
Meters larger than 4” shall be approved only for
specific uses and the design will be approved during
the sight plan and building permit approval
processes.
Flange meters shall be installed with an approved
bypass system.
(4) Special Joints and Fittings:
(a) Solder and Sweat Joints: Solder joints are not
permitted underground.
(b) Copper Tubing to Screw Pipe Joints: Joints from
copper tubing to threaded pipe shall be made by the
use of brass adapter fittings.
(5) Separation: Water service lines shall not be run
or laid in the same trench as the building sewer
lateral, unless the water service line is placed on a
solid shelf excavated at one side of the common
trench. At all locations there shall be at least twelve
(12) inches of separation horizontally and vertically
above the sewer lateral.
(6) Flushing, Testing and Disinfecting:
(a) Flushing, testing and disinfecting shall conform to
the applicable paragraphs of this division. The end of
the trench where the stub-out past the meter is located
shall be left open to allow for discharging water out
of the service line for proper flushing and to insure
that the line has been adequately disinfected. The
line shall be flushed thoroughly following
installation.
(b) On existing services the Developer/Contractor
shall take precautions to prevent contamination of the
pipe and connections during installation. The line
shall be flushed thoroughly following installation.
(7) Damage and Repair of Water Mains and
Appurtenances:
(a) The Developer/Contractor shall be responsible for
any damage to water mains and water facilities
caused by his operations. The Developer/Contractor
may be relieved of the responsibility under the
following conditions:
(i) He has not excavated below or beyond the
required excavation lines, and
(ii) He has given proper and timely notice of his work
plans, and
(iii) He has used reasonable care, and cooperated,
minimizing the damage.
(b) Any damage to water gates, hydrants, valve
chambers, meter boxes, and other surface
appurtenances that result from the
Developer/Contractor's operation shall be its sole
responsibility.
5.06 Flushing, Disinfecting, and Testing of Main
Lines:
(1) Flushing:
(2)
(i) All new water systems or extensions to existing
systems shall be thoroughly flushed before being
placed in service. Flushing shall be accomplished
through hydrants, or end of line blow-off assemblies
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PRESSURE PIPE CULINARY WATER
5—5
at a minimum flushing velocity of 2.5-cubic feet per
second. See chart below.
FLOW RATE AND OPENINGS TO
FLUSH PIPELINES
(40- psi Residual Pressure)
Pipe Size
(inches)
Flow Required to Produce
2.5 fps velocity (gpm)
2 26
4 100
6 220
8 390
10 610
12 880
14 1,200
16 1,565
18 1,980
20 2,450
24 3,525
30 5,507
(b) Disinfection:
(i) After flushing, all culinary water lines shall be
disinfected by chlorination. Chlorination shall
provide a minimum of 25-ppm residual after 24-
hours contact in the pipeline. During the process of
chlorinating the pipeline, all valves and other pipeline
appurtenances shall be operated several times to
provide sufficient contact with the chlorinating agent.
Following chlorination, the water line shall be
drained and thoroughly flushed according to Section
1 above and, if necessary, rechlorinated until a
satisfactory bacteriological test is obtained.
(ii) Disinfection shall conform to the requirements of
AWWA C651-86 (or latest edition). After complete
disinfection and flushing the Clinton City Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer shall be notified so a
Chlorine Residual Test can be taken.
(iii) Disinfection by Granular Calcium Hypochlorite:
Placement of granular calcium hypochlorite (TH
perchloron, Pittchlor, etc. which is 65% available
chlorine by weight) shall be put into new lines at
500-foot intervals. The following table provides
information as to the required quantity of granular
chlorine to be used to provide a chlorine
concentration of 50 ppm.
Pipe Size
(inches)
Required Amount of
Granular Calcium
Hypochlorite every 500 feet
6 0.48 lbs
8 0.83 lbs
10 1.30 lbs
12 1.88 lbs
After all lines are filled with water, through a
temporary connection, a Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer will take a chlorine test.
(iv) Disinfection by Slurry Calcium Hypochlorite:
Chlorine in the form of a 1% slurry of high-test
calcium hypochlorite (HTH, Perchloron, Pittchlor,
etc. which are 70% available chlorine by weight)
shall be fed into the pipeline in such a manner as to
mix with the water flowing in the pipeline. (A 1%
slurry – 10,000 ppm – results from mixing one pound
of calcium hypochlorite with 8.40 gallons of water.)
The following table provides information as to the
required quantity of slurry to be used per 100 feet of
pipe to provide a chlorine concentration of 55 ppm.
Pipe
Size
(in.)
Vol. of 100 ft.
Length
(gal)
Required Amount of
1 % Chlorine Slurry
(gal)
1 ½
2
½
3
4
6
8
10
12
9.18
16.32
25.50
36.73
65.28
146.90
261.10
408.10
587.60
0.07
0.12
0.18
0.26
0.47
1.05
1.87
2.92
4.20
(3) Bacteria Test: After the disinfected line is
flushed a Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer will
take a bacteria test. After the bacteria samples come
back satisfactory (normally 24 – 48 hours) a pressure
test must be performed. Bacteria tests will only be
accomplished Monday through Wednesday, on
regular working days to allow for results to be
accomplished prior to the end of the week.
(4) Pressure Test: All newly laid pipes or any valved
section thereof shall be subjected to a hydrostatic
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PRESSURE PIPE CULINARY WATER
5—6
pressure. A leakage test shall be conducted
concurrently with the pressure test.
(a) Test Pressure Restrictions: Test pressures shall:
(i) Be two (2) times the normal operating pressure as
determined by the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer;
(ii) Not exceed pipe or thrust restraint design
pressures;
(iii) Be of at least 2-hour duration;
(iv) Not vary by more than plus or minus five (+ 5)
psi for the duration of the test;
(v) Not exceed twice the rated pressure of the valves
or hydrants when the pressure boundary of the test
section includes closed gate valves or hydrants;
(vi) Not exceed the rated pressure of the valves when
the test boundary of the test section includes closed,
resilient-seated gate valves or butterfly valves.
(b) Pressurization: Each valved section of pipe shall
be slowly filled with water and the specified test
pressure, based on the elevation of the lowest point of
the line or section under test and corrected to the
elevation of the test gage, shall be applied by means
of a pump connected to the pipe in a manner
satisfactory to the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer.
(c) Air Removal: Before applying the specified test
pressure, air shall be expelled completely from the
pipe, valves, and hydrants. If permanent air vents are
not located at all high points, the
Developer/Contractor shall install corporation cocks
at such points so that the air can be expelled as the
line is filled with water. After all the air has been
expelled, the corporation cocks shall be closed and
the test pressure applied. At the conclusion of the
pressure test, the corporation cocks shall be removed
and plugged.
(d) Examination: All exposed pipe, fittings, valves,
hydrants, and joints shall be examined carefully
during the test. Any damaged or defective pipe,
fittings, valves, or hydrants that are discovered
following the pressure test shall be repaired or
replaced with sound materials and the test shall be
repeated until it is satisfactory to the Owner.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
CONCRETE PIPE
6—1
6. CONCRETE PIPE
6.01 General
6.02 Pipe
6.03 Pipe Laying
6.04 Gravel Foundation for Pipe
6.05 Installation Requirements for Line And
Grade
6.06 Spring Line
6.07 Pipe Bedding
6.08 Tests
6.09 Manhole Connections
6.10 Service Laterals
6.11 Damage and Repair of Existing Systems
and Appurtenances
6.01 GENERAL:
This section covers the requirements for concrete
pipe materials and installation in sanitary sewer,
storm drain, and other gravity line construction.
6.02 PIPE:
Concrete pipe used in sewer line, storm drain line and
other gravity line construction shall be reinforced
concrete pipe or non-reinforced concrete pipe, as
required by design loading and fill heights and as
follows:
1. Reinforced Concrete Pipe:
All reinforced concrete pipe used in the
construction shall be of the rubber gasket type,
bell and spigot joint design, conforming to the
requirements of the latest revision of ASTM
Designation C-76. Pipe class shall be as shown
on the Drawings. The minimum joint length of
all pipes provided shall be 7 1/2 feet. All pipe 12-
inch diameter and larger shall be reinforced
concrete.
2. Non-Reinforced Concrete Pipe:
All non-reinforced concrete pipe used in the
construction shall be of the rubber gasket type,
bell and spigot joint design, conforming to the
requirements of the latest revision of ASTM
Designation C-14. Pipe class shall be as shown
on the Drawings. The minimum joint length for
pipe shall be four feet for pipe up to ten inches
and seven and a half feet for all other pipe.
3. Bell and Spigot Joints:
Bell and spigot joints, including rubber gaskets,
shall conform to the requirements of the latest
revision of ASTM Designation C-443. The pipe
joint shall be so designed as to provide for
self-centering, and when assembled, to compress
the gasket to form a watertight seal. The gasket
shall be confined in a groove on the spigot, so that
pipe movement or hydrostatic pressure cannot
displace the gasket.
4. Minimum Size and Slope Requirements:
In no case shall sanitary sewer mains be less than
eight (8”) inches in diameter or storm drain lines
less than fifteen (15”) inches in diameter.
Exception: Storm drainpipes servicing a single
curb inlet box may be twelve (12”) inches in
diameter if the flow does not exceed the pipe size.
Concrete pipe shall be laid with uniform slope
between manholes. All concrete pipes shall be
designed and constructed to give mean velocities
of not less than 2 feet per second when flowing
full, based on Manning’s formula using an n
value of .013. Absolute minimum slope allowed
shall be those published by the Utah Department
of Environmental Quality, Division of Water
Quality as Administrative Rules for Design
Requirements for Wastewater Collection,
Treatment and Disposal System, R317-3, Table
R317-3-2.3 (D)(4) Minimum Slopes.
Whenever possible the slope should exceed 0.005
ft/ft. The pipe should be sized to meet anticipated
hydraulic loads, increasing the pipe size to reduce
the minimum slope requirements shall not be
allowed. Sewer slopes shall not exceed 0.12 ft/ft,
drop manholes shall be used when steeper slopes
are needed, drop manholes shall be used to keep
line grade below maximum grade allowed.
6.03 PIPE LAYING:
All concrete pipe installation shall proceed up grade
on a stable foundation, with joints closely and
accurately fitted. Rubber gaskets shall be fitted
properly in place, and care shall be taken in joining
the pipe units to avoid twisting of gaskets. Joints
shall be clean and dry, and a joint lubricant as
recommended by the pipe supplier shall be applied
uniformly to the mating joint surfaces to facilitate
easy positive joint closure.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
CONCRETE PIPE
6—2
Pipe shall be installed with uniform bearing under the
full length of the barrel, with suitable excavations
being made to receive pipe bells.
Select material shall be compacted around the pipe to
firmly bed the pipe in position. If adjustment of
position of a pipe length is required after being laid, it
shall be removed and re-jointed as for a new pipe.
When laying is not in progress, the ends of the pipe
shall be closed with a tight-fitting stopper to prevent
the entrance of foreign material.
In addition to the above requirements, all pipe
installation shall comply with the specific
requirements of the pipe manufacturer.
6.04 GRAVEL FOUNDATION FOR PIPE:
Wherever the subgrade material does not afford a
sufficiently solid foundation to support the pipe and
superimposed load, or where groundwater must be
drained, the subgrade shall be excavated to such
depth as may be necessary and replaced with crushed
rock or gravel compacted into place.
Gravel for concrete pipe foundation shall be clean
crushed rock or gravel with one hundred percent
(100%) passing a one-inch (1") screen and five
percent (5%) passing a No. 4 sieve.
6.05 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS
FOR LINE AND GRADE:
All concrete pipe shall be installed accurately to the
defined line and grade with the following limits:
Variance from established line and grade shall not be
greater than one-sixteenth (1/16) inch per inch of
pipe diameter in ten feet, and not to exceed one-half
inch in ten feet, provided that such variation does not
result in a level or reverse sloping invert; provided
also that variation in the invert elevation between
adjoining ends of pipe, due to non-concentricity of
joining surface and pipe interior surfaces, does not
exceed one-sixty-fourth (1/64) inch per inch of pipe
diameter, or one-half (1/2) inch maximum.
6.06 SPRING LINE:
All pipes shall be backfilled to the spring line with
imported fill no greater than one and one-half inch (1
½”) in size.
6.07 PIPE BEDDING:
All pipes shall be protected from lateral displacement
and possible damage resulting from impact or
unbalanced loading during backfilling operations by
being adequately bedded.
Pipe bedding materials placed at any point below the
mid-point of the pipe shall be deposited and
compacted in layers not to exceed ten-inches (10") in
uncompacted depth. Deposition and compaction of
bedding materials shall be done simultaneously and
uniformly on both sides of the pipe. Compaction
shall be accomplished with hand or mechanical
compactors. All bedding materials shall be placed in
the trench in such a manner that they will be scattered
alongside the pipe and not dropped into the trench in
compact masses. Bedding materials shall be loose
earth, free from lumps; sand or gravel, free from
rocks larger than one and one-half inch (1 ½”)
diameter. All materials shall be free from roots, sod,
or other vegetable matter.
In the event trench materials are not satisfactory for
pipe bedding, modified bedding will be required.
Modified bedding shall consist of placing compacted
granular material on each side of and to the level of
twelve-inches (12") above the top of the pipe.
Modified bedding material shall be graded as
follows: One-hundred percent (100%) passing a one
and one-half inch (1-1/2") screen and no more than
five percent (5%) passing a No. 4 sieve.
6.08 TESTS:
The Developer/Contractor or his representative shall
contract with a third party to have a video evaluation
of the entire sewer/storm drain system and provide a
copy of the video to the Public Works Department for
evaluation. The video shall indicate manhole
numbers relative to the “Approved Drawings” and a
running record of the footage of the pipe being
evaluated. Final approval of the installation of the
pipe system will not be given until the video has been
evaluated and work approved by the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer.
In the event that the video inspection is inconclusive,
any or all of the other required tests shall be
conducted in the presence of the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer or his representative. Tests shall
be performed as follows:
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
CONCRETE PIPE
6—3
1. Displacement Test:
In conducting the displacement test a light will be
flashed between manholes or, if the manholes
have not as yet been constructed, between the
locations of the manholes, by means of a
flashlight or by reflecting sunlight with a mirror.
If the illuminated interior of the pipe shows
broken, misaligned or displaced pipe or other
defects, the defects designated by the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer shall be remedied at
the Developer/Contractor's expense.
2. Infiltration Test:
The Developer/Contractor shall furnish labor,
equipment, and materials, including pumps, and
shall assist the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer in making infiltration tests of
the completed line before it can be placed into
service. The Developer/Contractor shall furnish
and install the measuring weirs or other
measuring devices. The length of line to be tested
at any time shall be subject to the approval of the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer. The
maximum allowable infiltration shall not exceed
one-hundred-fifty (150) gallons per inch diameter
per mile per twenty-four hours (24 hrs) for all
installed pipe. If the quantity of infiltration is in
excess of the maximum allowable, the leaking
joints shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer at the
expense of the Developer/Contractor.
3. Exfiltration Test:
The Developer/Contractor shall furnish labor,
equipment, and materials, including pumps, and
shall assist the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer in making ex-filtration tests of
the completed line before it can be placed into
service. The length of line to be tested at one
time shall be limited to the length between
adjacent manholes. The maximum allowable exfiltration
shall not exceed one-hundred-fifty (150)
gallons per inch diameter per mile per 24 hours
for all installed pipe. The end of the line that
projects into the manhole shall be plugged. The
pipe shall then be filled with water from the upper
manhole, and the line maintained under a light
pressure of four feet (4') of head. The inflow of
water necessary to maintain this head shall be
recorded as the leakage of the system. If the
quantity of ex-filtration is in excess of the
maximum allowable, the leaking joints shall be
repaired to the satisfaction of the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer at the expense of the
Developer/Contractor.
6.09 MANHOLE CONNECTIONS:
Concrete pipe connections to manholes shall be
achieved by use of manhole coupling adapters,
rubber gaskets, positive seal gasket system with 300
series nonmagnetic corrosion-resistant steel bands, or
grouting a bell or spigot pipe at the appropriate
locations. Connections shall meet the requirements of
Chapter 9, Manholes.
6.10 SERVICE LATERALS:
Concrete service laterals are not permitted.
6.11 DAMAGE AND REPAIR OF EXISTING
SYSTEMS AND APPURTENANCES:
The Developer/Contractor shall be responsible for the
protection of existing improvements, and any damage
resulting from its operations shall be its sole
responsibility.
Damage to the existing systems, laterals, or
appurtenances shall be repaired by acceptable and
approved methods.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PVC PLASTIC PIPE
7—1
7. PVC PLASTIC PIPE
7.01 GENERAL
7.02 PIPE
7.03 FITTINGS
7.04 PIPE LAYING
7.05 GRAVEL FOUNDATION FOR PIPE
7.06 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS FOR
LINE AND GRADE
7.07 PIPE BEDDING
7.08 TESTS
7.09 MANHOLE CONNECTIONS
7.10 LATERAL CONNECTIONS
7.11 DAMAGE AND REPAIR OF EXISTING
SYSTEMS AND APPURTENANCES
7.12 "GO/NO-GO" MANDREL PROOF
TESTING
7.01 GENERAL:
This section covers the requirements for PVC plastic
sewer and land drain pipe materials and installation
in sanitary sewer, land drain, storm drain, and other
gravity line construction.
7.02 PIPE:
PVC gravity sewer and land drain pipe and fittings
shall conform to ASTM D-3034, for diameters from
four-inch (4") to fifteen-inch (15") and ASTM F-679
for eighteen-inch (18") to twenty-seven-inch (27"),
with integral bell gasket joints. Rubber gaskets shall
be factory installed and conform to ASTM F-477.
Pipe shall be made of PVC plastic having a cell
classification of 12454A or 13364B (with minimum
tensile modulus of 500,000 PSI) as defined in ASTM
D-1784 and shall have a SDR of 35 and minimum
pipe stiffness of 46PSI according to ASTM test D-
2412.
Pipe shall be installed in compliance with ASTM D-
2321 and the manufacturer's requirements.
1. Minimum Size and Slope Requirements:
In no case shall sanitary sewer or land drain
mains be less than eight inches in diameter.
Sewers and land drains shall be laid with uniform
slope between manholes. All PVC plastic pipe
systems shall be designed and constructed to give
mean velocities of not less than 2 feet per second
when flowing full, based on Manning’s formula
using an n value of .013. Absolute minimum
slope allowed for sanitary sewers shall be those
published by the Utah Department of
Environmental Quality, Division of Water
Quality as Administrative Rules for Design
Requirements for Wastewater Collection,
Treatment and Disposal System, R317-3, Table
R317-3-2.3 (D)(4) Minimum Slopes.
Whenever possible the slope should exceed 0.005
ft/ft. The pipe should be sized to meet anticipated
hydraulic loads, increasing the pipe size to reduce
the minimum slope requirements shall not be
allowed. Sewer slopes shall not exceed 0.12 ft/ft,
drop manholes shall be used when steeper slopes
are needed, drop manholes shall be used to keep
line grade below maximum grade allowed.
7.03 FITTINGS:
Fittings shall be made of PVC plastic conforming to
ASTM D-1784 and a cell classification as outlined in
ASTM D-3034.
7.04 PIPE LAYING:
All pipe installation shall proceed upgrade on a stable
foundation, with joints closely and accurately fitted.
Joints shall be clean and dry, and a joint lubricant as
recommended by the pipe supplier shall be applied
uniformly to the mating joint surfaces to facilitate
easy positive joint closure.
Pipe shall be installed with uniform bearing under the
full length of the barrel, with suitable excavations
being made to receive pipe bells.
Select material shall be compacted around the pipe to
firmly bed the pipe in position. Haunching material
(bed to springline) should be carefully worked under
the haunches of the pipe and compacted from the
pipe to the trench wall or two and one half (2-1/2)
pipe diameters on each side of the pipe to ensure
support. If adjustment of position of a pipe length is
required after being laid, it shall be removed and rejointed
as for a new pipe. When pipe laying is not in
progress, the ends of the pipe shall be closed with a
tight-fitting stopper to prevent the entrance of foreign
material.
In addition to the above requirements, all pipe
installation shall rigidly adhere to the specific
requirements of the pipe manufacturer.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PVC PLASTIC PIPE
7—2
7.05 GRAVEL FOUNDATION FOR PIPE:
Wherever the subgrade material does not afford a
sufficiently solid foundation to support the pipe and
superimposed load, and where groundwater must be
drained, the subgrade shall be excavated to such
depth as may be necessary and replaced with crushed
rock or gravel compacted into place.
Gravel for PVC pipe foundation shall be clean
crushed rock or gravel with one hundred percent
(100%) passing a one-inch (1") screen and less than
five percent (5%) passing a No. 4 sieve.
7.06 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS
FOR LINE AND GRADE:
All PVC pipe shall be installed accurately to the
defined line and grade with the following limits.
Variance from established line and grade shall not be
greater than one-sixteenth (1/16) inch per inch of
pipe diameter in ten feet, and not to exceed one-half
inch in ten feet, provided that such variation does not
result in a level or reverse sloping invert; provided
also that variation in the invert elevation between
adjoining ends of pipe, due to non-concentricity of
joining surface and pipe interior surfaces, does not
exceed one-sixty-fourth (1/64) inch per inch of pipe
diameter, or one-half (1/2) inch maximum.
7.07 PIPE BEDDING:
All pipe sewers and drains shall be protected from
lateral displacement and possible damage resulting
from impact or unbalanced loading during backfilling
operations by being adequately bedded.
A groove shall be excavated in the bottom of the
trench to receive the bottom quadrant of the pipe.
Before preparing the groove, the trench bottom shall
be excavated or filled and compacted to an elevation
sufficiently above the grade of the pipe so that, when
completed, the pipe will be true to line and grade.
Bell holes shall be excavated so that only the barrel
of the pipe receives bearing from the trench bottom.
Pipe bedding materials placed at any point below the
mid-point of the pipe shall be deposited and
compacted in layers not to exceed ten-inches (10") in
uncompacted depth. Deposition and compaction of
bedding materials shall be done simultaneously and
uniformly on both sides of the pipe. Compaction
shall be accomplished with hand or mechanical
compactors. All bedding materials shall be placed in
the trench with hand tools or other approved method
in such a manner that they will be scattered alongside
the pipe and not dropped into the trench in compact
masses. Bedding materials shall be loose earth, free
from lumps; sand or gravel, free from rocks larger
than one-inch (1") diameter; with all materials free
from roots, sod, or other vegetable matter.
In the event trench materials are not satisfactory for
pipe bedding, modified bedding will be required.
Modified bedding shall consist of placing compacted
granular material on each side of and to the level of
twelve-inches (12") above the top of the pipe.
Modified bedding material shall be graded as
follows: One-hundred percent (100%) passing a one
and one-half inch (1-1/2") screen and five percent
(5%) passing a No. 4 sieve.
7.08 TESTS:
The Developer/Contractor will be required to conduct
an exfiltration and displacement test in the presence
of the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer or his
representative. If these tests prove to be
inconclusive, any or all of the other required tests
shall be conducted in the presence of the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer or his representative.
Tests shall be performed as follows:
1. Displacement Test:
In conducting the displacement test a light will be
flashed between manholes or, if the manholes
have not as yet been constructed, between the
locations of the manholes, by means of a
flashlight or by reflecting sunlight with a mirror.
If the illuminated interior of the pipe shows
broken, misaligned or displaced pipe or other
defects, the defects designated by the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer shall be remedied at
the Developer/Contractor's expense.
2. Infiltration Test:
The Developer/Contractor shall furnish labor,
equipment, and materials, including pumps, and
shall assist the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer in making infiltration tests of
the completed system before it can be placed into
service. The Developer/Contractor shall furnish
and install the measuring weirs or other
measuring devices. The length of line to be tested
at any time shall be subject to the approval of the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer. The
maximum allowable infiltration shall not exceed
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PVC PLASTIC PIPE
7—3
one-hundred-fifty (150) gallons per inch diameter
per mile per twenty-four hours (24 hrs) for all
installed pipe. If the quantity of infiltration is in
excess of the maximum allowable, the leaking
joints shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer at the
expense of the Developer/Contractor.
3. Exfiltration Test:
The Developer/Contractor shall furnish labor,
equipment, and materials, including pumps, and
shall assist the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer in making exfiltration tests of
the completed system before it can be placed into
service. The length of line to be tested at one
time shall be limited to the length between
adjacent manholes. The maximum allowable
exfiltration shall not exceed one-hundred-fifty
(150) gallons per inch diameter per mile per 24
hours for all installed pipe. The end of the system
line that projects into the manhole shall be
plugged. The pipe shall then be filled with water
from the upper manhole, and the line maintained
under a light pressure of four feet (4') of head.
The inflow of water necessary to maintain this
head shall be recorded as the leakage of the
system. If the quantity of exfiltration is in excess
of the maximum allowable, the leaking joints
shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer at the expense of the
Developer/Contractor.
4. Video Evaluation:
The Developer/Contractor or his representative
shall contract with a third party to have a video
evaluation of the entire PVC plastic pipe system
and provide a copy of the video to the Public
Works Department for evaluation. The video
shall indicate manhole numbers relative to the
“Approved Drawings” and a running record of the
footage of the PVC plastic pipe system pipe being
evaluated. Final approval of the installation of
the PVC plastic pipe system will not be given
until the video has been evaluated and work
approved by the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer.
7.09 MANHOLE CONNECTIONS:
PVC pipe connections to manholes shall be achieved
by use of manhole coupling adapters, rubber gaskets,
or positive seal gasket system with 300 series
nonmagnetic corrosion-resistant steel bands. PVC
may not be grouted directly to concrete. Connections
shall meet the requirements of Chapter 9, Manholes.
7.10 LATERAL CONNECTIONS:
All lateral connections onto system mains shall be
made through preformed tee fittings installed in the
main line at the time of main line installation.
Recommendations of manufacturer of the materials
used shall be carefully followed.
Connections onto existing system mains shall be
made with field installed service saddles (gasketed
and clamped). All connections by field installed
service saddles on existing system mains shall be
done with a sewer tapping machine and all required
fittings and materials. Connections shall be made as
shown on the Standard Drawing and at the location
specified herein, shown on the “Approved Drawings”
or as staked in the field.
1. Sewer Service Laterals:
New sanitary sewer service laterals shall be
constructed with materials and procedures as
specified herein.
Existing service laterals shall be constructed with
materials compatible with the existing laterals
with appropriate connections for joining the ends
of existing laterals. All laterals shall be four-inch
(4") in diameter unless shown otherwise.
a. Extent of Sewer Laterals and Location of
Laterals: New sewer laterals installed to lots
shall be located ten-foot (10’) uphill of the
lowest front property corner. Service laterals
shall extend from the sewer main to a point
ten-foot (10') beyond the street right-of-way
line unless shown or staked otherwise. A twoinch
(2") by four-inch (4") by six-foot (6')
marker, with the top twelve-inches (12")
painted green, shall be installed to clearly
mark the end of each lateral line. Said marker
shall extend a minimum of twenty-four inches
(24”) above the lateral and be at least twelveinches
(12”) below the surface of the rough
graded lot. In addition to the marker, the
Developer/Contractor shall provide to the
Community Development Department a typed
station (give a distance) sheet indicating the
location of the lateral on the lot relative to the
closest side lot line. Laterals shall be capped
with a cap suitable to withstand test pressure
and prevent any leakage into or out of the
lateral.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PVC PLASTIC PIPE
7—4
b. Existing Laterals: When an existing
sewer lateral is encountered along the line and
grade of a new pipeline it shall be relocated
using appropriate pipe and fittings and graded
to insure adequate slope to drain properly.
Minimum slope shall be one-quarter-inch
(1/4") per foot.
c. Excavation and Backfill: Trench
excavation and backfill shall conform to the
applicable paragraphs of Chapter 3 and the
bedding requirements of this Chapter.
d. Pipe: Pipe used for new service or
replacement laterals shall be white PVC
Plastic Pipe conforming to the International
Plumbing Code.2
e. Cover Over Sewer Lateral Lines: There
shall be a minimum of 3 feet of cover over all
sewer lateral lines (3’6” minimum at property
line.)
f. Sewer Clean Outs: There shall be a
maximum distance of 5 feet from the
foundation wall to the first exterior clean out
with a maximum distance between clean-outs
of one hundred (100) feet. There shall be a
clean out when a combination of bends is
ninety degree (90o) or greater. Sewer clean
outs shall be PVC Plastic Pipe or ABS Plastic
Pipe conforming to the International Plumbing
Code, clean out lids shall be brass for ease of
detection.2
g. Testing: The service laterals shall be
tested as a part of the sewer main to which
they are connected.
h. Magnetic Locator Tape: All pipe shall
include a 3-inch magnetic locator tape
installed in the pipeline trench. Tape shall run
from the curb line to the end of the pipe, run
up the marker board and is to be stapled in
place. The tape shall be located
approximately 12-inches above the pipe.
Identification tape shall be furnished with
white or black printing on a colored field
having the words “CAUTION: SEWER
LATERAL – BELOW” or other wording
clearly defining the lateral approved by the
Public Works Department.2
2. Land Drain Service Laterals:
New land drain service laterals shall be
constructed with materials and procedures as
specified herein.
Existing service laterals shall be constructed with
materials compatible with the existing laterals
with appropriate connections for joining the ends
of existing laterals. All laterals shall be four-inch
(4") in diameter unless shown otherwise.
a. Extent of Land Drain Laterals and
Location of Laterals: New land drain laterals
installed to lots shall be located a minimum of
ten-foot (10’) from any sanitary sewer lateral.
Service laterals shall extend from the main to
a point ten-foot (10') beyond the property line.
A two-inch (2") by four-inch (4") by six-foot
(6') marker, with the top twelve-inches (12")
painted red, shall be installed to clearly mark
the end of each lateral line. Said marker shall
extend a minimum of twenty-four inches (24”)
above the lateral and be at least twelve-inches
(12”) below the surface of the rough graded
lot. In addition to the marker, the
Developer/Contractor shall provide to the
Community Development Department a typed
station (give a distance) sheet indicating the
location of the lateral on the lot relative to the
closest side lot line. Laterals shall be capped
with a cap suitable to withstand test pressure
and prevent any leakage into or out of the
lateral.
b. Existing Land Drain Lateral: When an
existing land drain lateral is encountered along
the line and grade of a new pipeline it shall be
relocated using appropriate pipe and fittings
and graded to insure adequate slope to drain
properly. Minimum slope shall be onequarter-
inch (1/4") per foot.
c. Excavation and Backfill: Trench
excavation and backfill shall conform to the
applicable paragraphs of Chapter 3 and the
bedding requirements of this Chapter.
d. Pipe: Pipe used for new service or
replacement laterals shall be green PVC
Plastic Pipe conforming to the International
Plumbing Code.2
e. Cover Over Land Drain Lateral Lines:
There shall be a minimum of 3 feet of cover
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PVC PLASTIC PIPE
7—5
over all land drain lateral lines (3’6” minimum
at property line.)
f. Land Drain Clean Outs: There shall be a
maximum distance between clean-outs of one
hundred (100) feet. There shall be a clean out
when a combination of bends is ninety degree
(90o) or greater. Land drain clean outs shall
be PVC Plastic Pipe conforming to the
International Plumbing Code, clean out lids
shall be brass for ease of detection.2
g. Openings into a Land Drain: Land drains
shall extend without openings under dwelling
footings into gravel located under dwelling
slabs. In no instance shall perforated pipe be
placed where roots can infiltrate it.
h. Testing: The service laterals shall be
tested as a part of the land drain main to which
they are connected.
i. Introduction of Other Water Sources:
Land drain systems shall not have direct
connections to rain gutters, floor drains,
garage drains, window wells or other sources
that may contain contaminates, vegetation or
silts. Sump pumps may be connected to land
drains with a permit and inspection by the
building department.
j. Magnetic Locator Tape: All pipe shall
include a 3-inch magnetic locator tape
installed in the pipeline trench. Tape shall run
from the curb line to the end of the pipe, run
up the marker board and is to be stapled in
place. The tape shall be located
approximately 12-inches above the pipe.
Identification tape shall be furnished with
white or black printing on a colored field
having the words “CAUTION: LAND
DRAIN – BELOW” or other wording clearly
defining the lateral approved by the Public
Works Department.2
7.11 DAMAGE AND REPAIR OF EXISTING
SYSTEMS AND APPURTENANCES:
The Developer/Contractor shall be responsible for the
protection of existing improvements, and any damage
resulting from its operations shall be its sole
responsibility.
Damage to the existing PVC plastic pipe system,
laterals, or appurtenances shall be repaired by
acceptable and approved methods.
7.12 "GO/NO-GO" MANDREL PROOF
TESTING:
Not less than thirty (30) days after installation of the
flexible sewer or drain pipe, the
Developer/Contractor shall test the buried pipe to
insure that ring-deflection of the pipe does not exceed
five percent (5%) of the pipe's specified minimum
inside diameter (ID). This proof test shall establish
that the Developer/Contractor has installed the
flexible pipe in full compliance with the Project
Specifications thereby providing required pipe/soil
structural strength.
The Developer/Contractor, with Inspector present,
shall pull a "Go/No-Go" Mandrel, inspected and
approved by the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer,
through the full length of installed flexible pipe. The
Mandrel shall be fabricated from suitable metal with
a minimum of nine (9) properly sized radial fins
mounted upon a center-pulling shaft. In any case, the
Mandrel shall be provided with an odd number of
rigidly mounted radial fins. The Mandrel shall be
provided with a proof-sizing ring that can
demonstrate that the Mandrel's minimum outside
diameter (OD) is not less than ninety-five percent
(95%) of the specified minimum inside diameter of
the installed flexible pipe. The Mandrel shall be
pulled by the Developer/Contractor through one
hundred percent (100%) of the installed flexible pipe
without using mechanical equipment. Failure of the
Mandrel to pass through a pipeline shall be deemed
evidence of inadequate installation by the
Developer/Contractor not in compliance with the
Project Specifications.
The Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer may require,
if deemed appropriate or necessary, additional proof
testing of designated lengths of the buried flexible
pipe approximately one year (1 yr.) after installation
but prior to the expiration of the
Developer/Contractor's Maintenance Bond. The
flexible pipeline shall be cleaned adequately prior to
performing the "Go/No-Go" Mandrel ring deflection
proof test. The Developer/Contractor, with Inspector
present, shall pull a Mandrel, approved by the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer, through the designated
length of pipeline without using mechanical
equipment. Failure of the Mandrel to pass through
the pipeline shall be deemed evidence of inadequate
installation by the Developer/Contractor not in
compliance with the Project Specifications.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
POLYETHYLENE CORRUGATED PIPE
8—1
8. POLYETHYLENE CORRUGATED
PIPE
8.01 GENERAL
8.02 PIPE
8.03 JOINTS
8.04 PERFORATIONS
8.05 PIPE LAYING
8.06 GRAVEL FOUNDATION FOR PIPE
8.07 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS FOR
LINE AND GRADE
8.08 PIPE BEDDING
8.09 TESTS
8.10 MANHOLE CONNECTIONS
8.11 LATERAL CONNECTIONS
8.01 GENERAL:
This section covers the requirements for high-density
polyethylene corrugated pipe with integrally formed
smooth interior for use in land drain systems. Highdensity
polyethylene corrugated pipe with integrally
formed smooth interior shall not be used in Clinton
City except in cases where the approval has been
given as part of the “Approved Drawings” or the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer during on site
changes to the plans. Written documentation shall be
provided to the Community Development
Department for inclusion in the permanent file.
8.02 PIPE:
This specification is applicable to nominal sizes 12 -
36 inch diameter. Requirements for test methods,
dimensions, and markings are those found in
AASHTO Designation M-252 (3” – 10”) and M-294
(12” – 48”) and ASTM F-405 and F-667.
Pipe and fittings shall be made of polyethylene
compounds that meet or exceed the requirements of
Type III, Category 4 or 5, Grade P33 or P34, Class C
per ASTM Designation D-1248 with the applicable
requirements defined in ASTM D-1248. Clean
reworked material may be used.
Minimum parallel plate pipe stiffness values at 5%
deflection shall be as follows:
Diameter Pipe Stiffness*
12" 45 psi
15" 42 psi
18" 40 psi
24" 34 psi
30" 28 psi *Per ASTM Test
36" 22 psi Method D-2412
The pipe and fittings shall be free of foreign
inclusions and visible defects. The ends of the pipe
shall be cut squarely and cleanly so as not to
adversely effect joining.
The nominal size for the pipe and fittings is based on
the nominal inside diameter of the pipe. Corrugated
fittings maybe either molded or fabricated by the
manufacturer. Fittings produced by manufacturers
other than the supplier of the pipe shall not be
permitted without the approval of the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer. A manufacturers'
certification that the product was manufactured,
tested, and supplied in accordance with this
specification shall be furnished to the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer upon request.
Pipe installation shall be in accordance with ASTM
Recommended Practice D-2321 and the
manufacturer's requirements.
8.03 JOINTS:
Joints shall be made with bell and spigot meeting full
ASTM D3212 and ASTM F-477 (Elastomeric
gasket).
8.04 PERFORATIONS:
All perforated pipe used in the construction shall
have either circular or slotted perforations. Circular
perforations shall not be more that 5/16 in. nor less
than 3/16 in. in diameter, and arranged in rows
parallel to the axis of the pipe. Perforations shall be
3 in. center-to-center, along rows. The spigot or
tongue end shall not be perforated for a length equal
to the depth of the socket, or depth of the groove plus
3/4 in. and perforations shall continue at uniform
spacing along the entire length of the barrel. There
shall be a total of 8 rows for an 18-inch pipe. The
rows shall be spaced over not more than 165 deg of
circumference. Rows shall be symmetrically
arranged with respect to the intended top of bottom of
the pipe.
Slots shall be circumferential in direction, not more
than 3/16 in. or less than 1/8 in. in width, and 3 in.
long. The slots shall be spaced 6 in. apart. There
shall be two rows of slots, spaced 120o apart. The
distance from the spigot end, or from the shoulder of
the tongue end, to the first pair of slots shall be not
more than 1 in. greater than the specified slot
spacing, nor less than 1 in. less than the specified slot
spacing. Slots shall continue at uniform spacing
along the entire length of the barrel.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
POLYETHYLENE CORRUGATED PIPE
8—2
8.05 PIPE LAYING:
All pipe installation shall proceed upgrade on a stable
foundation, with joints closely and accurately fitted.
Pipe shall be installed with uniform bearing under the
full length of the barrel, with suitable excavations
being made to receive pipe joints.
Select material shall be compacted around the pipe to
firmly bed the pipe in position. Haunching material
(bed to springline) should be carefully worked under
the haunches of the pipe and compacted from the
pipe to the trench wall, or two and one-half (2-1/2)
pipe diameters on each side of the pipe, to ensure
support. If adjustment of position of a pipe length is
required after being laid, it shall be removed and rejointed
as for a new pipe. When pipe laying is not in
progress, the ends of the pipe shall be closed with a
tight-fitting stopper to prevent the entrance of foreign
material.
In addition to the above requirements, all pipe
installation shall rigidly adhere to the specific
requirements of the pipe manufacturer.
8.06 GRAVEL FOUNDATION FOR PIPE:
Wherever the subgrade material does not afford a
sufficiently solid foundation to support the pipe and
superimposed load, and where groundwater must be
drained, the subgrade shall be excavated to such
depth as may be necessary and replaced with crushed
rock or gravel compacted into place.
Gravel for pipe foundation shall be clean crushed
rock or gravel with one hundred percent (100%)
passing a one-inch (1") screen and less than five
percent (5%) passing a No. 4 sieve.
8.07 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS
FOR LINE AND GRADE:
All pipe shall be installed accurately to the defined
line and grade with the following limits:
Variance from established line and grade shall not be
greater than one-sixteenth (1/16) inch per inch of
pipe diameter in ten feet, and not to exceed one-half
inch in ten feet, provided that such variation does not
result in a level or reverse sloping invert; provided
also that variation in the invert elevation between
adjoining ends of pipe, due to non-concentricity of
joining surface and pipe interior surfaces, does not
exceed one-sixty-fourth (1/64) inch per inch of pipe
diameter, or one-half (1/2) inch maximum.
8.08 PIPE BEDDING:
Pipe bedding shall be in accordance with the
manufactures requirements. Generally all pipe shall
be protected from lateral displacement and possible
damage resulting from impact or unbalanced loading
during backfilling operations by being adequately
bedded.
A groove shall be excavated in the bottom of the
trench to receive the bottom quadrant of the pipe.
Before preparing the groove, the trench bottom shall
be excavated or filled and compacted to an elevation
sufficiently above the grade of the pipe so that, when
completed, the pipe will be true to line and grade.
Joint holes shall be excavated so that only the barrel
of the pipe receives bearing from the trench bottom.
Pipe bedding materials placed at any point below the
mid-point of the pipe shall be deposited and
compacted in layers not to exceed ten-inches (10") in
uncompacted depth. Deposition and compaction of
bedding materials shall be done simultaneously and
uniformly on both sides of the pipe. Compaction
shall be accomplished with hand or mechanical
compactors. All bedding materials shall be placed in
the trench with hand tools or other approved method
in such a manner that they will be scattered alongside
the pipe and not dropped into the trench in compact
masses. Bedding materials shall be loose earth, free
from lumps; sand or gravel, free from rocks larger
than one and one-half inch (1-1/2") diameter; with all
materials free from roots, sod, or other vegetable
matter.
In the event trench materials are not satisfactory for
pipe bedding, modified bedding will be required.
Modified bedding shall consist of placing compacted
granular material on each side of and to the level of
twelve-inches (12") above the top of the pipe.
Modified bedding material shall be graded as
follows: One hundred percent (100%) passing a No.
4 sieve and less than five percent (5%) passing a No.
200 sieve.
8.09 TESTS:
The Developer/Contractor will be required to conduct
a displacement test in the presence of the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer or his representative. If
this test proves to be inconclusive, other required
tests shall be conducted in the presence of the Public
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
POLYETHYLENE CORRUGATED PIPE
8—3
Facilities Inspector/Engineer or his representative.
The test shall be performed as follows:
1. Displacement Test:
In conducting the displacement test a light will be
flashed between manholes or, if the manholes
have not as yet been constructed, between the
locations of the manholes, by means of a
flashlight or by reflecting sunlight with a mirror.
2. Manufactures Suggested Procedures:
If the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer has
doubts as to the successful results of a
displacement test the manufactures recommended
procedures shall be followed.
3. Test Failure:
If the test results show broken, misaligned, or
displaced pipe or other defects, the defects
designated by the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer shall be remedied at the
Developer/Contractor's expense.
8.10 MANHOLE CONNECTIONS:
Corrugated polyethylene pipe connections to
manholes shall be achieved by use of manhole
coupling adapters, rubber boots with 300 series
nonmagnetic corrosion-resistant steel bands, or
grouted directly to concrete.
8.11 LATERAL CONNECTIONS:
All lateral connections into new mains shall be
through preformed tee fittings installed in the main
line or with field installed service saddles. All
connections by field installed service saddles on new
or existing mains shall be done in accordance with
manufacturer recommendations and with all required
fittings and materials. Connections shall be at the
locations shown in the Drawings.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
POLYETHYLENE CORRUGATED PIPE WITH WATER TIGHT JOINTS
9—1
9. POLYETHYLENE CORRUGATED
PIPE WITH WATER TIGHT JOINTS
9.01 GENERAL
9.02 PIPE
9.03 FITTINGS
9.04 JOINTS
9.05 PIPE LAYING
9.06 GRAVEL FOUNDATION FOR PIPE
9.07 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS FOR
LINE AND GRADE
9.08 PIPE BEDDING
9.09 TESTS
9.10 MANHOLE CONNECTIONS
9.11 LATERAL CONNECTIONS
9.12 "GO/NO-GO" MANDREL PROOF TESTING
9.01 GENERAL:
This section covers the requirements for high-density
polyethylene corrugated pipe with integrally formed
smooth interior for use in storm drains with watertight
joints. High-density polyethylene corrugated pipe
with integrally formed smooth interior shall not be
used in Clinton City except in cases where the
approval has been given as part of the “Approved
Drawings” or the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer
during on site changes to the plans. Written
documentation shall be provided to the Community
Development Department for inclusion in the
permanent file.
9.02 PIPE:
This specification is applicable to nominal sizes 14 - 18
inch diameter. Requirements for test methods,
dimensions, and markings are those found in AASHTO
Designation M-252 (3” – 10”) and M-294 (12” – 48”)
and ASTM F-405 and F-667.
Pipe shall be made of polyethylene compounds that
meet or exceed the requirements of Type III, Category
4 or 5, Grade P33 or P34, Class C per ASTM
Designation D-1248 with the applicable requirements
defined in ASTM D-1248. Clean reworked material
may be used.
Minimum parallel plate pipe stiffness values shall be as
follows:
Diameter Pipe Stiffness*
4" 50 psi
6" 50 psi
8" 50 psi
10" 50 psi
12" 45 psi *Per ASTM Test
15" 42 psi Method D-2412
18" 40 psi
The pipe and fittings shall be free of foreign inclusions
and visible defects. For pipe sizes 12" diameter and
greater, holes of any kind in the corrugation crests or
sidewalls shall be considered unacceptable. The ends
of the pipe shall be cut squarely and cleanly so as not to
adversely effect joining.
The nominal size for the pipe and fittings is based on
the nominal inside diameter of the pipe. Fittings shall
be molded by the manufacturer. Fittings produced by
manufacturers other than the supplier of the pipe shall
not be permitted.
A manufacturer's certification that the product was
manufactured, tested, and supplied in accordance with
this specification shall be furnished to the Project
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer upon request.
Pipe installation shall be in accordance with ASTM
Recommended Practice D-2321 and the manufacturer's
requirements.
9.03 FITTINGS:
Fittings shall be molded from SDR-35 PVC pipe
manufactured in accordance with the applicable
requirements defined in ASTM D-3034.
9.04 JOINTS:
Joints shall be made with bell and spigot meeting full
ASTM D3212 and ASTM F-477 (Elastomeric
gasket).
9.05 PIPE LAYING:
All pipe installation shall proceed upgrade on a stable
foundation, with joints closely and accurately fitted.
Pipe shall be installed with uniform bearing under the
full length of the barrel, with suitable excavations being
made to receive pipe joints.
Select material shall be compacted around the pipe to
firmly bed the pipe in position. Haunching material
(bed to springline) should be carefully worked under
the haunches of the pipe and compacted from the pipe
to the trench wall or two and one half (2-1/2) pipe
diameters on each side of the pipe to ensure support. If
adjustment of position of a pipe length is required after
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
POLYETHYLENE CORRUGATED PIPE WITH WATER TIGHT JOINTS
9—2
being laid, it shall be removed and re-jointed as for a
new pipe. When laying is not in progress, the ends of
the pipe shall be closed with a tight-fitting stopper to
prevent the entrance of foreign material.
In addition to the above requirements, all pipe
installation shall rigidly adhere to the specific
requirements of the pipe manufacturer.
9.06 GRAVEL FOUNDATION FOR PIPE:
Wherever the subgrade material does not afford a
sufficiently solid foundation to support the pipe and
superimposed load, or where groundwater must be
drained, the subgrade shall be excavated to such depth
as may be necessary and replaced with crushed rock or
gravel compacted into place.
Gravel for pipe foundation shall be clean crushed rock
or gravel with one hundred percent (100%) passing a
one-inch (1") screen and less than five percent (5%)
passing a No. 4 sieve.
9.07 INSTALLATION REQUIREMENTS
FOR LINE AND GRADE:
All pipe shall be installed accurately to the defined line
and grade with the following limits:
Variance from established line and grade shall not be
greater than one-sixteenth (1/16) inch per inch of pipe
diameter in ten feet, and not to exceed one-half inch in
ten feet, provided that such variation does not result in a
level or reverse sloping invert; provided also that
variation in the invert elevation between adjoining ends
of pipe, due to non-concentricity of joining surface and
pipe interior surfaces, does not exceed one-sixty-fourth
(1/64) inch per inch of pipe diameter, or one-half (1/2)
inch maximum.
9.08 PIPE BEDDING:
All pipe systems and drains shall be protected from
lateral displacement and possible damage resulting
from impact or unbalanced loading during backfilling
operations by being adequately bedded.
A groove shall be excavated in the bottom of the trench
to receive the bottom quadrant of the pipe. Before
preparing the groove, the trench bottom shall be
excavated or filled and compacted to an elevation
sufficiently above the grade of the pipe so that, when
completed, the pipe will be true to line and grade. Joint
holes shall be excavated so that only the barrel of the
pipe receives bearing from the trench bottom.
Pipe bedding materials placed at any point below the
mid-point of the pipe shall be deposited and compacted
in layers not to exceed ten-inches (10") in uncompacted
depth. Deposition and compaction of bedding
materials shall be done simultaneously and uniformly
on both sides of the pipe. Compaction shall be
accomplished with hand or mechanical compactors.
All bedding materials shall be placed in the trench with
hand tools or other approved method in such a manner
that they will be scattered alongside the pipe and not
dropped into the trench in compact masses. Bedding
materials shall be loose earth, free from lumps; sand or
gravel, free from rocks larger than one and one-half
inch (1-1/2") diameter; with all materials free from
roots, sod, or other vegetable matter.
In the event trench materials are not satisfactory for
pipe bedding, modified bedding will be required.
Modified bedding shall consist of placing compacted
granular material on each side of and to the level of
twelve-inches (12") above the top of the pipe.
Modified bedding material shall be graded as follows:
One-hundred percent (100%) passing a No. 4 sieve and
less than five percent (5%) passing a No. 200 sieve.
9.09 TESTS:
The Developer/Contractor will be required to conduct
an exfiltration and displacement test in the presence of
the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer or his
representative. If these tests prove to be inconclusive,
any or all of the other required tests shall be conducted
in the presence of the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer or his representative. Tests shall be
performed as follows:
1. Displacement Test:
In conducting the displacement test a light will be
flashed between manholes or, if the manholes
have not as yet been constructed, between the
locations of the manholes, by means of a
flashlight or by reflecting sunlight with a mirror.
If the illuminated interior of the pipe shows
broken, misaligned or displaced pipe or other
defects, the defects designated by the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer shall be remedied at
the Developer/Contractor's expense.
2. Infiltration Test:
The Developer/Contractor shall furnish labor,
equipment, and materials, including pumps, and
shall assist the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer in making infiltration tests of
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
POLYETHYLENE CORRUGATED PIPE WITH WATER TIGHT JOINTS
9—3
the completed line before it can be placed into
service. The Developer/Contractor shall furnish
and install the measuring weirs or other
measuring devices. The length of line to be tested
at any time shall be subject to the approval of the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer. The
maximum allowable infiltration shall not exceed
one-hundred-fifty (150) gallons per inch diameter
per mile per twenty-four hours (24 hrs) for all
installed pipe. If the quantity of infiltration is in
excess of the maximum allowable, the leaking
joints shall be repaired to the satisfaction of the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer at the
expense of the Developer/Contractor.
3. Ex-filtration Test:
The Developer/Contractor shall furnish labor,
equipment, and materials, including pumps, and
shall assist the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer in making ex-filtration tests of
the completed line before it can be placed into
service. The length of line to be tested at one
time shall be limited to the length between
adjacent manholes. The maximum allowable exfiltration
shall not exceed one-hundred-fifty (150)
gallons per inch diameter per mile per 24 hours
for all installed pipe. The end of the line that
projects into the manhole shall be plugged. The
pipe shall then be filled with water from the upper
manhole, and the line maintained under a light
pressure of four feet (4') of head. The inflow of
water necessary to maintain this head shall be
recorded as the leakage of the system. If the
quantity of ex-filtration is in excess of the
maximum allowable, the leaking joints shall be
repaired to the satisfaction of the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer at the expense of the
Developer/Contractor.
4. Video Evaluation:
The Developer/Contractor or his representative
shall contract with a third party to have a video
evaluation of the entire system and provide a
copy of the video to the Public Works
Department for evaluation. The video shall
indicate manhole numbers relative to the
“Approved Drawings” and a running record of the
footage of the pipe being evaluated. Final
approval of the installation of the system will not
be given until the video has been evaluated and
work approved by the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer.
9.10 MANHOLE CONNECTIONS:
Corrugated polyethylene pipe connections to
manholes shall be achieved by use of manhole
coupling adapters, rubber boots with 300 series
nonmagnetic corrosion-resistant steel bands, or
grouted directly to concrete.
9.11 LATERAL CONNECTIONS:
All lateral connections into new mains shall be
through preformed tee fittings installed in the main
line or with field installed service saddles. All
connections by field installed service saddles on new
or existing mains shall be done in accordance with
manufacturers recommendations and with all
required fittings and materials. Connections shall be
at the locations shown in the Drawings.
9.12 "GO/NO-GO" MANDREL PROOF
TESTING:
Not less than thirty (30) days after installation of the
flexible polyethylene corrugated pipe or drain pipe,
the Developer/Contractor shall test the buried pipe to
insure that ring-deflection of the pipe does not exceed
five percent (5%) of the pipe's specified minimum
inside diameter (ID). This proof test shall establish
that the Developer/Contractor has installed the
flexible pipe in full compliance with the Project
Specifications thereby providing required pipe/soil
structural strength.
The Developer/Contractor, with Inspector present,
shall pull a "Go/No-Go" Mandrel, inspected and
approved by the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer,
through the full length of installed flexible pipe. The
Mandrel shall be fabricated from suitable metal with
a minimum of nine (9) properly sized radial fins
mounted upon a center-pulling shaft. In any case, the
Mandrel shall be provided with an odd number of
rigidly mounted radial fins. The Mandrel shall be
provided with a proof-sizing ring that can
demonstrate that the Mandrel's minimum outside
diameter (OD) is not less than ninety-five percent
(95%)of the specified minimum inside diameter of
the installed flexible pipe. The Mandrel shall be
pulled by the Developer/Contractor through onehundred
percent (100%) of the installed flexible pipe
without using mechanical equipment. Failure of the
Mandrel to pass through a pipeline shall be deemed
evidence of inadequate installation by the
Developer/Contractor not in compliance with the
Project Specifications.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
POLYETHYLENE CORRUGATED PIPE WITH WATER TIGHT JOINTS
9—4
The Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer may require,
if deemed appropriate or necessary, additional proof
testing of designated lengths of the buried flexible
pipe approximately one year (1 yr) after installation
but prior to the expiration of the
Developer/Contractor's Maintenance Bond. The
flexible pipeline shall be cleaned adequately prior to
performing the "Go/No-Go" Mandrel ring deflection
proof test. The Developer/Contractor, with Inspector
present, shall pull a Mandrel, approved by the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer, through the designated
length of pipeline without using mechanical
equipment. Failure of the Mandrel to pass through
the pipeline shall be deemed evidence of inadequate
installation by the Developer/Contractor not in
compliance with the Project Specifications.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
MANHOLES
10—1
10. MANHOLES
10.01 GENERAL
10.02 CONCRETE BASE
10.03 MANHOLE SIZE
10.04 WALL AND CONE SECTIONS
10.05 DROP MANHOLES
10.06 MANHOLE RINGS AND COVERS
10.07 CONNECTIONS TO EXISTING SYSTEMS
10.08 INCOMING SEWER LINES
10.01 GENERAL:
This division covers the requirements for manhole
materials and installation. Manholes shall be
installed at the locations and at the depth shown on
the drawings. Manholes shall be furnished complete
with cast-iron rings and covers. These requirements
apply to all manholes unless specifically detailed
otherwise.
10.02 CONCRETE BASE:
Unless otherwise noted manhole bases shall be
precast and shall have pipe inverts and a resilient
connection between pipe and manhole for each pipe
connecting to the manhole.
Where piped lines pass through or enter manholes,
the invert channels shall be smooth and semi-circular
in cross section, conforming to the details shown on
the Drawings. Changes of direction of flow within
the manholes shall be made with a smooth curve with
as long a radius as possible. The floor of the manhole
outside the flow channels shall be smooth and slope
toward the channel at not less than one-half inch
(1/2“) per foot.
Concrete pipe connections to manholes shall be
achieved by use of manhole coupling adapters,
rubber gaskets, positive seal gasket system, or
grouting a bell or spigot pipe at the appropriate
locations. Rubber gaskets or boots shall be made of
rubber compound meeting ASTM C-923
Specifications for resilient connections between pipe
and manhole. They shall meet all other applicable
ASTM specifications, including ASTM F-477.
Positive seal gasket systems boot shall have a wall
thickness of three-eighths inch (3/8”). The boot shall
either be “cast-in-place” in the precast base or
attached to the precast base by means of an internal
expanding band. When the boot is attached to the
precast base, a watertight seal between the boot and
the precast base must be accomplished. An external
band (take-up clamp) shall be supplied and used to
clamp and seal the boot to the pipe. The band shall be
made of 300 series nonmagnetic corrosion-resistant
steel. After the band has been placed, it shall be
completely coated with a bituminous material
approved by the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer.
PVC pipe connections to manholes shall be achieved
by use of manhole coupling adapters, rubber gaskets,
or positive seal gasket system. PVC may not be
grouted directly to concrete.
The maximum size pipe that can be used in a 48-inch
manhole is twenty-four (24”) inch PVC or twentyone
(21”) inch concrete. For pipes larger than these
require a 60-inch manhole or concrete box.
Concrete for manhole bases shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 12, Portland Cement
Concrete, of these Specifications.
10.03 MANHOLE SPACING:2
Manholes shall be spaced a maximum of 500 feet
apart or whenever there is a change in direction as
outlined in this ordinance.
10.04 MANHOLE SIZE:
1. Sanitary Sewer:
Whenever a sewer main changes direction 135° or
less in a manhole or where more than two mains
come together in a manhole the manhole shall be
60” diameter. Manholes that are spaced for clean
out distance requirements and the sewer main is
straight through the manhole shall be 48”. Dead
end manholes, as in the case of a cul-de-sac where
laterals enter into the manhole the manhole shall
be 60”.2
2. Land Drain:
Whenever a land drain main changes direction
135° or less in a manhole or where more than two
mains come together in a manhole the manhole
shall be 60” diameter. Manholes that are spaced
for clean out distance requirements and the land
drain main is straight through the manhole shall
be 48”. Dead end manholes, as in the case of a
cul-de-sac where laterals enter into the manhole
the manhole may be 48”.2
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
MANHOLES
10—2
10.05 WALL AND CONE SECTIONS:
1. Precast:
All manholes shall be precast, sectional,
reinforced concrete pipe of forty-eight-inch (48")
or sixty-inch (60”) diameter as specified. Both
cylindrical and taper sections shall conform to all
requirements of ASTM Designation C-478-88 (or
latest revision) for Precast Reinforced Concrete
Manhole Sections.
EXCEPTIONS:
a. The throat section of the manhole shall be
adjustable, by use of manhole sections, up to
forty-eight inches (48") in height.
b. The taper section shall be a maximum of
thirty-six inches (36”) in height for 48-inch
manholes and thirty-nine inches (39”) for 60-
inch manholes, shall be of eccentric conical
design, and shall taper uniformly to thirty
inches (30") inside diameter.
c. The pipe used in the base section shall be
furnished in section lengths of one, two, three,
and four-feet (1, 2, 3, and 4 feet) as required.
All joint surfaces of precast sections and the face
of the manhole base shall be thoroughly cleaned
and wet prior to setting precast sections. All
joints, including grade rings, shall be set in mortar
or butyl rubber gasket. The mortar shall consist
of one (1) part cement and one and one-half
(1-1/2) parts sand with sufficient water added to
bring the mixture to workable consistency or the
joints shall be sealed with a butyl rubber gasket
that is permanently flexible and
non-shrinking. All joints shall be water tight and
free from appreciable irregularities in the interior
wall surface.
2. Manholes Shall Be Furnished With Steps:
The steps are to be made of co-polymer
polypropylene. The co-polymer polypropylene
used shall conform to ASTM D-4101-82
PP200B33450Z02. The steel used in
manufacturing of this product shall be a deformed
½” reinforcing rod. This material shall be grade
60 and conform to the requirements of ASTM A-
615.
10.06 DROP MANHOLES:
When the difference in elevation of an incoming
sewer is 24-inches or greater a drop manhole shall be
used. The drop manhole shall be constructed as
shown in the Standard Drawings. The piping from
the wye to the manhole on both legs shall be ductile
iron or PVC pipe with appropriate fittings. If the
sewer main that the drop manhole is a part of is
concrete, then a transition coupling (Fernco) shall be
used to connect the main with the drop pipe
assembly.
The drop pipe assembly shall be encased in flowable
fill. The flowable fill shall be placed to the minimum
thickness as shown on the Standard Drawings.
1. Cement:
Use Portland Cement, Type II per Chapter 12,
Portland Cement Concrete.
2. Fly Ash:
Supply fly ash that complies with ASTM C-618
Class F except that the loss on ignition must be 3
percent or less.
3. Fine Aggregate:
Use natural sand. The sand shall meet the
following gradation when tested in accordance
with AASHTO T-27.
Fine Aggregate
Sieve Size Percent Passing
No. ¾ 100
No. 100 0-10
4. Mix Design:
The mix design shall meet the following
requirements:
a. Mix design compressive strength (28 day)
– between 50 to 150 psi.
b. Portland Cement – at least 50 pounds per
cubic yard.
c. Fly Ash – at least 300 pounds per cubic
yard.
d. Slump – 6 to 10 inches maximum.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
MANHOLES
10—3
10.07 MANHOLE RINGS AND COVERS:
All iron casting shall conform to the requirements of
ASTM Designation A-48 (Class 35) for gray iron
castings, free from blowholes and shrinkage defects.
Castings shall be free from fins and burrs and shall be
shot-blasted to remove sand and other foreign matter.
Rings and covers shall be equal to the twenty-four
inch (24") Standard circular, with machined bearing
surfaces, gravity, solid, non-rocking type. The
minimum weight of the cover shall be one hundred
sixty (160) pounds. The minimum weight of the ring
shall be two hundred eighty (280 lbs.). Other than
sanitary sewer manhole lids, which shall be the
vented type each cover shall contain one (1) pick
hole but shall not contain air vent holes. The tops
of the cover and ring shall be flush and there shall be
1/8-inch clearance between the cover and the ring. In
addition to the foundry name and year of manufacture,
the cover shall be marked "SEWER," “STORM
DRAIN,” “DRAIN,” or “IRRIGATION” as
appropriate.
1. Setting of Manhole Frames and Covers:
Manhole rings shall be set in place with the shaft
in Kent Seal. Covers shall be set to the finished
grade and contour of the existing street. Rings
and covers shall be protected during backfilling
and compaction of the soil and during the placing
or replacing of road surfaces. Any rings or covers
loosened from the manhole sections shall be reset
in cement mortar and any rings or covers
damaged or broken shall be replace by the
Developer/Contractor at its expense. Manholes
placed in asphalt surfacing shall be constructed
such that the cast iron ring is one-sixteenth inch
(1/16”) lower than the pavement. Brick shall not
be used to raise the manhole. Cones shall not be
broken out to lower the ring to meet the road
grade. Sections shall be removed and grade rings
or adapter rings (riser) used.
10.08 CONNECTIONS TO EXISTING
SYSTEMS:
Manholes used to connect into an existing system
shall be plumb and centered on the existing pipe at
the elevation designated and the base placed as
specified. Care shall be taken not to disturb the
alignment of the existing system.
The cutting of the existing pipe shall be done in the
presence of the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer.
The cut shall be full area of the new pipe and shall be
finished so as to leave no projections that will restrict
the flow or catch solids.
Every precaution shall be taken to prevent any
material from entering the main. Any such materials
entering the system shall be removed.
10.09 INCOMING SEWER LINES:
In no case shall an incoming sanitary sewer be
allowed to drop more that 24-inches to the base.
Sewer lines where the grade is higher than 24-inches
above the existing base; a drop manhole connection
shall be used. In all cases the base shall have a
channel for the incoming sewage.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
VALVES, COUPLINGS, AND FIRE HYDRANTS
11—1
11. VALVES, COUPLINGS, AND FIRE
HYDRANTS
11.01 GENERAL
11.02 RESILIENT SEATED GATE VALVE
11.03 BUTTERFLY VALVE
11.04 VALVE BOXES
11.05 COUPLINGS
11.06 FIRE HYDRANTS
11.07 BLOWOFF VALVE
11.01 GENERAL:
This section covers distribution valves to be used in
the water system, couplings, and fire hydrants.
11.02 RESILIENT SEATED GATE VALVE:
Valves in sizes 4" through 12" shall be of the iron
body, non rising bronze stem, resilient seated type,
manufactured to equal or exceed all applicable
AWWA standards of C-509 latest revision and all
specific requirements outlined in these specifications.
a. Valves shall open left and be provided
with 2" square operating wrench nuts unless
otherwise specified.
b. When valves have Mechanical Joints,
they shall be furnished with all necessary
glands, followers, and bolts and nuts to
complete installation.
c. The disc shall have integrally cast ASTM
B-62 bronze stem nut to prevent twisting,
binding or angling of the stem. Designs with
loose stem nuts are not acceptable.
d. Bronze valve stems shall be
interchangeable with stems of the double disc
valves of the same size, direction of opening
and manufacture.
e. All internal ferrous surfaces shall be
coated, holiday free, to a minimum thickness
of 4 mills with a two part thermo setting
epoxy coating. Said coating shall be nontoxic,
impart no taste to the water, formulated
from materials deemed acceptable in the Food
and Drug Administration Document Title 21
of the Federal Regulations on food additives,
Section 121.2514 entitled Resins and
Polymeric Coatings. It shall protect all
seating and adjacent surfaces from corrosion
and prevent build-up of scale or tuberculation.
f. The sealing element shall be secured to
the disc with self-locking stainless steel
screws, and it shall be field replaceable, and
shall be such that it cannot be installed
improperly.
g. Stem failure from excessive torque in
either the open or closing position shall occur
externally at such a point as to enable the stem
to be safely turned by use of a readily
available tool after exposure of the valve
through excavation.
h. Valve design shall incorporate a positive
metal-to-metal stop to prevent overcompression
of the sealing element.
i. A full-faced composition gasket placed
between machined body and bonnet flanges is
required to eliminate cold flow or creep action
present with "O" ring gasketed bodies.
j. Valves shall have a test plug in the bonnet
area to vent air and allow line pressure testing.
k. The exterior of the valves shall be
Asphalt Varnish, JAN-P-450. If exterior
epoxy is used, all bolts and nuts shall be made
of Stainless Steel to prevent galvanic
corrosion of said nuts and bolts due to
insulation from the ferrous valve and line.
11.03 BUTTERFLY VALVE:
All butterfly valves shall conform to the latest
revision of AWWA Standard C-504, Class 150-B,
and comply with the following:
a. Valve bodies shall be cast iron, ASTM A-
126 Class B. Body ends shall be flanged with
facing and drilling in accordance with ANSI
B16.1, Class 125; or mechanical joint in
accordance with AWWA C-111. All
mechanical joint end valves shall be furnished
complete with joint accessories (bolts, nuts,
gaskets, and glands). All valves shall conform
to AWWA Standard C-504, Table 3, Laying
Lengths for Flanged Valves and Minimum
Body Shell Thickness for all Body Types.
b. Valve disc shall be ductile iron ASTM A-
536, grade 65-45-12. Valve disc shall be of
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
VALVES, COUPLINGS, AND FIRE HYDRANTS
11—2
the offset design providing 360 degree
uninterrupted seating.
c. The resilient seat shall be natural rubber
bonded to an 18-8, Type 304 stainless steel
retaining ring secured to the disc by 18-8,
Type 304 stainless steel screws. The seat
shall be capable of mechanical adjustment in
the field and field replaceable without the
need for special tools. Valve body seat shall
be 18-8, Type 304 Stainless Steel.
d. Valve shafts shall be 18-8, Type 304
stainless steel. Shafts shall be of the twopiece
stub design and attached to the disc by
means of "O" ring sealed taper pins with lock
nuts.
e. The valve assembly shall be furnished
with a non-adjustable factory set thrust
bearing designed to center the valve disc at all
times.
f. Shaft bearings shall be contained in the
integral hubs of the valve body and shall be
self-lubricated sleeve type.
g. Valve shaft seal shall consist of "O"
Rings. Where the valve shaft projects through
the valve body for actuator connection, the
"O" Ring packing seal shall be field
replaceable as a part of a removable bronze
cartridge.
h. When manual actuators are required they
shall be of the traveling nut design capable of
withstanding 450 foot pounds of input torque
against the open and closed stops. All
actuators shall have adjustable mechanical
stop limits. The closed position stop shall be
externally adjustable. Valves shall be
installed with the shaft horizontal unless
otherwise directed by the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer and shall be provided with
a 2-inch square operating nut for manually
operating the valve with a "T" handle wrench.
i. All valves shall be coated with epoxy in
conformance to AWWA Standard C-550,
latest revision. Interior wetted ferrous
surfaces shall be coated nominal 10 mils thick
for long life; and body exterior shall have a
minimum of 3 to 4 mils coating thickness in
order to provide superior base for fieldapplied
finish coats.
11.04 VALVE BOXES:
All buried valves shall be installed complete with
two-piece, cast iron, telescoping type, 5-1/4-inch
shaft valve box. The lid shall have the words
"Water" cast in the metal.
Valves and valve boxes shall be installed where
shown on the drawings. Valves and valve boxes
shall be set plumb. Valve boxes shall be centered
directly over the valve. Valves shall be aligned with
property lines where possible. Earth fill shall be
carefully tamped around the valve box to a distance
of four (4) feet on all sides of the box, or to the
undisturbed trench face if less than four (4) feet.
Valves shall have the interiors cleaned of all foreign
matter before installation. All valve boxes located in
streets shall be installed to grade. Valves placed in
asphalt surfacing shall be constructed such that the
cast iron ring is one-sixteenth inch (1/16”) lower than
the pavement.
Valve boxes in off-road areas shall extend six (6)
inches above grade.
11.05 COUPLINGS:
Couplings shall be equal to the product of Smith-
Blair or Dresser with ductile iron couplings being
used on all ductile iron and PVC pipe. Couplings
shall be of the straight, transition, or reducing style as
required by the specific installation. Where the
coupling is used to join a ductile iron line to a PVC
line appropriate transition gaskets will be used. All
steel fittings and bolts shall be coated with a nonoxide
coating and wrapped with polyethylene as
outlined in § 3.02.D above.
11.06 FIRE HYDRANTS:
Fire hydrants shall be "traffic model" type designed
to conform to AWWA Specification C-502 and shall
be of the compression type. Hydrants shall be
Mueller "Super Centurion 200" or equal.
Hydrant valves shall be a minimum of 9-inch size.
Hydrants shall be supplied complete with two 2 1/2-
inch hose nozzles and one 4 1/2-inch pumper nozzle.
All nozzles shall be provided with National Standard
Threading. A one cubic yard gravel sump shall be
provided at each hydrant. All hydrants shall be
mechanical joint end and shall be connected to the
main by means of a mechanical joint by flanged tee
and flanged by mechanical joint auxiliary gate valve
and box as shown on the Standard Drawings. Each
hydrant shall also be supplied with O-ring seals, a
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
VALVES, COUPLINGS, AND FIRE HYDRANTS
11—3
National Standard pentagon operating nut that is
designed for clockwise rotation closing, and a 9-inch
mechanical joint inlet. All hydrants shall be flanged
and be connected to a gate valve that is “flanged x
mechanical joint” and shall be connected to the main
line by a “tee’ that is mechanical joint.
11.07 BLOWOFF VALVE:
A blow-off valve is required on the culinary system
in cul-de-sac’s and in temporary dead-end streets.
The installation in cul-de-sacs shall be permanent and
shall come off the end of the culinary water line. On
temporary dead-ended streets the connection shall be
made using a main size by three-inch MJ tee.
The blow-off valve shall be a Mueller 2” x 3’ bury A-
410 hydrant with a stop and waste two-inch (2”)
Mueller Mark II Oriseal Valve shut-off and two-andone-
half-inch (2 ½”) hose nozzle.
The blow off will be placed in a standard water meter
box eighteen-inches (18”) in diameter by thirtyinches
(30”) high-corrugated plastic with groves to fit
over the inlet and outlet lines. The cover is to be a
D&L eighteen-inch (18”) ring cover with a raised
cast center rim.
The cover is to be three-eighths-inch (3/8”) above top
back of curb-centered two-and-one-quarter-feet
(2.25’) from the back of curb.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
EARTHWORK
12—1
12. EARTHWORK
12.01 GENERAL
12.02 EXCAVATION FOR STRUCTURES
12.03 GRANULAR FOUNDATION BORROW
12.04 BACKFILL AROUND STRUCTURES
12.05 CONSTRUCTION OF EMBANKMENTS
AND FILLS
12.06 COMPACTION OF MATERIALS
12.07 REMOVAL AND PLACEMENT OF
DEFECTIVE FILL
12.01 GENERAL:
This section defines the requirements for excavation
and backfill for structures, construction requirements
of earth embankments and earth fills, and subgrade
preparation required by the Standard Drawings and
Specifications.
12.02 EXCAVATION FOR STRUCTURES:
Where suitable subgrade soils exist, structures shall
be founded on undisturbed original subsoil. All
unauthorized excavation below the specified
subgrade shall be replaced with concrete, monolithic
with that of the slab above or with coarse gravel
thoroughly compacted into place.
Subgrade soils for structures not suitable for proper
support shall be replaced with firm, dense,
thoroughly compacted and consolidated material free
from mud and muck. Coarse gravel or crushed stone
may be used for subsoil reinforcement if satisfactory
results can be obtained thereby. Such material shall
be applied in thin layers, each layer being embedded
in the subsoil by thorough tamping. All excess soil
shall be removed to compensate for the displacement
of the gravel or crushed stone and the finished
elevation of any subsoil reinforced in this manner
shall not be above the specified subgrade elevation.
12.03 GRANULAR FOUNDATION
BORROW:
Granular foundation borrow shall be compacted to
not less than 95% of maximum dry density as
determined by ASTM D-1557.
12.04 BACKFILL AROUND STRUCTURES:
No backfilling around or behind structures shall be
initiated until the concrete is fully cured for seven
days. Backfill around structures shall be placed to
the lines shown on the drawings, or as directed. After
completion of foundation footings and walls and
other construction below the elevation of the final
grades, and prior to backfilling, all forms shall be
removed and the excavation shall be cleaned of all
trash and debris. Hand compacted fill, including fill
compacted by manually directed power tampers, shall
be placed in layers whose thickness before
compaction is not greater than four (4) inches.
Material for backfilling shall consist of suitable
excavated material or imported sand, gravel, or other
suitable material with no rocks whose greatest
dimension is larger than two (2) inches.
Fill shall be placed in a manner that will prevent
damage to the structures and will allow the structures
to assume the loads from the fill gradually and
uniformly. The height of the fill adjacent to a
structure shall be increased at approximately the
same rate on all sides of the structure. Each layer
shall be compacted by hand or machine tampers or by
other suitable equipment to a density equal to 95% of
maximum dry density as measured by ASTM D1557.
12.05 CONSTRUCTION OF
EMBANKMENTS AND FILLS:
1. Foundation Preparation:
Earth fill for foundations shall have unsuitable
materials, such as weeds, sod, roots larger than
1/4-inch in diameter, vegetation, or other organic
material removed by clearing, stripping, and/or
grubbing. Except as otherwise specified, earth
foundation surfaces shall be graded to remove
surface irregularities and shall be scarified
parallel to the axis of the fill or otherwise
acceptably scored and loosened to a minimum
depth of six inches. The moisture content of the
loosened material shall be controlled as specified
for the earth fill, and the surface materials of the
foundation shall be compacted and bonded with
the first layer of earth fill as specified for
subsequent layers of earth fill.
Earth abutment surfaces shall be free of loose,
uncompacted earth in excess of 2 inches in depth
normal to the slope and shall be at such moisture
content that the earth fill can be compacted
against them to affect a good bond between the
fill and the abutments.
Rock foundation and abutment surfaces shall be
cleared of all loose material by hand or other
effective means and shall be free of standing
water when fill is placed upon them. Occasional
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
EARTHWORK
12—2
rock outcrops in earth foundations for earth fill,
except in dams and other structures designed to
restrain the movement of water, shall not require
special treatment if they do not interfere with
compaction of the foundation and initial layers of
the fill or the bond between the foundation and
the fill.
2. Placement:
Fill shall not be placed until the required
excavation and foundation preparation have been
completed and the foundation has been inspected
and approved by the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer and any Regulatory Agency
having authority over the project. Fill shall not be
placed upon a frozen surface, nor shall snow, ice,
or frozen material be incorporated in the fill.
Fill shall be placed in approximately horizontal
layers. The thickness of each layer before
compaction shall not exceed the maximum
thickness specified. Materials placed by dumping
in piles or windrows shall be spread uniformly to
not more than the specified thickness before being
compacted. Hand compacted fill, including fill
compacted by manually directed power tampers,
shall be placed in layers whose thickness before
compaction is not greater than four (4) inches.
All rock whose greatest dimension is larger than
two-inch (2") shall be removed from the material
receiving compaction by manually directed power
tampers.
Earth fill designed to restrain the movement of
water shall be placed so as to meet the following
additional requirements:
a. The distribution of materials throughout
each zone shall be essentially uniform, and the
fill shall be free from lenses, pockets, streaks,
or layers of material differing substantially in
texture or gradation from the surrounding
material.
b. If the surface of any layer becomes too
hard and smooth for proper bond with the
succeeding layer, it shall be scarified parallel
to the axis of the fill, to a depth of not less
than 2 inches before the next layer is placed.
c. The top surfaces of embankments shall be
maintained approximately level during
construction, except that a crown or crossslope
of not less than 2 percent shall be
maintained to ensure effective drainage, and
except as otherwise specified for drain fill
zones. If the Drawings or specifications
require or the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer directs that fill be placed at
a higher level in one part of the embankment
than another is, the top surface of each part
shall be maintained as specified above.
d. Dam embankments shall be constructed
in continuous layers from abutment to
abutment except where openings to facilitate
construction of inlet and outlet pipes are
specifically authorized in the contract.
e. Embankments built at different levels as
described in 3 and 4 shall be constructed so
that the slope of the bonding surfaces between
the embankment in place and embankment to
be placed is not steeper than 2 feet horizontal
to 1-foot vertical. The bonding surface of the
embankment in place shall be stripped of all
loose material, scarified, moistened and
recompacted when the new fill is placed
against it. This is needed to ensure a good
bond with the new fill, to obtain the specified
moisture content and specified density at the
junction of the in-place and new fill.
3. Borrow:
When the embankment or fill exceeds the amount
of excavation, sufficient additional material shall
be obtained from borrow pits provided by the
Developer/Contractor. All material proposed to
be imported shall be subject to the review and
approval of the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer prior to starting of hauling
operations.
The materials used for embankment and fill
construction shall be free from sod, grass, roots
larger than 1/4-inch diameter, trash, clods, rocks
larger than six inches in diameter, and all other
material unsuitable for construction of compacted
fills. Rotomilled asphalt meeting the large rock
requirement may be used as borrow.
Grading of completed embankments and fills
shall bring the surfaces to a smooth, uniform
condition with final grades being within 0.1 foot
of the design grade.
12.06 COMPACTION OF MATERIALS:
The material shall be deposited in horizontal layers
having a thickness of not more than eight-inches (8")
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
EARTHWORK
12—3
prior to being compacted as hereinafter specified.
The distribution of materials shall be such that the
compacted material will be homogeneous and free
from lenses, pockets, or other imperfections.
During placement and compaction of fill, the
moisture content of the materials being placed shall
be maintained within the specified range, and the
moisture content shall be uniform throughout the
layers. Disking, blading or other approved methods
prior to compaction of the layer shall obtain uniform
moisture distribution. The moisture shall be
controlled at a level to permit compaction of the fill
as specified, but in no case greater or less than two
percent plus or minus of the optimum moisture as
determined by AASHTO T-99.
The application of water to the fill materials shall be
accomplished at the borrow areas insofar as
practicable. Water may be applied by sprinkling the
materials after placement on the fill, if necessary.
Material that is too wet when deposited on the fill
shall either be removed or dried to specified moisture
content prior to compaction.
If the top surface of the preceding layer, a foundation
or abutment surface in the zone of contact with the
fill becomes too dry to permit suitable bond it shall
be scarified and moistened by sprinkling to the
required moisture content prior to placement of the
next layer of fill.
When the material has been conditioned as here in
before specified the backfill or embankment shall be
compacted to a minimum of 96% of maximum dry
density as determined by AASHTO T-99.
Densification of earth fill shall be performed by
equipment designated solely for that purpose. Each
layer of fill shall be compacted as necessary to make
the density of the fill matrix not less than the
minimum density specified. The fill matrix is
defined as the portion of the fill material finer than
the maximum particle size used in the compaction
test method specified.
1. Under Roadways:
Under roadways and extending one foot beyond
the proposed curb-line the fill or embankment
material shall be compacted to a minimum of
96% of maximum density specified above.
2. Under Sidewalks and Driveways:
Under sidewalks and driveways extending one
foot each side of the edge of slab the fill or
embankment material shall be compacted to a
minimum of 96% of maximum density specified
above.
12.07 REMOVAL AND PLACEMENT OF
DEFECTIVE FILL:
Fill placement at densities lower than the specified
minimum density or at moisture contents outside the
specified acceptable range of moisture content or
otherwise not conforming to the requirements of the
specifications shall be reworked to meet the
requirements or removed and replaced with
acceptable fill. The replacement fill and the
foundation, abutment and fill surfaces upon which it
is place shall conform to all requirements of this
specification for foundation preparation, approval,
placement, moisture control and compaction.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE
13—1
13. PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE
13.01 GENERAL
13.02 MATERIALS
13.03 CLASS OF CONCRETE
13.04 COMPOSITION OF CONCRETE
13.05 DESIGN OF THE CONCRETE MIX
13.06 OBSERVATION AND TESTING
13.07 HANDLING AND MEASUREMENT OF
MATERIALS
13.08 MIXERS AND MIXING
13.09 FORMS
13.10 PREPARATION OF FORMS AND
SUBGRADE
13.11 CONVEYING
13.12 PLACING
13.13 CONSTRUCTION JOINTS
13.14 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION
JOINTS
13.15 WATERSTOP
13.16 REMOVAL OF FORMS
13.17 FINISHING FORMED SURFACES
13.18 FINISHING UNFORMED SURFACES
13.19 CURING AND PROTECTION
13.20 REMOVAL OR REPAIR
13.21 CONCRETING IN COLD WEATHER
13.22 CONCRETING IN HOT WEATHER
13.01 GENERAL:
The work shall consist of furnishing, forming,
placing, finishing, and curing Portland cement
concrete, as required.
13.02 MATERIALS:
1. Portland Cement:
Portland cement shall be Type II and shall
comply with the Standard Specification for
Portland Cement, ASTM C-150.
If air-entraining cement is to be used, the
Developer/Contractor shall furnish the
manufacturers written statement giving the
source, amount and brand name of the airentraining
addition.
Cement shall be stored in such a manner as to be
protected from weather, dampness or other
destructive agents. Cement that is partially
hydrated or otherwise damaged will be rejected.
2. Aggregate:
Aggregates shall conform to Tentative
Specifications for Concrete Aggregates, ASTM
C-33 for the specified sizes. Aggregates that fail
to meet any requirement may be accepted only
when: (1) the specified alternate conditions of
acceptance can be proved prior to the use of the
aggregates on the job and within a period of time
such that no work under the contract will be
delayed by the requirements of such proof; or, (2)
the specification for concrete expressly contains a
provision of special mix requirements to
compensate for the effects of the deficiencies.
The potential reactivity of aggregates with the
alkalis in cement shall be evaluated by
petrographic examination and, where applicable,
the chemical method of test, ASTM Designation
C 289, or by the results of previous tests or
service records of concrete made from similar
aggregates from the same source. The standards
for evaluating potential reactivity shall be as
described in ASTM Specification C-33, Appendix
A1. Aggregates indicated by any of the above to
be potentially reactive shall not be used, except
under one of the following conditions:
a. Applicable test results of mortar bar tests,
made according to ASTM Method C-227, are
available which indicate an expansion of less
than 0.10 per cent at six months in mortar bars
made with cement containing not less than 0.8
per cent alkalis expressed as sodium oxide; or
b. Concrete made from similar aggregates
from the same source has been demonstrated
to be sound after 3 years or more of service
under conditions of exposure to moisture and
weather similar to those anticipated for the
concrete under these specifications.
Aggregates indicated to be potentially reactive,
but within acceptable limits as determined by
mortar bar test results or service records, shall be
used only with "low alkali" cement, containing
less than 0.60 per cent alkalis expressed as
sodium oxide.
Aggregate of each class and size shall be stored
and handled by methods that prevent segregation
of particle sizes or contamination by intermixing
with other materials.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE
13—2
3. Water:
Water shall be cleaned and free from injurious
amounts of oil, salt, acid, alkali, organic matter or
other deleterious substances.
4. Air-entrainment:
Air-entraining agent shall be used in all concrete
exposed to the weather. The agent shall conform
to ASTM Designation C-175 and C-260, except
that the relative durability factor in the freezing
and thawing test shall be not less than 95.
5. Steel Reinforcement:
Steel reinforcement shall be free from rust, oil,
grease, dirt, paint or other deleterious matter.
Steel bars for concrete reinforcement requiring
bends shall be deformed billet-steel bars
conforming to ASTM Specification A-615, Grade
40 or Grade 60. Straight steel bars shall be
deformed bars conforming to one of the following
specifications:
a. Deformed Billet-Steel Bars for Concrete
Reinforcement (Grade 40 or Grade 60) -
ASTM Designation A-615.
b. Rail-Steel Deformed Bars for Concrete
Reinforcement (Grade 50 or Grade 60) -
ASTM Designation A-616.
c. Axle-Steel Deformed Bars for Concrete
Reinforcement (Grade 40 or Grade 60) -
ASTM Designation A-617.
d. Fabricated Steel bar mats shall conform
to the requirements of ASTM Specification A-
184.
e. Welded steel wire fabric reinforcement
shall conform to the requirements of ASTM
Specification A-185.
f. Welded deformed steel wire fabric for
concrete reinforcement shall conform to the
requirements of ASTM Specification A-497.
g. Cold-drawn steel wire reinforcement shall
conform to the requirements of ASTM
Specification A-82.
h. Deformed steel wire for concrete
reinforcement shall conform to the
requirements of ASTM Specification A-496.
i. Gages, spacing and arrangement of wires
in welded steel wire fabric shall be as defined
in ACI Standard 315 of the American
Concrete Institute for the specified style
designations.
j. Steel reinforcement stored at the site of
the work shall be stored above the ground
surface on platforms, skids or other supports
and shall be protected from mechanical injury
and corrosion.
6. Admixtures:
Water-reducing and set-retarding admixtures shall
conform to the requirements of ASTM
Specification C-494, except that resistance to
freezing and thawing shall be determined in all
cases, and the minimum relative durability factor
shall be 95.
Admixtures shall be Type A, Water-Reducing or
Type D, Water-Reducing and Retarding, as
defined in ASTM Specification C-494.
When added, in the manner and amount
recommended by the manufacturer, to the
concrete used on the job, with no change in the
cement content or proportions of the aggregates,
admixtures shall have the following effects:
a. Type A or Type D: The water content at
the required slump shall be at least 5 per cent
less with the admixture than without. The air
content shall remain within the range
specified, but shall not exceed 8 per-cent in
any case.
b. Type D: The time of initial setting,
determined as prescribed in ASTM C-494,
shall be from 1 to 3 hours longer with the
admixture than without.
7. Curing Compound:
Curing compound for concrete shall meet the
requirements of ASTM Specification C-309.
Unless otherwise specified, the compound shall
be Type 2.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE
13—3
All curing compound shall be delivered to the site
of the work in the original container bearing the
name of the manufacturer and the brand name.
The compound shall be stored in a manner to
prevent damage to the containers and to protect
water-emulsion types from freezing.
13.03 CLASS OF CONCRETE:
For the purpose of practical identification, concrete
has been divided into four classes: Class AA(AE),
A(AE), B(AE) and C(AE). The specific use for each
Class is identified in the Chapter in which the
concrete is used. The symbol (AE) designates airentrainment.
Basic requirements for each class are as
follows:
Concrete
Maximum
Net Class
Of Water
Content
(gallons/bag)
Minimum
Cement
Content
(bags/cu.yd.)
Minimum
28-day
Comp
Strength
(psi)
AA
(AE)
5 6 ½ 4000
A
(AE)
6 6 3500
B
(AE)
7 5 2500
C
(AE)
8 4 2000
13.04 COMPOSITION OF CONCRETE:
1. Aggregate:
Aggregates maximum size shall be not larger than
one-fifth (1/5) of the narrowest dimension
between forms within which the concrete is to be
cast, nor larger than three-fourths (3/4) of the
minimum clear spacing between reinforcing bars
or between reinforcing bars and forms. For unreinforced
concrete slabs, the maximum size of
aggregates shall not be larger than one-fourth
(1/4) the slab thickness.
2. Water:
Water shall be added to the mix to produce
concrete with the minimum practicable slump.
The slump of mechanically vibrated concrete
shall not exceed four-inch (4"). No concrete shall
be placed with a slump in excess of five-inch (5").
3. Air-Entrainment:
Air-Content for air-entrained concrete shall
comply with the following:
Course Aggregate
Size (in.)
Air Content
(percent)
1 1/2 to 2 1/2 5 + 1
3/4 or 1 6 + 1
3/8 or 1/2 7 + 1
The air-entraining agent shall be added as liquid
to the mixing water by means of mechanical
equipment capable of accurate measurement and
control.
4. Admixtures:
Water reducing, set retarding admixtures shall not
be used except with previous approval from the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer and shall in
such a case, conform to the standards of materials
set forth in the specification.
13.05 DESIGN OF THE CONCRETE MIX:
The proportions of the aggregates shall be such as to
produce a concrete mixture that will work readily
into the corners and angles of the forms and around
reinforcement when consolidated, but will not
segregate or exclude free water during consolidation.
Prior to placement of concrete, the
Developer/Contractor shall furnish the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer, for approval, a
statement of the materials and mix proportions
(including admixtures, if any) it intends to use. The
statement shall include evidence satisfactory to the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer that the materials
and proportions will produce concrete conforming to
this specification. The materials and proportions so
stated shall constitute the "job mix." After the job
mix has been reviewed for conformance to
specification by the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer, neither the source, character,
grading of the aggregates, the type and brand of
cement, nor admixture shall be changed without prior
notice to the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer. If
such changes are necessary, no concrete containing
such new or altered materials shall be placed until the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer has approved a
revised job mix.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE
13—4
13.06 OBSERVATION AND TESTING:
The Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer shall have
free entry to the plant and equipment furnishing
concrete under the contract. Proper facilities shall be
provided for the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer
to observe the materials, equipment and processes
and to obtain samples of the concrete. All tests and
observations will be conducted so as not to interfere
unnecessarily with manufacture and delivery of the
concrete.
13.07 HANDLING AND MEASUREMENT OF
MATERIALS:
Materials shall be stockpiled and batched by methods
that will prevent segregation or contamination of
aggregates and insure accurate proportioning of the
ingredients of the mix.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, cement
and aggregates shall be measured as follows:
1. Cement shall be measured by weight or in
bags of 94 pounds each. When cement is
measured in bags, no fraction of a bag shall be
used unless weighed.
2. Aggregates shall be measured by weight.
Mix proportions shall be based on saturated,
surface-dry weights. The batch weight of each
aggregate shall be the required saturated, surfacedry
weight plus the weight of surface moisture it
contains.
3. Water shall be measured by weight, to
accuracy within one per cent of the total quantity
of water required for the batch.
4. Admixtures shall be measured within a limit
of accuracy of 3 per cent.
13.08 MIXERS AND MIXING:
Concrete shall be uniform and thoroughly mixed
when delivered to the work. Variations in slump of
more than 1 inch within a batch will be considered
evidence of inadequate mixing and shall be corrected
by increasing mixing time or other means. For
stationary mixers, the mixing time after all cement
and aggregates are in the mixer drum shall be not less
than 1 1/2 minutes. When concrete is mixed in a
truck mixer, the number of revolutions of the drum or
blades at mixing speed shall be not less than 70 or
more than 100.
Unless otherwise specified, volumetric batching and
continuous mixing at the construction site will be
permitted if approved by Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer. The batching and mixing
equipment shall conform to the requirements of
ASTM Specification C-685 and shall be
demonstrated prior to placement of concrete, by tests
with the job mix, to produce concrete meeting the
specified proportioning and uniformity requirements.
Concrete made by this method shall be produced,
inspected, and certified in conformance with Sections
6, 7, 8, 13, and 14 of ASTM Specification C-685.
No mixing water in excess of the amount called for
by the job mix shall be added to the concrete during
mixing or hauling or after arrival at the delivery
point.
13.09 FORMS:
Forms shall be of wood, plywood, steel or other
approved material and shall be mortar tight. The
forms and associated falsework shall be substantial
and unyielding and shall be constructed so that the
finished concrete will conform to the specified
dimensions and contours. Form surfaces shall be
smooth and free from holes, dents, sags or other
irregularities. Forms shall be coated with nonstaining
form oil before being set into place.
Metal ties or anchors within the forms shall be
equipped with cones, she-bolts or other devices that
permit their removal to a depth of at least one inch
without injury to the concrete.
All edges that will be exposed to view when the
structure is completed shall be chamfered by placing
molding in the forms, unless finishing with molding
tools.
13.10 PREPARATION OF FORMS AND
SUBGRADE:
Prior to placement of concrete the forms and
subgrade shall be free of chips, sawdust, debris,
water, ice, snow, extraneous oil, mortar, or other
harmful substances or coatings. Any oil on the
reinforcing steel or other surfaces required to be
bonded to the concrete shall be removed. Rock
surfaces shall be cleaned by air-water cutting, wet
sandblasting or wire brush scrubbing, as necessary,
and shall be wetted immediately prior to placement
of concrete. Earth surfaces shall be firm and damp.
Placement of concrete on mud, dried earth or
uncompacted fill or frozen subgrade will not be
permitted.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE
13—5
Unless otherwise specified, when concrete is to be
placed over drain fill, the contact surface of the drain
fill shall be covered with a layer of asphaltimpregnated
building paper or polyvinyl sheeting
prior to placement of the concrete. Forms for
weepholes shall extend through this layer into the
drain fill.
Items to be embedded in the concrete shall be
positioned accurately and anchored firmly.
Weepholes in walls or slabs shall be formed with
nonferrous materials.
13.11 CONVEYING:
Concrete shall be delivered to the site and discharged
into the forms within 1 1/2 hours after the
introduction of the cement to the aggregates. In hot
weather or under conditions contributing to quick
stiffening of the concrete, the time between the
introduction of the cement to the aggregates and
discharge shall not exceed 45 minutes. The Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer may allow a longer
time, provided the setting time of the concrete is
increased a corresponding amount by the addition of
an approved set-retarding admixture. In any case,
concrete shall be conveyed from the mixer to the
forms as rapidly as practicable by methods that will
prevent segregation of the aggregates or loss of
mortar.
Concrete shall not be dropped more than five feet
vertically unless suitable equipment is used to
prevent segregation.
13.12 PLACING:
Concrete shall not be placed until the subgrade, forms
and steel reinforcement have been inspected and
approved. No concrete shall be placed except in the
presence of the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer.
The Developer/Contractor shall give 48-hour notice
to the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer each time
it intends to place concrete. Such notice will give the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer adequate time to
inspect the subgrade, forms, steel reinforcement and
other preparations for compliance with the
specifications before concrete is delivered for
placing.
The concrete shall be deposited as closely as possible
to its final position in the forms and shall be worked
into the corners and angles of the forms and around
all reinforcements and embedded items in a manner
to prevent segregation of aggregates or excessive
laitance. Unless otherwise specified, slab concrete
shall be placed to design thickness in one continuous
layer. Formed concrete shall be placed in horizontal
layers not more than 20 inches thick. Hoppers and
chutes, pipes or "elephant trunks" shall be used as
necessary to prevent splashing of mortar on the forms
and reinforcing steel above the layers being placed.
Immediately after the concrete is placed in the forms,
it shall be consolidated by spading, hand tramping or
vibration as necessary to insure smooth surfaces and
dense concrete. Each layer shall be consolidated to
insure monolithic bond with the preceding layer. If
the surface of a layer of concrete in place sets to the
degree that it will not flow and merge with the
succeeding layer when spaded or vibrated, the
Developer/Contractor shall discontinue placing
concrete and shall make a construction joint
according to the procedure specified.
If placing is discontinued when an incomplete
horizontal layer is in place, the unfinished end of the
layer shall be formed by a vertical bulkhead.
13.13 CONSTRUCTION JOINTS:
Construction joints shall be made at the locations
shown on the Drawings. If construction joints are
needed which are not shown on the Drawings, they
shall be placed in locations approved by the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer.
Where a featheredge would be produced at a
construction joint, as in the top surface of a sloping
wall, an inset form shall be used so that the resulting
edge thickness on either side of the joint is not less
than six-inches (6").
In walls and columns, as each lift is completed, the
top surfaces shall be immediately and carefully
protected from any condition that might adversely
affect the hardening of the concrete.
Steel tying and form construction adjacent to
concrete in place shall not be started until the
concrete has cured at least 12 hours. Before new
concrete is deposited on or against concrete that has
hardened, the forms shall be retightened. New
concrete shall not be placed until the hardening
concrete has cured at least 12 hours.
Surfaces of construction joints shall be cleaned of all
unsatisfactory concrete, laitance, coatings or debris
by washing and scrubbing with a wire brush or wire
broom or by other means approved by the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer. The surfaces shall be
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE
13—6
kept moist for at least one hour prior to placement of
the new concrete.
13.14 EXPANSION AND CONTRACTION
JOINTS:
Expansion and contraction joints shall be made only
at locations shown on the drawings.
Exposed concrete edges at expansion and contraction
joints shall be carefully tooled or chamfered, and the
joints shall be free of mortar and concrete. Joint filler
shall be left exposed for its full length with clean and
true edges.
Preformed expansion joint filler shall be held firmly
in the correct position as the concrete is placed.
Open joints, when specified, shall be constructed by
the insertion and subsequent removal of a wooden
strip, metal plate or other suitable template in such a
manner that the corners of the concrete will not be
chipped or broken. The edges of open joints shall be
finished with an edging tool prior to removal of the
joint strips.
13.15 WATERSTOP:
Waterstops shall be held firmly in the correct position
as the concrete is placed. Joints in metal waterstops
shall be soldered, brazed or welded. Joints in rubber
or plastic waterstops shall be cemented, welded or
vulcanized as recommended by the manufacturer.
13.16 REMOVAL OF FORMS:
Forms shall not be removed without the approval of
the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer. Forms shall
be removed in such a way as to prevent damage to
the concrete. Supports shall be removed in a manner
that will permit the concrete to take the stresses due
to its own weight uniformly and gradually.
13.17 FINISHING FORMED SURFACES:
Immediately after the removal of the forms:
1. Projections:
All fins and irregular projections shall be
removed from exposed surfaces.
2. Imperfections:
On all surfaces, the holes produced by the
removal of form ties, cone-bolts, and she-bolts
shall be cleaned, wetted and filled with a dry-pack
mortar consisting of one part Portland cement,
three parts sand that will pass a No. 16 sieve, and
water just sufficient to produce a consistency such
that the filling is at the point of becoming rubbery
when the material is solidly packed.
13.18 FINISHING UNFORMED SURFACES:
All exposed surfaces on the concrete shall be
accurately screeded to grade and then float finished,
unless specified otherwise.
Excessive floating or troweling of surfaces while the
concrete is soft will not be permitted.
The addition of dry cement or water to the surface of
the screeded concrete to expedite finishing will not
be allowed.
Joints and edges on unformed surfaces that will be
exposed to view shall be chamfered or finished with
molding tools.
13.19 CURING AND PROTECTION:
Concrete shall be prevented from drying for a curing
period of at least 7 days after it is placed. Exposed
surfaces shall be kept continuously moist for the
entire period, or until curing compound is applied as
specified below. Sprinkling, flooding or fog spraying
shall maintain moisture or by covering with
continuously moistened canvas, cloth mats, straw,
sand or other approved material. Wood forms
(except plywood) left in place during the curing
period shall be kept wet. Formed surfaces shall be
thoroughly wetted immediately after forms are
removed and shall be kept wet until patching and
repairs are completed. Water or covering shall be
applied in such a way that the concrete surface is not
eroded or otherwise damaged.
As soon as the concrete has hardened sufficiently to
prevent damage, the finished surface shall be
protected for curing one of the following ways:
1. Ponding of water on the surface or
continuous sprinkling.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
PORTLAND CEMENT CONCRETE
13—7
2. Application of absorptive mats such as threeinches
(3") of cured hay, clean straw or fabric
kept continuously wet.
3. Application of two-inches (2") of moist earth
or sand uniformly distributed on the surface and
kept saturated by spraying with water.
4. Application of light colored waterproof
plastic materials, conforming to "Specifications
for Waterproof Sheet Materials for Curing
Concrete" ASTM C-171, placed and maintained
in contact with the surface of the concrete.
5. Application of a curing compound,
conforming to "Specifications for Liquid
Membrane - Forming Compounds for Curing
Concrete" ASTM C-309. The compound shall be
light in color and shall be applied in accordance
with the manufacturers recommendations
immediately after any water sheen, which may
develop after finishing, has disappeared from the
concrete surface.
Curing compound shall not be applied to surfaces
requiring bond to subsequently placed concrete, such
as construction joints, shear plates, reinforcing steel
and other embedded items. If the membrane is
damaged during the curing period, the damaged area
shall be re-sprayed at the rate of application specified
above.
13.20 REMOVAL OR REPAIR:
When concrete is honey combed, damaged or
otherwise defective, the Developer/Contractor shall
remove and replace the structure or structural
member containing the defective concrete or, where
feasible, correct or repair the defective concrete.
Prior to starting repair work the
Developer/Contractor shall obtain the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer's approval of its plan for
affecting the repair. The Developer/Contractor shall
perform all repair work in the presence of the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer.
13.21 CONCRETING IN COLD WEATHER:
Concrete shall not be mixed nor placed when the
daily minimum atmospheric temperature is less than
forty degrees Fahrenheit (40°) unless facilities are
provided to prevent the concrete from freezing.
When concrete is poured at a temperature below
thirty five degrees Fahrenheit (35° F), the ingredients
of the concrete shall be heated so that the temperature
of the mixture shall be not less than fifty degrees
Fahrenheit (50°) or more than one hundred degrees
Fahrenheit (100°). Before mixing, the heated
aggregates shall not exceed one hundred twenty five
degrees Fahrenheit (125°) and the temperature of
heated water shall not exceed one hundred seventy
five degrees Fahrenheit (175°). Cement shall not be
added while the temperature of the mixed aggregate
and water is greater than one hundred degrees
Fahrenheit (100°). When there is a likelihood of
freezing during the curing period, the concrete shall
be protected by means of an insulated covering
and/or heating to prevent freezing of the concrete for
a period of not less than four (4) days after placing.
Concrete shall not be placed on frozen soil. The use
of accelerators or antifreeze compounds will not be
allowed.
13.22 CONCRETING IN HOT WEATHER:
The Developer/Contractor shall apply effective
means to maintain the temperature of the concrete
below 90 degrees during mixing, conveying and
placing.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
REINFORCING STEEL
14—1
14. REINFORCING STEEL
14.01 GENERAL
14.02 FABRICATION AND PLACING
REINFORCEMENT
14.03 EPOXY COATING
14.04 FIELD CUTTING
14.01 GENERAL:
Furnish and place reinforcing steel and reinforcing
steel (epoxy-coated). Use deformed billet-steel bars
as specified. All reinforcing bars shall be Grade 40 or
Grade 60 as required. Wire Fabric shall conform to
ASTM A185-70.
Before ordering the supply of steel, the
Developer/Contractor shall provide all order lists and
bending diagrams for approval of the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer. The approval of such lists and
diagrams shall in no way relieve the
Developer/Contractor of responsibility for the
correctness of reinforcing supplied and all expenses
incidental to revision of furnished reinforcing steel
shall be carried by the Developer/Contractor.
14.02 FABRICATION AND PLACING
REINFORCEMENT:
1. Fabrication:
Reinforcement shall be cold bent to the shapes
shown in accordance with ACI 1977 Standard
Code (ACI 318-77) Chapter 7 Section 7.1.
2. Clearances:
All bars shall be of the size specified and shall be
placed in the positions shown on the Drawings in
such a manner as to be firmly held during the
placing of the concrete. Where not otherwise
indicated, minimum clearance and cover as
required by the ACI Code, Section 7.7 shall be
maintained:
Reinforced Clearances Minimum
Cover
Inches
Cast In Place Concrete (Non Prestressed)
Concrete cast against and
permanently exposed to
earth
3
Concrete exposed to earth or weather:
No. 6 through No. 18 Bar 2
No. 5 Bar, W31 or D31
wire, and smaller
1 ½
Concrete not exposed to weather or in
contact with ground:
- Slabs, Walls, and Joists:
No. 14 and no. 18 Bar 1 ½
No. 11 Bar and smaller ¾
- Beams, Columns:
Primary reinforcements,
ties, stirrups, spirals
1 ½
- Shells, Folded Plate
Members:
No. 6 Bar and larger ¾
No. 5 Bar, W31 or D31
wire, and smaller
½
Reinforcement Clearances Minimum
Cover
Inches
Precast Concrete (Manufactured Under
Plant Controlled Conditions)
Concrete exposed to earth or weather:
- Wall Panels:
No. 6 through No. 18 Bar 1 ½
No. 5 Bar, W31 or D31
wire, and smaller
¾
-Other Members:
No. 14 and No. 18 Bars 2
No. 6 through No. 11 Bars 1 ½
No. 5 Bar, W31 or D31
wire, and smaller
1 ¼
Concrete not exposed to weather or in
contact with ground:
- Slabs, Walls, and Joists:
No. 14 and no. 18 Bar 1 ¼
No. 11 Bar and smaller 5/8
- Beams, Columns:
Primary reinforcements 1 ½
Ties, stirrups, spirals 3/8
- Shells, Folded Plate
Members:
No. 6 Bar and larger 5/8
No. 5 Bar, W31 or D31
wire, and smaller
3/8
3. Support:
Bars shall be tied at all intersections except where
the spacing is less than twelve inches (12") where
alternate intersections shall be tied. Distance
from supports shall be by means of ties, hangers,
or other approved supports. Metal chairs of
approved design shall be used to hold
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
REINFORCING STEEL
14—2
reinforcement from contact with the forms. Metal
chairs that are in contact with the exterior surface
of the concrete shall be galvanized. Layers of
bars or when placing concrete directly on a
prepared subgrade reinforcing shall be separated
by precast mortar blocks or by other equally
suitable devices. The use of stones, pieces of
broken brick, metal pipe, or wooden blocks shall
not be permitted. Reinforcement in any member
shall be placed and then inspected and approved
by the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer before
the placement of concrete begins. Concrete
placed in violation of this provision may be
rejected in which case removal will be required.
If the fabric reinforcement is shipped in rolls, it
shall be straightened into flat sheets before being
placed.
4. Splicing:
All splices shall be staggered so that splices in
adjacent bars shall be not less than four feet (4')
apart, and shall conform to ACI Code Section
12.15.
14.03 EPOXY COATING:
1. Prequalify all Coatings:
Ensure that epoxy coating applicator has Concrete
Reinforcing Steel Institute (CRSI) fusion bonded
epoxy coating applicator plant certification.
Furnish a copy of the Prequalification Test Report
to the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer.
Provide an 8-ounce sample of the coating material
from each batch.
2. Coat Bars as Specified:
The following requirements shall be followed:
a. Maintain the coating thickness between 8
and 12 mils.
b. Coat bars after bending, unless the
fabricator can show that satisfactory results
can be obtained by coating before bending.
c. Reject any bent bars with visible cracks
or damage in the coating.
3. Handling:
Do not damage the bars or the coating during
handling and storage.
a. Use systems with padded contact areas
when handling coated bars.
b. Pad all bundling bands.
c. Lift all bundles with strong back, multiple
supports, or a platform bridge.
d. Do not drop or drag bars.
e. Repair damaged bars or coating at no
additional cost to the Owner.
f. Use patching material per manufacturer’s
recommendation to repair damaged coating.
g. Have the coated bars inspected for
damage to the coating after the bars are in
place and immediately before concrete
placement.
h. Repair all visible defects using the
specified patching or repair material.
14.04 FIELD CUTTING:
1. Cutting:
Saw or shear epoxy-coated bars that are specified
to be cut in the field. Do not flame cut.
2. Repairing:
Repair the sawed or sheared end of epoxy-coated
bars using the specified patching or repair
material.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
RESTORATION OF SURFACE IMPROVEMENTS
15—1
15. RESTORATION OF SURFACE
IMPROVEMENTS
15.01 GENERAL
15.02 FIELD VERIFICATION OF
IMPROVEMENTS
15.03 REMOVAL OF PAVEMENT, SIDEWALKS,
CURBS, ETC.
15.04 MATERIALS
15.05 RESTORING BITUMINOUS, CONCRETE,
OR ASPHALT STREET SURFACES
15.06 GRAVEL SURFACE
15.07 MISCELLANEOUS IMPROVEMENTS
15.08 RESTORATION OF SURFACES
15.09 CLEANUP
15.10 PAVEMENT MARKINGS
15.01 GENERAL:
The Developer/Contractor shall be responsible for the
protection and the restoration or replacement of any
improvements existing on public or private property
at the start of work or placed there during the
progress of the work.
Existing improvements shall include but not to be
limited to permanent surfacing, curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, planted areas, ditches, driveways, culverts,
fences, and walls. All improvements shall be
reconstructed to equal or better, in all respects, than
the existing improvements removed.
15.02 FIELD VERIFICATION OF
IMPROVEMENTS:
In submitting a bid, the Developer/Contractor will be
deemed to have carefully examined the site of the
work and to have acquainted itself with all conditions
relating to the protection and restoration of existing
improvements. The Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer does not guarantee that all
improvements are shown on the Drawings, and it
shall be the Developer/Contractor's responsibility to
provide in its bid for the protection and restoration of
all existing improvements whether or not each is
provided for specifically on the Drawings and/or Bid
Form.
15.03 REMOVAL OF PAVEMENT,
SIDEWALKS, CURBS, ETC.:
The pavement, sidewalk, curb and gutter, driveway,
etc. shall be cut vertically along the lines forming the
trench, or nearest full joint, in such a manner as to not
cause damage to adjoining pavement, sidewalk, curb
and gutter, driveway, etc. An undercut level at the
rate of one inch (1") per foot of thickness or an
underlap joint will be provided at the proposed
junction between old and new surfaces. The portion
to be removed shall be broken up in a manner that
will not cause damage to the pavement or concrete
outside the limits of the trench; however, any
pavement damaged by operations outside the limits
of the trench shall be replaced at the
Developer/Contractor's expense. Broken paving
materials shall be removed immediately from the site
of the work.
15.04 MATERIALS:
Materials used for repair or replacement of surface
improvements shall be equal to or better than the
material removed.
1. Untreated Base Course:
Untreated base course shall comply with the
requirements of Chapter 16, Section 16.08, Base
Course. The Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer
shall take samples of the untreated base course on
a random basis. All materials not meeting the
tolerance requirements shall be removed from the
project and replaced with specification material.1
2. Bituminous Surface Course:
The bituminous surface shall be hot-rolled plant
mix in accordance with Chapter 15, Section
15.09, Bituminous Asphalt Cement Pavement.
3. Concrete:
Concrete shall comply with Chapter 11 of these
Standard Specifications. Concrete shall be Class
AA(AE).
15.05 RESTORING BITUMINOUS,
CONCRETE, OR ASPHALT STREET
SURFACES:
Where trenches are in or cross bituminous or
concrete surfaced roads, traffic lanes, driveways,
parking areas, etc., the bituminous or concrete
surface shall be cut, restored as quickly as there is
sufficient quantity to make it practical, weather
permitting, and maintained as follows:
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
RESTORATION OF SURFACE IMPROVEMENTS
15—2
1. Before Excavation:
All existing asphalt or concrete surfaces shall be
saw cut or roto-milled to a square edge before
excavation.
2. Temporary Graded Surface:
Until resurfacing can be done in paved areas a
temporary gravel surface shall be placed deep
enough to provide a minimum of eight inches (8")
below the bottom of the bituminous surface and
shall be brought flush with the paved surface.
The untreated base shall be placed in the trench at
the time it is backfilled. Excess material shall be
removed from the premises immediately. The
Developer/Contractor will maintain the temporary
gravel surface until the asphalt is placed.
3. Preparation for Paving:
The area over trenches to be resurfaced shall be
graded and rolled with a roller weighing not less
than 12 tons, or with the rear wheels of a fiveyard
truck loaded to capacity, until the subgrade
is firm and unyielding. Mud or other soft or
spongy material shall be removed and the void
filled with gravel and rolled and tamped
thoroughly in layers not exceeding six inches in
thickness. The edges of trenches, which are
broken down during the making of subgrade,
shall be removed and trimmed neatly before
resurfacing.
Before any permanent resurfacing is placed, the
Developer/Contractor shall trim the existing
paving to clean straight lines as nearly parallel to
the centerline of the trench as practicable. Said
straight lines shall be thirty feet minimum lengths
and no deviations from such lines shall be made
except as specifically permitted by the Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer.
Existing bituminous paving shall be saw cut or
roto-milled back a minimum of twelve-inches
beyond the limits of any excavation or cave-in
along the trench so that the edges of the new
paving will rest on at least twelve-inches (12") of
undisturbed soil.
4. Bituminous Surface:
The bituminous surface over trenches shall be
restored by standard paving practices to a
minimum thickness of three inches (3”) or one
inch (1”) thicker than existing, whichever is
greater. Gradation of aggregate shall conform to
the ¾-inch gradation limits as defined in the
Standard Specifications for Road and Bridge
Construction.1
Pavement restoration shall include priming of
pavement and concrete edges with Type MC-70
bituminous material and placing rolled plant hot
mix bituminous material to the level of the
adjacent pavement surfaces.1
15.06 GRAVEL SURFACE:
Where trenches are excavated through gravelsurfaced
areas such as roads and shoulders, parking
areas, unpaved driveways, etc., the gravel surface
shall be restored and maintained as follows:
? The gravel shall be placed deep enough to
provide a minimum of six inches of material.
? The gravel shall be placed in the trench at the
time it is backfilled. The surface shall be
maintained by blading, sprinkling, rolling,
adding gravel, etc., to maintain a safe,
uniform surface. Excess material shall be
removed from the premises immediately.
? Material for use on gravel surfaces shall be
obtained from sound, tough, durable gravel
or rock meeting the following requirements
for gradation:
Passing 1-inch sieve 100%
Passing 1/2-inch sieve 79-91%
Passing No. 4 sieve 49-61%
Passing No. 16 sieve 27-35%
Passing No. 200 sieve 7-11%
15.07 MISCELLANEOUS IMPROVEMENTS:
It shall be the Developer/Contractor's responsibility
to restore to their original condition all irrigation
canals, levees, culverts, gates, fences, drainage
ditches, and all such improvements that are cut or
disturbed during construction. Topsoil in farming
areas or along road edges shall be stored separate
from subsoil during pipe trench excavation. Topsoil
shall be replaced during backfill operations as nearly
as possible to its original condition, thereby assuring
suitable soil for reseeding.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
RESTORATION OF SURFACE IMPROVEMENTS
15—3
15.08 RESTORATION OF SURFACES:
Unless otherwise directed, all street surfacing, curbs,
gutters, sidewalks, driveways, or other hard surface
that must be removed in the performance of the work
shall be restored in kind by the Developer/Contractor
in accordance with the Specifications contained
herein. Deviation of more than one-fourth inch (1/4")
between old and new work or within new
construction shall be corrected. Such measurement
shall be made from a ten-foot (10') minimum length
straight edge. Adjoining surfaces between old and
new must be flush.
15.09 CLEANUP:
At the completion of each area of work all
equipment, barricades, and similar items shall be
removed from the area. All excess material will be
removed. All rocks larger than one and one-half inch
(1 ½”) shall be removed from the surface. Adjacent
borrow pits and road shoulders used for storage of
excavating materials will be smoothed and returned
to its original contour.
15.10 PAVEMENT MARKINGS:
The Developer/Contractor shall be responsible for
restoration of pavement markings on all City and/or
County roadways. Restoration of pavement markings
shall conform to the applicable local and state
specifications.
On roadways under UDOT jurisdiction temporary
pavement markings shall be provided for any
removed or obliterated markings. The temporary
markings shall conform to UDOT standards and
specifications. Permanent pavement markings will be
replaced by UDOT.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
ROADWAY CONSTRUCTION
16—1
16. ROADWAY CONSTRUCTION
16.01 GENERAL
16.02 PULVERIZING
16.03 EARTHWORK
16.04 ROADWAY EXCAVATION
16.05 SUBGRADE PREPARATION
16.06 GRANULAR BORROW
16.07 GRANULAR BACKFILL BORROW
16.08 BASE COURSE
16.09 BITUMINOUS ASPHALT CEMENT
PAVEMENT
16.10 CONTACT SURFACES
16.11 ADJUSTING MANHOLES AND VALVE
BOXES TO FINAL GRADE
16.01 GENERAL:
This Chapter covers roadway construction. Work
shall consist of pulverizing existing asphalt,
earthwork, roadway excavation, 6-inch curb walls,
24-inch curb and gutter, 6-foot monolithic curb gutter
and sidewalk, and drive approaches. It will also
include imported granular borrow, curb face inlet
boxes including connection to existing storm drain,
subgrade preparation, untreated base course, asphalt
surface and raising manholes and valve boxes to
grade.
16.02 PULVERIZING:
The Developer/Contractor shall pulverize the existing
asphalt and roadbase to a depth of 6 to 8 inches. The
limits of the area to be pulverized will be as shown
on the improvement drawings. This material will be
used for granular borrow or untreated roadbase. The
Developer/Contractor has the option of methods he
feels will result in the least work and best product in
breaking up the existing asphalt, provided that the
maximum size for a single piece of asphalt does not
exceed 3-inches. Placing, grading and compacting of
this material shall comply with the requirements of
borrow or roadbase. The existing asphalt edges
where the pulverizing terminates shall be saw cut
following or prior to being pulverized.
16.03 EARTHWORK:
The earthwork needed for roadway construction shall
meet the requirements of Chapter 10, Earthwork.
16.04 ROADWAY EXCAVATION:
Following completion of the curb and gutter
improvements the roadway between lip of gutters
shall be excavated to the lines and grades shown on
the improvement drawings. Materials not suitable for
use as granular borrow or roadbase shall be removed
from the road section. Excavation may be done on
one-half of the road at a time.
16.05 SUBGRADE PREPARATION:
This work shall consist of the shaping and
compacting of the subgrade in accordance with these
specifications and in conformity with the lines,
grades, and typical cross sections shown on the
Drawings or as established by the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer.
Following roadway excavation the subgrade shall be
proof rolled by running moderate-weight rubber tiremounted
construction equipment uniformly over the
surface at least twice. During the rolling operation
moisture content of the subgrade layer shall be
maintained at not less than 97% or more than 105%
of the optimum moisture content. Rolling shall be
continued until the entire roadbed is compacted to the
specified density to a minimum depth of 8 inches.
16.06 GRANULAR BORROW:
Granular borrow (foundation or roadway) material
shall consist of well graded granular bank run natural
aggregate material with a maximum size of 3 inches
and less than 15% passing a No. 200 sieve. The
material shall meet the following gradation:
Sieve Size Percent Passing
No. 10 50 Max
No. 40 30 Max
No. 200 15 Max
The granular borrow material shall be compacted to
not less than 96% maximum dry density as
determined by AASHTO T-99. Granular foundation
borrow shall be compacted to not less than 95% of
maximum dry density as determined by ASTM D-
1557. Surfaces shall be true to the established grade
with thickness being not less than 1/4-inch from the
required layer thickness and with the surface
elevation varying not more than 3/8-inch in ten feet
from the true profile and cross section.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
ROADWAY CONSTRUCTION
16—2
16.07 GRANULAR BACKFILL
BORROW:
Granular backfill borrow shall be free draining
natural aggregate material meeting the following
gradation:
Sieve Size Percent Passing
1 - ½ inch 100
1 inch 95-100
½ inch 25-60
No. 4 0-10
16.08 BASE COURSE:
The base course shall be made, placed, graded and
compacted in accordance with the Utah Chapter of
the American Public Works Association (APWA)
Manual of Standard Specification, latest edition
including latest addendum, Section 32 11 23
Aggregate Base Course. APWA Target Gradation
shall be Grade 1. Construction Untreated base course
material meeting the UDOT Standard Specification
Untreated Base Course Section 02721 is acceptable.
Placement shall be per the APWA Standard.
16.09 BITUMINOUS ASPHALT CEMENT
PAVEMENT:
The bituminous asphalt shall be mixed and placed in
accordance with the Utah Chapter of the American
Public Works Association (APWA) Manual of
Standard Specification, latest edition including latest
addendum.
The following sections shall apply:
Section 32 12 03 Asphalt Binders;
Section 32 12 05 Bituminous Concrete;
Section 32 12 13.13 Tack Coat;
Section 32 12 13.19 Prime Coat;
Section 32 12 16.13 Plant-Mix paving.
The City Public Works Department will provide the
Developer/Contractor with the current approved mix
design from the APWA manual.
History: 05/17 - Ord 17-01E
16.10 CONTACT SURFACE:
Contact surface of curbing, gutters, waterways
manholes and other structures, shall be painted with
tack coat consisting of a cut back asphalt grade RC-
250 or SS-1 immediately before the paving materials
are placed against them. Care should be taken during
application to prevent the tack coat from being
applied to exposed concrete above the contact
surfaces.
Any overlay of existing asphalt with or without
paving fabric shall have a tack coat applied prior to
application of any bituminous asphalt material.
Immediately adjacent to gutters, manholes and other
structures, the bituminous surface course shall be
spread uniformly high, so that after compaction it
will be slightly above the edges of such structures
Along curbs, gutters, manholes and other places
inaccessible to the roller, the materials shall be
thoroughly compacted with hand tampers, but
extreme care shall be exercised to prevent damaging
the adjacent surfaces.
16.11 ADJUSTING MANHOLES AND
VALVE BOXES TO FINAL
GRADE:
This section covers the requirements for adjusting
manholes and valves to final grade. The adjustment
shall be made with cast-iron ring inserts concrete
grade rings or cast-in-place concrete rings or squares.
Cast-in-place concrete rings or squares shall be
constructed after the asphalt surface has been placed.
When concrete rings are used the concrete shall
conform to the requirements of Chapter 12. Concrete
shall be Class AA(AE). The concrete mix shall be
one part cement to two parts sand or Kent Seal.
Manholes and valves in asphalt surfaces shall have
the cast iron ring and cover constructed such that the
cast iron ring is one-sixteenth inch (1/16th") lower
than the existing or new pavement. Manhole rings
shall be set to the grade and slope of the road – shim
and grout ring into place.
Where manholes are to be raised this is be
accomplished by removing the cover and frame and
raising the manhole to proper elevation with
concrete.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
ROADWAY CONSTRUCTION
16—3
Rings and covers shall be protected during
backfilling and compaction of the soil and during the
placing or replacing of road surfaces. Any ring or
cover loosened from the manhole section shall be
resent in cement mortar and any ring or cover
damaged or broken shall be replaced by the
Developer/Developer/Contractor at its expense.
16.12 ASPHAULT SURFACE
TREATMENTS
The asphalt surface treatments shall be mixed and
placed in accordance with the Utah Chapter of the
American Public Works Association (APWA)
Manual of Standard Specification, latest edition
including latest addendum.
The following sections shall apply:
Section 32 01 13.61 Slurry Seal;
Section 32 01 13.64 Chip Seal;
Section 32 01 13.52 Mastic Seal;
Section 32 01 13.50 Fog Seal.
Section 32 01 13.68 High Density Mineral Bond
Seal.
The City Public Works Department will provide the
Developer/Contractor with the mix design from the
APWA manual based on location and time of year
placed.
History: 05/17 - Ord 17-01E
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER AND SIDEWALK
17—1
17. CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER
AND SIDEWALK
17.01 GENERAL
17.02 CONCRETE
17.03 GRADE
17.04 FORMS
17.05 SUBGRADE PREPARATION
17.06 CONSTRUCTION OF CURB, GUTTER
AND SIDEWALK
17.07 CONCRETE CURB WALL
17.08 6-INCH CONCRETE DRIVE APPROACH
17.09 AMERICAN DISABILITIES
ACCESSIBILITY STANDARDS IN
PUBLIC STREET RIGHT OF-WAYS
17.10 LANDSCAPE RESTORATION
17.01 GENERAL:
This section covers installation of curb and gutter,
sidewalk, combination of curb, gutter and sidewalk,
cross gutter, drive approaches handicap ramps and
curb returns. All improvements shall be constructed
to the dimensions and thickness shown on the
Standard Drawings.
17.02 CONCRETE:
Concrete shall be Class AA(AE) and shall meet all of
the requirements of Chapter 12, Portland Cement
Concrete. Under no condition shall the water cement
ratio exceed 0.53.
17.03 GRADE:
After construction, gutters shall be checked by
flowing water. The Public Facilities Inspector/Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer shall be present during
the flow test. Removing concrete and replacing to
the correct grade shall repair any high spots or
depressions (which exceed 0.02 feet). (Minimum
flow line grade shall be 0.5 percent.)
17.04 FORMS:
All forms shall be steel, except at curves with a
radius smaller than 200 feet. They shall be of a size
to match the sections shown on the Drawings. Forms
shall be held firmly in place with stakes or other
approved means and shall be true to line and grade.
All forms shall be clean and coated with a light oil to
prevent the concrete from adhering to them. Clamps,
spreaders and braces shall be used where required to
insure rigidity in the forms.
Forms shall not vary from vertical grade by more
than 0.02 feet and from horizontal alignment by more
than 0.05 feet. All forms shall have smooth even
lines in both the horizontal and vertical plane.
Forms for curved sections shall be so constructed and
placed that the finish surface of walls and edge of
sidewalks, curbs and gutters will not deviate from the
arc of the curve.
17.05 SUBGRADE PREPARATION:
The developer/Developer/Contractor shall grade to
the line and grade approved by the City. No concrete
shall be placed without approved cut sheets. The
sub-grade shall be properly shaped to conform to the
cross section shown on the Standard Drawings,
graded and compacted. Compaction shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 11, Earthwork.
All excess material excavated by the
Developer/Developer/Contractor shall be removed
from the site. Removal of the excavated material
shall be done before or immediately after the
concrete is placed. The Developer/Contractor shall
maintain adequate barricades and other devices to
protect the public until excavated material is
removed.
Placement of concrete on unsuitable materials shall
not be permitted. The subgrade surface shall have a
4-inch roadbase foundation as shown on the Standard
Drawings. Immediately prior to the placing of
concrete, the subgrade shall be compacted using a
mechanical foot compactor, with compaction being at
least ninety-six percent (96%) density.
17.06 CONSTRUCTION OF CURB, GUTTER
AND SIDEWALK:
Concrete curb, gutter and sidewalk may be
constructed by first constructing the curb and gutter
and then constructing the sidewalk behind it. If this
method is used the joint between the back of curb and
front edge of sidewalk shall be sealed. The curb and
gutter may be placed using stationary forms or the
slip method of forming. Concrete curb, gutter and
sidewalk may be constructed at the same time,
combination curb, gutter and sidewalk. Stationary
forms can be used to place combination curb, gutter
and sidewalk or the slip form method can be used if it
can be demonstrated that the tolerances specified
herein can be met.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER AND SIDEWALK
17—2
Curb and gutter to be installed with bituminous
asphalt cement pavement shall have contraction
joints placed every 10 feet by use of 1/8-inch steel
template of the exact cross section of the curb and
gutter. Remove the templates as the concrete takes
initial set. Cut the joint 1-1/2 inches deep when using
the slip form method to place the concrete. Use 1/2-
inch thick, pre-molded, expansion joint filler at curb
and gutter radii, where the curb and gutter abuts a
solid object and at intervals not to exceed 50 feet,
unless otherwise specified by the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer.
Joints in sidewalk, when placed separately and
adjacent to the curb shall match the contraction and
expansion joints in the curb and gutter as well as
where the sidewalk abuts a solid object. Sidewalks
not placed adjacent the curb shall have contraction
joints at 10-foot intervals. The joints shall be
approximately 3/16 inch wide and approximately
one-half of the total slab thickness in depth.
Expansion joints shall be 1/2-inch thick, shall be
placed every 50 feet, adjoins existing sidewalks, or
abuts a solid object.
Material for 1/2-inch expansion joints shall be as
specified in AASHTO M-153 and AASHTO M-213,
and shall be installed with its top approximately 1/4-
inch below the concrete surface.
After the concrete placed for a sidewalk has been
brought to the established grade and screeded, it shall
be float finished, edged and then given a light broom
finish. In no case shall dry cement or a mixture of
dry cement and sand be sprinkled on the surface to
absorb moisture or hasten hardening. Surface edges
of all slabs shall be rounded to a radius of 1/2 inch.
After concrete has been placed in curb and gutter
forms, it shall be consolidated so as to insure a
thorough mixture, eliminate air pockets, and create
uniform, smooth sides. As the concrete takes its
initial set the forms shall be removed and all exposed
surfaces shall be float finished, edged and broomed
lightly. The curb and gutter shall be constructed to
the dimensions shown in the Standard Drawings.
The top and face of the curb and also the top of the
apron on combination curb and gutter must be
finished true to line and grade and without any
noticeable irregularities of surface. No portion of the
surface or face of the curb and gutter shall depart
more than 1/4 inch from a straight edge ten feet in
length, placed on the curb parallel to the street center
line nor shall any part of the exposed surface present
a wavy appearance.
17.07 CONCRETE CURB WALL:
Concrete curb wall shall be Class AA(AE) and shall
meet all of the requirements of Chapter 12, Portland
Cement Concrete.
Reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements of
Chapter 13, Reinforcing Steel.
Excavation for and backfill around the curb walls
shall meet all the requirements of Chapter 11,
Earthwork.
The curb walls shall be constructed to the dimensions
and grades shown on the Standard Drawings or
improvement drawings or as determined by the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer.
17.08 6-INCH CONCRETE DRIVE
APPROACH:
The concrete to be used for the drive approach shall
be Class AA(AE) and shall meet the requirements of
Chapter 12, Portland Cement Concrete.
The driveways shall be a minimum of 6-inch thick.
They shall be constructed to the dimensions shown
on the Standard Drawings. The concrete shall be
finished as described above for sidewalks.
The driveways shall have a compacted 4-inch
untreated base course under them.
17.09 AMERICAN DISABILITIES
ACCESSIBILITY STANDARDS IN
PUBLIC STREET RIGHT OF-WAYS:
This section sets guidelines for accessibility to places
of public accommodation and commercial facilities
by individuals with disabilities. These guidelines are
to be applied during the design, construction, and
alteration of street construction or public buildings.
The construction of curb ramps and drive approaches
shall conform to the Standard Drawings.
1. Curb Ramp Location:
Curb ramps complying with Section 16.09 shall
be provided wherever an accessible route crosses
a curb or as determined necessary during the
project review process.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER AND SIDEWALK
17—3
2. Curb Ramp Slope:
Slope of curb ramps shall be the least possible
slope. The maximum slope of a ramp in new
construction shall be 1:12. The maximum rise for
any run shall be thirty (30) inches. Transitions
from ramps to walks, gutters, or streets shall be
flush and free of abrupt changes. Maximum
slopes of adjoining gutters, road surface
immediately adjacent to the curb ramp, or
accessible route shall not exceed 1:20.
3. Curb Ramp Width:
The minimum width of a curb ramp shall be
thirty-six (36) inches, exclusive of flared sides.
4. Curb Ramp Surface:
Surface of curb ramps shall be stable, firm, and
slip resistant.
5. Sides of Curb Ramps:
If a curb ramp is located where pedestrians must
walk across the ramp, or where it is not protected
by hand rails or guardrails, it shall have flared
sides: the maximum slope of the flare shall be
1:12 (see Standard Drawings). Curb ramps with
returned curbs may be used where pedestrians
would not normally walk across the ramp.
6. Built up Curb Ramps:
Built-up curb ramps shall be located so that they
do not project into vehicular traffic lanes.
7. Obstructions:
Curb ramps shall be located or protected to
prevent their obstruction by parked vehicles.
8. Location of Marked Crossings:
Curb ramps at marked crossings shall be wholly
contained within the markings, excluding any
flared sides.
9. Diagonal Curb Ramps:
If diagonal (or corner type) curb ramps have
returned curbs or other well-defined edges, such
edges shall be parallel to the direction of
pedestrian flow. The bottom of diagonal curb
ramps shall have a forty-eight (48) inch minimum
clear space. If diagonal curb ramps are provided
at marked crossings, the forty-eight (48) inch
clear space shall be within the markings. If
diagonal curb ramps have flared sides, they shall
also have at least a twenty-four (24) inch long
segment of straight curb located on each side of
the curb ramp and within the marked crossing.
10. Islands:
Any raised islands in crossing shall be cut
through level with the street or have curb ramps at
both sides and a level area at least forty-eight (48)
inches long between the curb ramp in the part of
the island intersected by the crossing.
17.10 LANDSCAPE RESTORATION:
Areas of new construction that cover or disturb
existing landscaped areas with fills and cuts or areas
disturbed by construction of retaining walls shall
have the landscape restored. Areas that have lawn or
flower beds shall be restored including sprinkling
systems that might be damaged or relocated because
of construction. Lawn covered or removed shall be
replaced by sod.
The topsoil shall be fertile, sandy loam topsoil,
obtained from well-drained areas. It shall be without
admixture of subsoil or slag and shall be free of
stones, lumps, sticks, plants or their roots, toxic
substances or other extraneous matter that may be
harmful to plant growth and would interfere with
future maintenance. Topsoil pH range shall be 5.3 to
6.0.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
CONCRETE CURB AND GUTTER AND SIDEWALK
18—1
18. STORM DRAINS
18.01 GENERAL
18.02 PIPE INSTALLATION
18.03 PIPE
18.04 MANHOLES
18.05 CONCRETE
18.06 REINFORCING STEEL
18.07 STORM DRAIN INLET BOXES
18.08 PIPE CONNECTING INLET BOXES TO
EXISTING STORM DRAINS
18.01 GENERAL:
This section covers installation of storm drainpipe,
manholes, and curb face inlet boxes. All
improvements shall be constructed to the dimension
and thickness shown on the Standard Drawings.
18.02 PIPE INSTALLATION:
Installation of pipe shall be in an open trench unless
otherwise shown. Trench and backfill shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 3, Trench Excavation and
Backfill.
18.03 PIPE:
Pipe and pipe laying shall meet the requirements of
Chapter 5, Concrete Pipe, Chapter 6, PVC Plastic
Pipe, Chapter 7, Polyethylene Corrugated Pipe,
Chapter 8, Polyethylene Corrugated Pipe with Water
Tight Joints. Pipe shall be laid with the bells up
grade.
18.04 MANHOLES:
Manholes shall meet the requirements of Chapter 9,
Manholes. Where the size of the storm drain does
not permit use of manholes, precast or cast-in-place
reinforced concrete boxes shall be used. Concrete
used in precast or cast-in-place boxes shall be Class
AA(AE).
18.05 CONCRETE:
Concrete shall meet the requirements of Chapter 12,
Portland Cement Concrete.
18.06 REINFORCING STEEL:
Reinforcing steel shall meet the requirements of
Chapter 13, Reinforcing Steel.
18.07 STORM DRAIN INLET BOXES:
The concrete to be used for the storm drain inlet
boxes shall be Class AA(AE). The boxes shall be
built to the dimensions and reinforced as shown on
the Standard Drawings. The boxes may be precast or
cast-in-place.
Excavation and backfill of the boxes shall meet the
requirements of Chapter 11, Earthwork.
The storm drain inlet grate and frame shall be a D &
L Supply I-3518 single unit with curb box with type
"V" grate or equal. Grates and frames are to be
dipped in cold tar epoxy following fabrication.
18.08 PIPE CONNECTING INLET BOXES
TO EXISTING STORM DRAINS:
The pipe to be used for connecting a new inlet box to
an existing storm drain shall be of the same type of
pipe as the existing pipe to which it is being
connected. Where possible such connections shall be
made by installation of a manhole. The Public
Facilities Inspector/Engineer shall approve
connection locations and methods.
Connections to concrete pipe shall be by coring a
hole in the pipe and then grouting the connecting pipe
to the concrete pipe. Connections to PVC or HDPE
pipe shall be as per manufacture's recommendations.
These recommendations will be reviewed with the
Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer prior to
construction.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
UTAH DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION RIGHTS-OF-WAY
19—1
19. UTAH DEPARTMENT OF
TRANSPORTATION RIGHTS-OF-WAY
19.01 GENERAL
19.02 UTILITY LINE AGREEMENT
19.03 INSPECTION FEES
19.04 PERMITS
19.01 GENERAL:
Work to be performed within UDOT rights-of-way
shall be done in accordance with "SPECIFICATIONS
FOR EXCAVATION ON STATE HIGHWAY
RIGHT-OF-WAY", latest revision. The
Developer/Contractor shall be responsible to obtain all
necessary permits and meet any bond requirements
imposed by that agency.
19.02 UTILITY LINE AGREEMENT:
The improvements to be placed along or across UDOT
rights-of-way are subject to the conditions of Utility
Line Agreements between the UTAH DEPARTMENT
OF TRANSPORTATION and CLINTON CITY. The
Developer/Contractor is bound by all conditions of the
Agreement. The Developer shall be responsible for
completing the Utility Line Agreement and furnishing
the necessary Drawings and other information,
including meeting with UDOT to insure requirements
are met, required by UDOT. The Developer shall then
submit the completed agreement to the City for
signature and forwarding to UDOT. The
Developer/Contractor shall not proceed with any work
in a UDOT right-of-way until it has obtained a permit
from UDOT, posted the required bond (if one is
required) and provided any other information, such as
traffic control plans, required by UDOT.
19.03 INSPECTION FEES:
The Developer/Contractor will pay UDOT fees for any
UDOT inspectors.
19.04 PERMITS:
A copy of all UDOT applications and permits issued to
the Developer/Contractor by UDOT will be provided to
the Clinton City Community Development Department
for inclusion in the permanent file.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
CASINGS
20—1
20. CASINGS
20.01 GENERAL
20.02 MATERIALS
20.03 CONSTRUCTION METHODS
20.04 LINE AND GRADE
20.05 CARRIER PIPE INSTALLATION
THROUGH CASINGS
20.06 PERMITS
20.01 GENERAL:
This division defines the materials and construction
requirements for steel casings under canals, railroad
tracks, highways and Interstates. All construction
operations shall be subject to the approval of the
canal, Railroad Company or UDOT whose facility is
being crossed. The Developer/Contractor shall make
application to and secure permission from the canal,
Railroad Company or UDOT before commencing
work within the right-of-way. The
Developer/Contractor shall provide all insurance and
the services of all watchmen and flagmen required by
the Railroad Company or UDOT. The
Developer/Contractor will pay the Railroad Company
and UDOT for their inspection services.
20.02 MATERIALS:
The pipe shall be welded steel pipe conforming to
ASTM Designation A-139, Grade A. Pipe wall
thickness shall be a minimum of point three seven
five inches (0.375") or as shown on the Drawings.
20.03 CONSTRUCTION METHODS:
The steel pipe casing shall be jacked under the
railroad tracks, highway or Interstate using methods
submitted to the Public Facilities Inspector/Engineer
for review by the Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer. Circular pipe joints shall be field
welded as the jacking process progresses. The pipe
interior shall be completely excavated and cleaned
prior to installation of the carrier pipe.
Steel pipe casing shall be installed by open cut under
canals. These installations shall be as per details
approved by the Canal Company.
All required approach trenches or working pits shall
be excavated and shored as defined in Chapter 3,
Trench Excavation and Backfill. Provisions shall be
made for a drain sump in one corner of the working
pit to allow for the accumulation and pumping of
seepage water, if ground water is expected to be
encountered.
20.04 LINE AND GRADE:
Casings shall be installed accurately to the line and
grade shown on the Drawings. Casings shall be
installed to grade with sufficient accuracy to permit
installation of the carrier pipe to the design grade
shown on the Drawings or to the cover depth
required. The Developer’s Public Facilities
Inspector/Engineer will provide base lines and
benchmarks at each casing location. Instrument
checks of the line and grade shall be made by the
Developer/Contractor at intervals sufficient to
maintain the casing on line and grade.
20.05 CARRIER PIPE INSTALLATION
THROUGH CASINGS:
The carrier pipe shall be installed to the grade shown
on the Drawings. Casing insulators or chocks shall
be fastened to the carrier pipe as per the
manufacturer's recommendations. For ductile iron
pipe or PVC pipe, insulators shall be installed within
one foot on each side of the bell and one in the center
of the joint when 18' or 20' long joints are used.
Metal components of the insulators or chocks shall be
manufactured from 14 Ga. Steel, hot rolled and
pickled and plastic coated or Type 304(18-8)
stainless steel. The liner shall be polyvinyl chloride
or Neoprene Rubber with antioxidant and antiozonant
properties for extended service life. Runners shall be
glass-reinforced plastic or UHMW polyethylene.
Runners shall have high abrasion resistance and a
low friction coefficient. Following installation of the
carrier pipe the annular space between the inside of
the casing and the outside of the carrier pipe shall be
blown full of sand. The sanding operation shall be
carried out such that sand is placed in the center of
the casing first and the annular space filled as the
placing pipe is withdrawn. The
Developer/Contractor shall not be allowed to wash
sand in from the end of the casing.
20.06 PERMITS:
A copy of all UDOT, railroad or similar applications
and permits issued to the Developer/Contractor by a
controlling agency other than the City will be
provided to the Clinton City Community
Development Department for inclusion in the
permanent file.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
STREET EXCAVATIONS/ROAD CUTS
21—1
21. STREET EXCAVATION/ROAD
CUTS
21.01 PERMIT REQUIRED; BASIS FOR
ISSUANCE
21.02 CUTTING OF NEWLY PAVED STREETS
21.03 PERMIT APPLICATION
REQUIREMENTS
21.04 EMERGENCY WORK
21.05 PERMIT FEES
21.06 PERMIT - CONTENTS - DURATION
AND EXTENSIONS
21.07 PERMIT - NO TRANSFER OR
ASSIGNMENT
21.08 COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS,
STANDARDS, TRAFFIC-CONTROL
REGULATIONS; SITE PERMITTEE
IDENTIFICATION
21.09 OTHER HIGHWAY PERMITS
21.10 RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN
PUBLIC WAYS
21.11 IMPACT OF EXCAVATION ON
EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS
21.12 RESTORATION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY
21.13 RESTORATION OF PRIVATE
PROPERTY
21.14 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS
21.15 BOND - WHEN REQUIRED,
CONDITIONS, WARRANTY
21.16 HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT;
LIMITATIONS ON CITY LIABILITY
21.17 WORK WITHOUT PERMIT - PENALTY
21.18 FAILURE TO COMPLY; DEFAULT IN
PERFORMANCE
21.19 FAILURE TO CONFORM TO
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS -
PENALTY
21.20 APPEAL OF SUSPENSION,
REVOCATION, OR STOP ORDER
21.21 TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC
BARRICADES
21.22 CONFLICT WITH GOVERNING
PROVISIONS
21.01 PERMIT REQUIRED, BASIS FOR
ISSUANCE:
Any Person desiring to perform work of any kind in a
Public Way within the City shall make application
for a permit. The decision by the City to issue a
permit shall include, among other factors determined
by the City, the following:
1. The capacity of the Public Way to
accommodate the facilities or structures proposed
to be installed in the Public Way;
2. The capacity of the Public Way to
accommodate multiple wire in addition to cables,
conduits, pipes or other facilities or structures of
other users of the Public Way, such as electrical
power, telephone, gas, sewer, secondary water
(pressure irrigation) and water;
3. The damage or disruption, if any of public or
private facilities, improvements, or landscaping
previously existing in the Public Way;
4. The public interest in minimizing the cost
and disruption of construction from numerous
excavations of the Public Way.
21.02 CUTTING OF NEWLY PAVED
STREETS
1. The City’s policy is not to cut newly paved
streets for five (5) years from the time of paving.
This applies to new streets, streets that have been
reconstructed, and overlaid streets. However, in
the situations where a street must be cut during
this time period, the street shall be restored per
the APWA Bituminous Pavement T Patch
standard, latest edition.
History: 03/18 - Ord 18-01E
21.03 PERMIT APPLICATION
REQUIREMENTS:
Application for a permit shall be filed with the
Director on a form or forms to be furnished by the
City. Property owners and/or tenants for whom work
is being done shall be responsible for obtaining the
permits, provided, however, contractors may obtain
the permit in the contractor’s name.
No Person shall be eligible to apply for or receive
permits to do work within the Public Ways of the
City, save and except the following:
1. Contractors licensed by the state as general
contractors;
2. Providers;
3. Property owners installing, replacing, or
maintaining less than five hundred square feet or
one hundred linear feet of sidewalk, curb, and
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
STREET EXCAVATIONS/ROAD CUTS
21—2
gutter, or driveway approach, or other work
approved by the Director, upon a portion of the
Public Way adjacent to their residence; or
4. Persons offering a service which requires
occupation of the Public Way, such as scaffold or
staging, staging of a crane, installation or
maintenance of electric signs, glass, awnings, and
painting or cleaning of buildings or sign boards or
other structures.
The Director may deny the issuance of permits to
contractors, utility companies, or other permit
Applicants who have shown by past performance that
in the opinion of the Director they will not
consistently conform to the Development Standards,
or the requirements of this Chapter.
When necessary, in the judgment of the Director, to
fully determine the relationship of the work proposed
to existing or proposed facilities within the Public
Ways, or to determine whether the work proposed
complies with the Development Standards, the
Director may require the filing of engineering plans,
Specifications and sketches showing the proposed
work in sufficient detail to permit determination of
such relationship or compliance, or both, and the
application shall be deemed suspended until such
plans and sketches are filed and approved.
It shall be unlawful for any Person to commence
work upon any Public Way until the Director has
approved the application and until a permit has been
issued for such work, except as specifically approved
to the contrary in this Chapter.
The disapproval or denial of an application by the
Director may be appealed by the Applicant to the
City Council by filing of a written notice of appeal
within ten days of the action of the Director. The
City Council shall hear such appeal, if written request
therefore be timely filed as soon as practicable, and
render its decision within two weeks following notice
of such appeal.
In approving or disapproving work within any Public
Way, or permits therefore, in the inspection of such
work; in reviewing plans, sketches or Specifications;
and generally in the exercise of the authority
conferred upon him/her by this Chapter, the Public
Facilities Inspector shall act in such manner as to
preserve and protect the Public Way and the use
thereof, but shall have no authority to govern the
actions or inaction of Permittees and Applicants or
other Persons which have no relationship to the use,
preservation or protection of the Public Way.
It shall be unlawful for a City, County, State, Federal
or other government employee to perform routine
maintenance work, not involving excavations,
without first having obtained a permit therefore.
A permit is not required from the Director for hand
digging excavations for installation or repair of
sprinkler systems and landscaping within the nonpaved
areas of the Public Way. However,
conformance to all City Specifications is required.
21.04 EMERGENCY WORK:
Any Person maintaining pipes, lines, or facilities in
the Public Way may proceed with work upon existing
facilities without a permit when Emergency
circumstances demand the work to be done
immediately; provided a permit could not reasonably
and practicably have been obtained beforehand.
In the event that Emergency work is commenced on
or within any Public Way of the City during regular
business hours, the Director shall be notified within
one-half hour from the time the work is commenced.
The Person commencing and conducting such work
shall take all necessary safety precautions for the
protection of the public and the direction and control
of traffic, and shall insure that work is accomplished
according to City Development Standards, the
Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices and
other applicable laws, regulations, or generally
recognized practices in the industry.
Any Person commencing Emergency work in the
Public Way during other than business hours without
a permit shall immediately thereafter apply for a
permit or give notice during the first hour of the first
regular business day on which City offices are open
for business after such work is commenced. A
permit for such Emergency work may be issued
which shall be retroactive to the date when the work
was begun, at the discretion of the Director.
21.05 PERMIT FEES:
The City shall charge and the Permittee shall pay
upon issuance of the permit, fees for costs associated
with the work performed under the permit as outlined
in the Consolidated Fee Schedule. Such costs could
include costs for reviewing the project and issuing
the permit, inspections of the project, deterioration of
the Public Way or diminution of the useful life of the
Public Way, and other costs to the City associated
with the work to be done under the permit. All costs
shall be assessed in a non-discriminatory manner.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
STREET EXCAVATIONS/ROAD CUTS
21—3
The Council may waive permit fees or penalties or
portion thereof provided for in this Chapter, when
he/she determines that such permit fee or penalty:
1. Pertains to construction or rehabilitation of
housing for Persons whose income is below the
median income level for the City; or
2. Pertains to an encroachment on the Public
Way involving a beautification project which
furthers specific goals and objectives set forth in
the City’s strategic plan, master plans, or other
official documents, including decorative street
lighting, building facade lighting, flower and
planter boxes, and landscaping.
Additional charges to cover the reasonable cost and
expenses of any required engineering review,
inspection, and Work Site Restoration associated
with each undertaking may be charged by the City to
each Permittee, in addition to the permit fee.
21.06 PERMIT - CONTENTS - DURATION
AND EXTENSIONS:
Each permit application shall state the starting date
and estimated completion date. Work shall be
completed within five days from the starting date or
as determined by the Director. Such determination
shall be based upon factors reasonable related to the
work to be performed under the permit. Such factors
may include, in addition to other factors related to the
work to be performed, the following:
1. The scope of work to be performed under the
permit;
2. Maintaining the safe and effective flow of
pedestrian and vehicular traffic on the Public Way
affected by the work;
3. Protecting the existing improvements to the
Public Way impacted by the work;
4. The season of the year during which the work
is to be performed as well as the current weather
and its impact on public safety and the use of the
Public Way by the public;
5. Use of the Public Way for extraordinary
events anticipated by the City.
The Director shall be notified by the Permittee of
commencement of the work within twenty-four hours
prior to commencing work. The permit shall be valid
for the time period specified in the permit.
If the work is not completed during such period, prior
to the expiration of the permit, the Permittee may
apply to the Director for an additional permit or an
extension, which may be granted by the Director for
good cause shown.
The length of the extension requested by the
Permittee shall be subject to the approval of the
Director. No extension shall be made that allows
work to be completed in the winter period without
payment of winter fees.
21.07 PERMIT - NO TRANSFER OR
ASSIGNMENT:
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and
work shall not be performed under a permit in any
place other than that specified in the permit. Nothing
herein contained shall prevent a Permittee from
subcontracting the work to be performed under a
permit; provided, however, that the holder of the
permit shall be and remain responsible for the
performance of the work under the permit, and for all
bonding, insurance and other requirements of this
Chapter and under said permit.
21.08 COMPLIANCE WITH
SPECIFICATIONS, STANDARDS,
TRAFFIC-CONTROL REGULATIONS;
SITE PERMITTEE IDENTIFICATION:
The work performed in the Public Way shall conform
to the requirements of the Engineering and Standard
Specifications and Drawings, copies of which shall
be available from the Director, kept on file in the
office of the City Recorder and are open to public
inspection during office hours.
Where a job site is left unattended, before completion
of the work, signage with minimum two inch high
letters shall be attached to a barricade or otherwise
posted at the site, indicating the Permittee’s name, or
company name, telephone number, and after hours
telephone number.
All excavations shall be conducted in a manner
resulting in a minimum amount of interference or
interruption of street or pedestrian traffic.
Inconvenience to Residents and Businesses fronting
on the Public Way shall be minimized. Suitable,
adequate and sufficient barricades and/or other
structures will be available and used where necessary
to prevent accidents involving property or Persons.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
STREET EXCAVATIONS/ROAD CUTS
21—4
Barricades must be in place until all of the
Permittee’s equipment is removed from the site and
the excavation has been backfilled and proper
temporary gravel surface is in place, except where
backfilling and resurfacing is to be done by the City;
in which case the barricades, together with any
necessary lights, flares or torches, must remain in
place until the backfill work is actually commenced
by the City. From sunset to sunrise, all barricades
and excavations must be clearly outlined by adequate
signal lights, torches, etc. The Police Department
and Fire Department shall be notified at least 24
hours in advance of any planned excavation requiring
street closure or traffic detour.
21.09 OTHER HIGHWAY PERMITS:
Holders of permits for work on highways owned or
under the jurisdiction of other government entities,
but located within the City limits, shall not be
required to obtain permits from the City under the
provisions of this Chapter, unless the work extends
beyond the back side of the curb, or beyond any other
designated jurisdictional boundary. Any City permit
shall not be construed to permit or allow work on a
County road on a State highway within the City
without an applicable County or State permit.
The Director, in his or her discretion, shall have the
right and authority to regulate work under permits
issued by other governmental entities with respect to
hours and days of work, and measures required to be
taken by the Permittee of said governmental entity
for the protection of traffic and safety of Persons and
property. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in
this Chapter shall be construed to impose any duty,
implied or express, on the City or its employees,
officers, agents or assigns, relative to the protection
of traffic and safety of Persons or property, arising
out of the issuance of any permit issued by
government entities other than the City, or arising out
of any work performed on any Public Way owned or
within the jurisdiction of the City.
21.10 RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN
PUBLIC WAYS:
The Director may direct any Person owning or
maintaining facilities or structures in the Public Way
to alter, modify or relocate such facilities or
structures as the Director may require as set forth
herein. Sewers, pipes, drains, tunnels, conduits, Pipe
Driveways, vaults, trash receptacles and overhead
and underground gas, electric, telephone,
telecommunication and communication facilities
shall specifically be subject to such directives. The
Person owning or maintaining the facilities or
structures shall, at their own cost and expense and
upon reasonable written notice by the City, promptly
protect, or promptly alter or relocate such facilities or
structures, or part thereof, as directed by the City. In
the event that such Person refuses or neglects to
conform to the directive of the City, the City shall
have the right to break through, remove, alter or
relocate such part of the facilities or structures
without liability to such Person. Such Person shall
pay to the City all costs incurred by the City in
connection with such work performed by the City,
including also design, engineering, construction,
materials, insurance, court costs and attorneys fees.
Any directive by the Director shall be based upon of
the following:
1. Input from the City Engineer and Public
Works Department.
2. The facility or structure was installed, erected
or is being maintained contrary to law, or
determined by the Building Official to be
structurally unsound or defective;
3. The facility or structure constitutes a
nuisance as defined under State statute;
4. The permit under which the facility or
structure was installed has expired or has been
revoked;
5. The Public Way is about to be repaired or
improved and such facilities or structures may
pose a hindrance to construction; or
6. The grades or lines of the Public Way are to
be altered or changed.
Any directive of the Director/Public Facilities
Inspector under this Section shall be under and
consistent with the City’s police power. Unless an
emergency condition exists, the Director/Public
Facilities Inspector shall make a good faith effort to
consult with the Person regarding any condition that
may result in a removal or relocation of facilities in
the Public Way to consider possible avoidance or
minimization of removal or relocation requirements
and provide the directive as far enough in advance of
the required removal or relocation to allow the
Person a reasonable opportunity to plan and minimize
cost associated with the required removal or
relocation.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
STREET EXCAVATIONS/ROAD CUTS
21—5
This obligation does not apply to facilities or
structures originally located on private property
pursuant to a private easement, which property was
later incorporated into the Public Way, if that prior
private easement grants a superior vested right.
Any Person owning or maintaining facilities or
structures in the Public Way who fails to alter,
modify or relocate such facilities or structures upon
notice to do so by the Director/Public Facilities
Inspector shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor.
All costs of alteration, modification or relocation
shall be borne by the Person owning or maintaining
the facilities or structures involved.
The City may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster or
other emergency, as determined by the City in its
reasonable discretion, cut or move any parts of the
System and appurtenances on, over or under the
Public Way, in which event the City shall not be
liable therefore to a Person. The City shall notify a
Person in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any
event as soon as possible and in no case later than the
next business day following any action taken under
this subsection.
21.11 IMPACT OF EXCAVATION ON
EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS:
If any sidewalk or curb ramp is blocked by
excavation work, a temporary sidewalk or curb ramp
shall be constructed or provided. Said temporary
improvement shall be safe for travel and convenient
for users, and consistent with City standards for such.
Where excavations are made in paved areas, the
surface shall be replaced with a temporary gravel
surface until such time as the permanent repairs are
completed.
Protection of personal property of a private property
owner or city is the responsibility of the permitee.
1. At any time a Permittee disturbs the yard,
residence or the real or Personal property of a
private Property Owner or the City, such
Permittee shall insure that such property is
returned, replaced and/or restored to a condition
that is comparable to the condition that existed
prior to the commencement of the work.
2. The costs associated with the disturbance and
the return, replacement and/or restoration shall be
borne by the Permittee. Further, a Permittee shall
reimburse a Property Owner or the City, for any
actual damage caused by the Permittee, its
subcontractor, or its independent contractor, in
connection with the disturbance of such property.
However, nothing in this Subsection shall require
the Permittee to pay a subscriber or private
Property Owner when that subscriber or private
Property Owner requests that the Permittee
remove, replace or relocate improvements
associated with the service provided by the
Permittee to the Property Owner and when the
Permittee exercises due care in the performance
of that service, or when the subscriber or private
Property Owner provided false information to the
Permittee on which the Permittee relied to its
detriment.
Examples of types of acts specifically included in this
Section are the following:
1. Removal of sod, lawn, shrubbery, flowers,
trees, driveways, or fence, to install, trench,
repair, replace, remove or locate, equipment,
cable or other Appurtenances of the Permittee;
2. Installation or removal of equipment or other
Appurtenances of the Permittee’s System within a
private Property Owner’s property or residence
which requires drilling, excavating, plastering, or
the like on the part of the Permittee;
3. Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of
personal property or a fixture of a private
Property Owner (such as a motor vehicle, fence,
air conditioning, heating unit, or the like) in order
to perform some sort of construction,
maintenance or repair by the Permittee; or
4. Permanently removing a Permittee’s
equipment or other Appurtenances due to the
revocation, termination or non-renewal of the
franchise (if applicable).
Existing drainage channels, such as gutters or ditches,
shall be kept free of dirt or other debris so that natural
flow will not be interrupted. When it is necessary to
block or otherwise interrupt flow of the drainage
channel, a method of rerouting the flow must be
submitted for approval by the Director prior to the
blockage of the channel.
The requirements imposed upon the Permittee extend
to any subcontractor or independent contractor that
the Permittee might employee to perform the tasks
pursuant to the permit.
The requirements of this Section shall not apply to
the removal by a Permittee, of a permanent structure
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
STREET EXCAVATIONS/ROAD CUTS
21—6
placed by a Property Owner in a Public Way, unless
such Property Owner has received prior written
permission from the City granting the Property
Owner the right to install a permanent structure on a
Public Way, and such written permission has been
recorded in the office of the County Recorder.
21.12 RESTORATION OF PUBLIC
PROPERTY:1
1. The Permittee shall, at its own expense,
restore the surface of any Public Way to its
original condition and replace any removed or
damaged pavement with the same type and depth
of pavement as that which is adjoining, including
the gravel base material or as stated in 15.05.4
whichever is greater.
2. Each applicant shall:
a. For single excavated areas less than fifty
feet (50') in length and twenty feet (20') in
width, all materials that are dug out of the
trench or excavation shall be hauled off and
disposed of at an approved site. The trench or
excavation shall be refilled with new crushed
road base and compacted to ninety six percent
(96%) and made ready for the asphalt finish
surface. The trench or excavation shall be
patched by the contractor with a minimum of
three (3) inches of asphalt or as outlined in
Section 15.04.1 whichever is greater.
b. Before any excavation begins under this
permit and at all times during the excavation,
make proper provisions for protecting the
public with necessary guards, barricades,
lights, signals and with all other
appurtenances necessary to safeguard the lives
and property of the users of such roadway,
sidewalk and other facilities. Visible flasher
lights shall be used in hours of darkness.
c. Be responsible for any liability or
personal injury resulting from neglect. The
applicant shall indemnify Clinton City against
all claims, demands, costs, damages,
attorney’s fees or other expenses of any kind
occasioned by such neglect. The applicant
shall, upon request of the City, produce
evidence of insurance adequate to cover such
claims.
d. Be responsible for restoring all Public
Ways, including sidewalk surfaces, curb and
gutter, driveways, ditches, and other
landscaping, to their original condition in a
manner conforming to current Clinton City
specifications.
e. On any project, regardless of the age or
condition of the pavement, keep excavations
to a minimum and, wherever possible, locate
excavations so that one "common" patch can
cover as many excavations as possible.
f. Restore roads to a passable and safe
condition within sixteen (16) hours. All
remaining repairs and restoration shall take
place within ten (10) calendar days from the
date of the first excavation, except as outlined
herein for winter restoration. All debris
generated as a result of said excavation will be
removed immediately from the area upon
completion of the excavation. If, within the
standard ten (10) days, or other time period
authorized by the City Public Facilities
Inspector, the road cut or excavation has not
been repaired as required, Clinton City may
revoke the excavation bond and cause the
repairs to be made. The costs of repair shall
include administrative costs. The Permittee
shall be responsible for trench maintenance
for one (1) year after the date it was inspected
and approved by the City Public Facilities
Inspector. If repair of the road cut or trench is
necessary within the one-year period, the City
shall notify the Permittee in writing with a copy
provided to the Bonding Agent, if applicable. If
the defects are not corrected within thirty (30)
days after the City sends the notice, the City
may revoke the excavation bond and cause the
repairs to be made. The guarantee funds shall
be applied toward 1) construction or installation
of the improvements in accordance with City
standards; or 2) repair of the improvements to
bring them into conformity with City standards;
and 3) for payment of legal costs and
administrative charges incurred or assessed by
the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Permittee will remain liable to the City for any
deficiency after application bond and shall pay
the difference to the City on demand. The City
may refuse all future road cut permit request to
the Permittee or any company that the Permittee
may represent if funds are owed to the City for
necessary repairs.
g. Winter restoration shall consist of “cold
patch repairs” as outlined by the City Public
Facilities Inspector. The Permittee shall
remove all cold patch repairs as soon as
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
STREET EXCAVATIONS/ROAD CUTS
21—7
conditions are in compliance with the Clinton
City Engineering and Standard Specifications
and Standard Drawings and as authorized by
the City Public facilities Inspector. Permittee
shall remove and replace all cold patch repairs
within ten (10) days of notice by the City that
conditions are acceptable. Once work on
replacing the cold patch has started all
remaining repairs and restoration shall take
place within ten (10) calendar days from the
date work recommenced. All debris generated
as a result of said excavation will be removed
immediately from the area upon completion of
the excavation. If, within the standard ten (10)
days, or other time period authorized by the
City Public Facilities Inspector, the cold patch
has not been repaired as required, Clinton City
may revoke the excavation bond and cause the
repairs to be made. The costs of repair shall
include administrative costs. The Permittee
shall be responsible for trench maintenance
for one (1) year after the date of inspection for
replacement of the cold patch has been
approved by the City Public Facilities
Inspector. If repair of the road cut or trench is
necessary within the one-year period, the City
shall notify the Permittee in writing with a copy
provided to the Bonding Agent, if applicable. If
the defects are not corrected within thirty (30)
days after the City sends the notice, the City
may revoke the excavation bond and cause the
repairs to be made. The guarantee funds shall
be applied toward 1) construction or installation
of the improvements in accordance with City
standards; or 2) repair of the improvements to
bring them into conformity with City standards;
and 3) for payment of legal costs and
administrative charges incurred or assessed by
the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the
Permittee will remain liable to the City for any
deficiency after application bond and shall pay
the difference to the City on demand. The City
may refuse all future road cut permit request to
the Permittee or any company that the Permittee
may represent if funds are owed to the City for
necessary repairs.
h. All repairs required within the one-year
guarantee period shall be commenced within
ten (10) days of notification by the city and all
work completed within ten (10) days from the
date repairs are initiated, or other time period
authorized by the City Public Facilities
Inspector.
i. If in the determination of the City
Engineer or authorized representative repairs
are required sooner than outlined in “h” above
due to public health, safety, and/or welfare the
City will call the Permittee if possible in an
attempt to have the Permittee make repairs
immediately. If repairs can not or are not
made by the Permittee within a satisfactory
time period the City will go ahead with repairs
and bill the cost of such repairs, to include but
not be limited to material, man hours and
equipment hours to the Permittee. If the
Permittee does not repay the City within thirty
(30) days of invoice, the City may revoke the
excavation bond for payment of repairs made.
The guarantee funds shall be applied toward 1)
construction or installation of the improvements
in accordance with City standards; or 2) repair
of the improvements to bring them into
conformity with City standards; and 3) for
payment of legal costs and administrative
charges incurred or assessed by the city.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Permittee
will remain liable to the City for any deficiency
after application bond and shall pay the
difference to the City on demand. The City
may refuse all future road cut permit request to
the Permittee or any company that the Permittee
may represent if funds are owed to the City for
necessary repairs.
j. Limit the trench length left at grade but
unpaved to a maximum of one thousand feet
(1000'). No excavation shall be allowed to
continue until the one thousand feet (1000') of
trench has been restored with proper asphalt
surface, and inspected and accepted by the
City.
k. All excavations of twelve inches (12“) or
less in width shall be required to use flowable
fill prior to the application of an asphaltfinished
surface.
l. All excavation, when refilled, shall be
compacted to ninety-six percent (96%). The
contractor shall submit tests to the City
confirming that compaction.
m. Bore pits adjacent to or which may be
hazardous to traffic shall not be left open or
unshielded (covered) overnight. Shielding in
conformance with the appropriate OSHA and
Federal Highway Administration Manuals
shall be allowed in the case of large pits or
extensive bore and jack operations. Small
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
STREET EXCAVATIONS/ROAD CUTS
21—8
bores under two lane roadways should be
completed in one continuous operation.
n. Common trenching shall be required in
all subdivisions, unless otherwise approved or
accepted by the City Public Facilities
Inspector.
o. All utility excavation shall be bored
whenever possible.
3. For any asphalt surface three years old or
less, new asphalt must be provided for the length
of the cut and the width of all lanes affected by
the construction or other activity. For any asphalt
surface where thirty percent (30%) or more of the
width of any lane is affected by the construction
or other activity, new asphalt shall be provided
for the length of the cut and the width of all lanes
affected. For all other asphalt surfaces, new
asphalt shall be provided for the length and width
of the affected area as required in this chapter.
The City Public Facilities Inspector may require
that the surface of the street receiving new asphalt
be rotomilled prior to resurfacing. For the
purpose of this section a lane is determined to
extend from edge of asphalt or curb to the center
of the right-of-way.
21.13 RESTORATION OF PRIVATE
PROPERTY:
The Permittee shall, at its own expense, restore any
Private Property to its as good or better than the
original condition and replace any removed or
damaged vegetation, surfaces, systems, structures or
other private property. All restoration shall conform
to the quality and material originally installed and
shall be accomplished within the time limits set forth
in the permit, unless the Department grants additional
time in writing.
The Permittee shall obtain and provide to the city
written acceptance by the owner of any restored
property indicating that the owner accepts all work
conducted and holds the City harmless for any
discrepancies related to the restored property.
21.14 INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS.
Before a permit is issued, the Applicant shall furnish
to the City evidence that such Applicant has a
comprehensive general liability and property damage
policy that includes contractual liability coverage
endorsed with the following limits and provisions or
with such alternative limits and provisions as may be
approved by the City:
1. A minimum of One Million Dollars
($1,000,000) combined single limit per
occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury, and
property damage and not less than One Million
Dollars ($1,000,000) in the aggregate. The
general aggregate limit shall apply separately to
the permit, or the general aggregate limit shall be
two times the required occurrence limit. The
coverage shall be in the nature of Broad From
Commercial General Liability coverage. The
City Attorney may increase or decrease minimum
insurance limits, depending on the potential
liability of any project.
2. All policies shall include the City, its
employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers
and assigns, as insureds. Any reference to the
“City” shall include the City, its employees,
officers, officials, agents, volunteers and assigns.
3. The coverage shall be primary insurance as
respects the City, its employees, officers,
officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns. Any
insurance or self-insurance maintained by the
City, its employees, officers, officials, agents,
volunteers, and assigns shall be in excess of the
Permittee’s insurance and shall not contribute to
or with it.
4. Any Failure to comply with reporting
provisions of the policy shall not effect coverage
provided to the City, its employees, officers,
officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns.
5. Coverage shall state that the Permittee’s
insurance shall apply separately to each insured
against whom claim is made or suit is brought,
except with respect to the limits of the insurer’s
liability.
6. Underwriters shall have no right of recovery
or subrogation against the City, it being the intent
of the parties that the insurance policy so affected
shall protect both parties and be primary coverage
for any and all losses covered by the described
insurance.
7. The insurance companies issuing the policy
or policies shall have no recourse against the City
for payment of any premiums due or for any
assessments under any form of any policy.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
STREET EXCAVATIONS/ROAD CUTS
21—9
8. Each insurance policy shall be endorsed to
state that the coverage shall not be suspended,
voided, canceled, or reduced in coverage or in
limits, except after thirty (30) days’ prior written
notice by certified mail, return receipt requested
sent to the City.
9. Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify,
save harmless and defend the City and its officers
and employees against any claim or loss, damage
or expense sustained on account of damages to
Persons or property occurring by reason of permit
work done by the Permittee, his/her subcontractor
or agent, whether or not the work has been
completed and whether or not the right-of-way
has been opened to public travel.
10. Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify,
hold harmless and defend the City, and its officers
and employees against any claim or loss, damage
or expense sustained by any Person occurring by
reason of doing any work pursuant to the permit
including, but not limited to falling objects or
failure to maintain proper barricades and/or lights
as required from the time work begins until the
work is completed and right-of-way is opened for
public use.
Insurance is to be placed with insurers with an AM
Best rating of no less than an A carrier, with a rating
of “7” or higher.
The Permittee shall furnish the City with certificates
of insurance and original endorsements affecting
coverage required by the permit. The certificates and
endorsements for each insurance policy are to be
signed by a Person authorized by that insurer to bind
coverage on its behalf. The City expressly reserves
the right to require complete, certified copies of all
required insurance policies at any time.
Consequently, the Permittee shall be prepared to
provide such copies prior to the issuance of the
permit.
If any of the required policies are, or at any time
become, unsatisfactory to the City as to form or
substance, or if a company issuing any such policy is,
or at any time becomes, unsatisfactory to the City, the
Permittee shall promptly obtain a new policy, submit
the same to the City for approval, and thereafter
submit verification of coverage as required by the
City. Upon failure to furnish, deliver and maintain
such insurance as provided herein, the City may
declare the permit to be in default and pursue any and
all remedies the City may have at law or in equity,
including those actions outlined in this Chapter.
The Permittee shall include all subcontractors as
insured under its policies or shall furnish separate
certificates and endorsements for each subcontractor.
All coverages for subcontractors shall be subject to
all of the requirements stated herein.
Any deductibles or self-insured retentions shall be
declared to and approved by the City. At the option
of the City, either the insurer shall reduce or
eliminate such deductibles or self-insured retentions
as respects the City, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers or assigns, or the Permittee shall
procure a bond, in a form acceptable to the City,
guaranteeing payment of losses and related
investigations, claim administration, and defense
expenses.
A Property Owner performing work adjacent to
his/her residence may submit proof of a homeowner’s
insurance policy in lieu of the insurance requirements
of this Section.
A Provider may be relieved of the obligation of
submitting certificates of insurance under the
following circumstances:
1. If such company shall submit satisfactory
evidence in advance that:
a. It is insured in the amounts set forth in
this Chapter, or has complied with State
requirements to become self-insured. Public
utilities may submit annually evidence of
insurance coverage in lieu of individual
submissions for each permit; and
b. Said coverage provides to the City the
same scope of coverage that would otherwise
be provided by a separate policy as required
by this Chapter; or
2. The work to be performed under the permit
issued to the Applicant is to be performed by the
City, in which case insurance or other risk
transfer issues shall be negotiated between the
City and the Applicant by separate agreement.
21.15 BOND - WHEN REQUIRED,
CONDITIONS, WARRANTY:
Except as noted in this Chapter, each Applicant,
before being issued a permit, shall provide the City
with an acceptable security (this may include a
corporate surety bond, cash bond or letter of credit, as
determined by the City) in an amount to be
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
STREET EXCAVATIONS/ROAD CUTS
21—10
established by the City Council by resolution to
guarantee faithful performance of the work
authorized by a permit granted pursuant to this
Chapter. The amount of the security required may be
increased or decreased at the discretion of the
Council whenever it appears that the amount and cost
of the work to be performed, and not satisfactorily
completed, may vary from the amount of security
otherwise required under this Chapter. The form of
the security and the entity issuing the security shall
be subject to the approval of the City Attorney.
Public utilities franchised by the City shall not be
required to file any security if such requirement is
expressly waived in the franchise documents.
The security required by this Section shall be
conditioned as follows:
1. That the Permittee shall fully comply with
the requirements of the City ordinances and
Regulations, Specifications and standards
promulgated by the City relative to work in the
Public Way, and respond to the City in damages
for failure to conform therewith;
2. That after work is commenced, the Permittee
shall proceed with diligence and expedition and
shall promptly complete such work and restore
the Public Way to Development Standards, so as
not to obstruct the public place or travel thereon
more than is reasonably necessary;
3. That the Permittee shall guarantee the
materials and workmanship for a period of two
years from completion of such work, with
reasonable wear and tear excepted; and
4. That unless authorized by the Director on the
permit, all paving, resurfacing or replacement of
street facilities on major or collector streets shall
be done in conformance with the regulations
contained herein within three calendar days, and
within seven calendar days from the time the
excavation commences on all other streets, except
as provided for during excavation in winter or
during weather conditions which do not allow
paving according to Development Standards. In
winter, a temporary patch must be provided. In
all excavations, restoration or pavement surfaces
shall be made immediately after backfilling is
completed or concrete is cured. If work is
expected to exceed the above duration, the
Permittee shall submit a detailed construction
schedule for approval. The schedule will address
means and methods to minimize traffic disruption
and complete the construction as soon as
reasonably possible.
21.16 HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT;
LIMITATIONS ON CITY LIABILITY:
The Permittee agrees to save the City, its officers,
employees and agents harmless from any and all
costs, damages and liabilities that may accrue or be
claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed
under the permit. The issuance and acceptance of
any permit under this Chapter shall constitute such an
agreement by the Permittee to this Section.
This Chapter shall neither be construed as imposing
upon the City, its officers, employees and agents, any
liability or responsibility for damages to any Person
injured by or by reason of the performance of any
work within the Public Way, or under a permit issued
pursuant to this Chapter; nor shall the City, its
officers, officials, employees, agents, volunteers or
assigns thereof be deemed to have assumed any such
liability or responsibility by reason of inspection
authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit, or
the approval of any work.
21.17 WORK WITHOUT PERMIT –
PENALTY:
A stop work order may be issued by the Public
Facilities Inspector directed to any Person or Persons
doing or causing any work to be done in the pubic
way without a permit. The abutting Property Owner
shall be responsible for causing work to be done.
Any Person found to be doing work in the Public
Way without having obtained a permit, as provided in
this Chapter, shall be required to pay a permit fee
equal to two times the normal permit fee. For
replacement work, where a fee is not normally
charged, the normal permit fee for new construction
shall apply.
21.18 FAILURE TO COMPLY; DEFAULT IN
PERFORMANCE:
Any permit may be revoked or suspended and a stop
work order issued by the Public Facilities Inspector,
after notice to the Permittee for:
1. Violation of any condition of the permit, the
security, or of any provision of this Chapter;
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
STREET EXCAVATIONS/ROAD CUTS
21—11
2. Violation of any provision of any other
ordinance of the City or law relating to the work;
or
3. Existence of any condition or the doing of
any act that does constitute, may constitute, or
cause a condition endangering life or property.
A suspension or revocation by the Public Facilities
Inspector, and a stop order, shall take effect
immediately upon entry thereof by the Public
Facilities Inspector and notice to the Person
performing the work in the Public Way. Notice to
the Person performing the work shall be
accomplished when the Public Facilities Inspector
has posted a stop work order at the location of the
work and written notice has been mailed, return
receipt requested, to the address indicated by the
Permittee on the permit.
Whenever the Director finds that a default has
occurred in the performance of any term or condition
of the permit, written notice thereof may be given to
the principal and to the surety on the bond, if there is
a surety bond. Such notice shall state the work to be
done, the estimated cost thereof, and the period of
time deemed by the Director to be reasonably
necessary for the completion of the work.
In the event that the surety (or principal), within a
reasonable time following the giving of such notice
(taking into consideration the exigencies of the
situation, the nature of the work, the requirements of
public safety and for the protection of Persons and
property), fails either to commence and cause the
required work to be performed with due diligence, or
to indemnify the City for the cost of doing the work,
as set forth in the notice, the City may perform the
work, at the discretion of the City Manager, with City
forces or contract forces or both, and suit may be
commenced by the City Attorney against the
contractor and bonding company and such other
Persons as may be liable, to recover the entire
amount due to the City, including attorney fees, on
account thereof. In the event that cash has been
deposited, the cost of performing the work may be
charged against the amount deposited, and suit
brought for the balance due, if any.
21.19 FAILURE TO CONFORM TO
DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS –
PENALTY:
For failure to conform to the Development Standards
and Regulations, the City may:
1. Suspend or revoke the permit;
2. Issue a stop order;
3. Order removal and replacement of faulty
work;
4. Require an extended warranty period; and/or
5. Negotiate a cash settlement to be applied
toward future maintenance costs.
21.20 APPEAL OF SUSPENSION,
REVOCATION, OR STOP ORDER:
Any suspension, revocation or stop order by the
Director may be appealed by the Permittee to the City
Council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten
days of the action of the Director. The City Council
shall hear such appeal, if written request therefore be
timely filed, as soon as practicable, and render its
decision within a reasonable time following filing of
notice of appeal.
21.21 TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC
BARRICADES:
It shall be unlawful for any Person to maliciously or
wantonly or without authorization and legal cause,
extinguish, remove or diminish any light illuminating
any barricade or excavation, or to tear down, remove
or in any manner alter any rail, fence or barricade
protecting any excavation or other construction site.
21.22 CONFLICT WITH GOVERNING
PROVISIONS:1
Should there be a conflict between the provisions of
this Chapter and the provisions of any other
ordinance, agreement, franchise, or other document
governing the excavation of a public way, the more
restrictive provisions of the aforesaid documents
shall apply.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
ROADWAY LIGHTING
22—1
22. ROADWAY LIGHTING
22.01 GENERAL
22.02 APPROVED MATERIALS AND
METHODS OF INSTALLATION
22.03 SPECIFIC REQUIREMENTS FOR
APPLICATIONS AND LIGHT FIXTURES
22.04 WIRING
22.05 APPLICATION
22.01 GENERAL:
All outdoor artificial street illuminating devices shall be
installed in conformance with the provisions of this
ordinance, and applicable provisions of the Zoning
Ordinance, the national Electric Code and the national
Electric Safety Code. The spacing and arrangement of
streetlights will be designed during the preliminary plat
or sight plan review phases of a development.
22.02 APPROVED MATERIALS AND
METHODS OF INSTALLATION:
The provisions of this ordinance are to prevent the use
of any material or method of installation not
specifically prescribed by this ordinance. The Director
must approve any proposed alternatives.
1. Lamp Source:
High Pressure Sodium is the lamp source that will
be utilized throughout the city for all roadway
lighting.
2. Deviations:
Any material or method of installation not
specifically prescribed in this article will be
evaluated by the appropriate Director as stated
above, for approval based on the following
criteria:
a. It provides equivalence to the applicable
specific requirements of this ordinance.
b. It is otherwise satisfactory in complying
with the intent of this ordinance.
c. The plans, and variants to this ordinance
for proposed lighting schemes, will be
submitted to the Community Development
Department for approval, and shall be
sufficiently complete with all variants from
this ordinance noted, to enable the Director,
and/or Public Works Director, to readily
determine whether compliance with the intent
of this ordinance will be secured.
3. Variances:
Any person desiring to install an outdoor lighting
fixture in violation of this Ordinance may apply
to the City Council with recommendation from
the Planning Commission for a variance from the
regulation in question by applying through the
Community Development Department.
22.03 ROADWAY LIGHTING:
1. Non-decorative Poles and Heads:
Non-decorative poles and heads shall only be
utilized in the city where, upon the
recommendation of the Planning Commission and
approval of the City Council a specific lighting
plan has been approved.
a. All roadway pole mounted fixtures shall
not be mounted above thirty (30) feet, as
measured from the top of the fixture to the
adjacent grade or the horizontal plane being lit
by the fixture.
b. The fixture should house a high-pressure
sodium lamp, with a cut-off lens and no more
than 150 watts/pole.
c. Fixtures will be standard equipment
installed by UP&L, serviced and maintained
by them.
2. Decorative Poles and Heads:
Decorative poles and heads shall be installed as
outlined on plans approved through the
Community Development Department.
a. All decorative roadway pole mounted
fixtures shall not be mounted above eighteen
(18) feet, as measured from the top of the
fixture to the adjacent grade or the horizontal
plane being lit by the fixture.
b. The fixture should house a high-pressure
sodium lamp, with no more than 150
watts/pole.
c. Decorative roadway application fixtures
should utilize highly refractive globes, which
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
ROADWAY LIGHTING
22—2
have a minimum of 85 horizontal and 345
vertical prisms, to evenly direct the light, and
evenly diffuse the light source. The fixture
should have the ability to have internal light
directing reflectors that can be field installed
after fixture installation, to accommodate
customization of the lighting output, and/or to
redirect unwanted light to the traffic area.
d. The fixture should have photometrics so
that when used on a 40 foot wide road, and
placed on opposing 180 feet spacing, mounted
on a 18 foot pole with a type III distribution,
and 150 watt hps head, the following
horizontal foot-candles should be produced on
the roadway; (Using a .85 light loss factor)
i. Average Maintained = 1 footcandle
or more
ii. Maintained minimum = .4 footcandles
or more
iii. Max/Min Uniformity = 4.54 or
less
e. At 40 feet away from the pole, the
roadway should not have less than .1
horizontal foot-candle minimum maintained at
any point on the road, and 1.5 vertical footcandles
as measured from ground level to six
feet above the ground, in the middle of the
road.
f. The refractor should be made of acrylic,
and should be available in type III, and IV
distributions, with a reflector in the top to
eliminate uplight, and redirect the light
downward towards the surface and a house
light shield. It sets in die-cast aluminum
polyester powdercoated pod, which will allow
easy access to all of the internal electrical
components. It should have internal twist-lock
style photocell receptacle when needed, and,
quick release wiring components on the
socket, ballast, and igniter, with a Ground
Fault Interrupted outlet mounted on the pod.
Approved Manufacturers are as follows;
i. Hadco Streetscapes Refractive
Globes UT33A150SE-150HPS style or
Equal.
g. Light Posts: Light posts shall be sixteen
(16) foot tall, 5”X3” smooth tapered
aluminum pole with a .125” wall thickness.
Bolt circle shall be 14” diameter, four (4)
bolts, 90° apart, with a decorative base 12
3/4” square X 45” high, with a three (3) inch
outside diameter fitter. Aluminum is to be
polyester powdercoated black.
i. Hadco Streetscapes Posts - 2520
style or Equal.
3. Road Light Levels:
Roadway Lighting Maximum Levels, (as
measured at the horizontal plane being lit).
a. The maximum point should not exceed 6
foot-candles within the circulation area being
lit.
b. The average light level should not exceed
1 foot-candle within the circulation area being
lit.
c. No more than 1 foot-candle will be
allowed outside of 20 feet of the circulation
area being lit.
d. No more than .05 foot-candles will be
allowed outside the property lines of the
easement.
e. No more than .01 foot-candles should be
allowed to spill on any residential property as
a result of another party lighting their own
property.
22.04 WIRING:
1. Lamp and Pole Wiring:
All internal wiring of the lamps shall be
accomplished at the manufacturer’s facilities. No
alterations or modifications shall be accomplished
as part of the instillation of the lamps.
2. Applicable Codes:
All underground wiring shall be accomplished in
accordance with the National Electric Code as
adopted by the State of Utah.
3. Wire or Cable:
Wire shall be a minimum eight (8) gauge copper
wire and shall have appropriate coatings as
required by the current Electrical Code. Wire and
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
ROADWAY LIGHTING
22—3
cable placed in conduit or direct burial shall be
rated for the applicable use.
4. Ground:
Pole will be grounded to grounding rod set in the
footing as outlined in the Standard Drawings.
Neutral line shall not be connected to the pole.
5. Depth of Bury:
Direct burial cable, conductors and non-metallic
raceways shall be a minimum of twenty-fourinches
(24”) below the top back of curb or
finished grade which ever is lower. All cable or
conduit shall be inside a raceway where less than
twenty-four-inches (24”) below the top back of
curb or finished grade which ever is lower.
Cables, conductors, and raceways shall have their
location identified by a warning ribbon that is
placed in the trench at least twelve-inches (12”)
above the underground installation.
6. Splices and Taps:
Buried conductors or cables, either contained in a
non-metallic raceway or direct bury shall have no
splices or taps.
7. Backfill:
Backfill that contains large rocks, paving
materials, cinders, large or sharply angular
substances, or corrosive materials that may
damage raceways, cables, or conductors or
prevent adequate compaction of fill or contribute
to corrosion of raceways, cables, or conduits shall
not be utilized.
8. Raceway Seals:
Conduits or raceways through which moisture
may contact energized live parts shall be sealed or
plugged at both ends.
22.05 APPLICATION:
1. Responsibility:
Any person, developer or other entity applying
for a subdivision shall be required to install
outdoor street lighting fixtures, said person shall
submit evidence that the proposed work will
comply with this ordinance, or, take full
responsibility for compliance.
2. Requirements:
The application shall contain, but not be limited
to the following; (not required if a person will be
installing the specific unit outlined in Section
20.05.2.5 above):
a. Plans indicating the location on the
premises, and the type of illuminating devices,
fixtures, lamps, supports, and other devices.
b. Description of the illuminating devices,
fixtures, lamps supports, and other devices.
This description may include but is not limited
to manufacturers specifications and drawings
including sections where required.
c. Photometry data such as that furnished by
manufacturers, or similar, showing the angle
of cutoff of light emissions for the proposed
luminaire(s).
d. Computer generated point-to-point
calculation on a scaled site plan indicating
conformance to this Ordinance.
e. Such other information as the Director
may determine is necessary to ensure
compliance with this Ordinance.
f. When a development wishes to install
equipment other than the unit outlined in
Section 20.05.2 the city may require that the
developer provide a maintenance supply of
replacement equipment and parts that are not
standard with the unit outlined.
3. Preliminary Design:
At the time of Preliminary Plat approval the City
will provide a street lighting plan to the developer
based upon the unit outlined in Section 20.05.2 or
specific unit submitted by the developer as
outlined in Section 20.06.2 above.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
STREET SIGNAGE
23—1
23. STREET SIGNAGE
23.01 GENERAL
23.02 LAYOUT AND DESIGN
23.03 SIGN PROCUREMENT
23.01 GENERAL:
Street and informative signs dealing with traffic control
and information shall be designed with cooperation
between the developer and the City.
23.02 LAYOUT AND DESIGN:
The layout, design and requirement for all street
signage will be determined during platting or site plan
design portion of a project. The Director or his
designee will determine street numbers and addresses
while accomplishing the project review procedures.
The requirement for caution, hazard, speed and other
information signs will also be determined during the
project review process.
23.03 SIGN PROCUREMENT:
The Developer/Contractor for any given project is
responsible for the procurement of all street signage
required within a project area or outside of a project
area if the need for the sign is determined to be due to
the nature of the project being developed.
1. UDOT Required Signage:
All signage required for UDOT roadways shall be
acquired by the developer through the UDOT
District One offices.
2. City Road Signage:
The Developer/Contractor shall purchase through
the city all signage for City streets. City crews
will install all road signage required as part of a
project.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
OTHER REQUIREMENTS
24—1
24. OTHER REQUIREMENTS
24.01 MAILBOXES
24.02 DUMPSTERS
24.03 SANITARY FACILITIES
24.04 FENCES
24.05 SURVEY MONUMENTS
24.01 MAILBOXES:
When mailboxes are to be installed as a part of the
design of a development or where a requirement for
mailboxes exists as outlined in Clinton City Zoning
Ordinance and Clinton City Subdivision Ordinance
the following guidelines shall apply.
1. Conventional Residential Subdivisions:
a. The design of mailboxes or mailbox
support installed by a developer shall be
reviewed during the development of the
preliminary plat.
b. Mailbox support shall be of sufficiently
strong to support the box(es), however; it shall
not present a hazard to traffic or pedestrian
travel.
c. Mailboxes and mailbox supports shall be
located in the parkstrip as outlined in the
Zoning Ordinance or in other approved
location designated for the pick-up and
delivery of mail for a group of residences or
structures. Areas for general delivery and
pick-up of mail will be designated during the
preliminary plat design of a subdivision or
development.
d. The maximum depth of the mailbox and
support shall not exceed 24”. This is to
prevent the mailbox interfering with
pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk.
e. The mailbox support shall be designed to
facilitate newspaper delivery.
2. Non-Conventional Residential
Subdivisions:
The design of mailboxes in other than
conventional residential subdivisions; planned
developments of residential, multi-family,
commercial or other use shall have the type and
design of the mailbox or mail delivery system
determined at the time of preliminary plat or site
plan review.
24.02 DUMPSTERS:
All construction sites shall be provided with a
dumpster or other means of controlling trash
accumulation approved by the Director. Dumpsters
shall be routinely emptied to keep the area from
becoming a nuisance due to odors, insects or other
undesirable conditions.
24.03 SANITARY FACILITIES:
Construction sites shall be provided with a minimum
of one portable potty. Portables will also be provided
in a quantity suitable for the number of workers on
the site, (one unit per every 10 workers, working a 40
hour work week, at the site). Where a site is large the
number of units may need to be increased above the
standard worker to unit ratio because of travel
distance.
24.04 FENCES:
Fences required as part of the processing of a
subdivision shall comply with the requirements of
this section unless other specific requirements are
established as part of the approval process.
1. Chain Link Fence:
a. The fabric is to be chain link that has
been galvanized after weaving with a
minimum of 1.2 oz. Per square foot of wire
surface. Fence shall be six-foot (6’) high,
eleven (11) gauge with two-inch (2”) mesh.
b. All steel pipe members shall conform to
the requirements of ASTM designation A-120,
Schedule 40, hot dipped zinc coated steel
pipe.
c. All posts shall be set in concrete and shall
be topped with ball type or other approved
ornament.
d. All end, corner, or pull posts shall be
eight-foot (8’) in length with a minimum
diameter of 2 3/8 inches. All line posts shall
be eight-foot (8’) in length with a minimum
diameter of 1 7/8 inches.
e. When required, privacy slats shall be of
flat, tubular construction manufactured from
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
OTHER REQUIREMENTS
24—2
virgin polyethylene containing an ultraviolet
inhibitor. The slats shall be retained by a
retaining channel at the bottom of the fence
fabric.
f. A #9 gauge tension wire, straight wire
shall be installed at the bottom of the fence.
g. Gates required as part of the fence shall
be as follows:
Gate Posts And Gate Frames
Height Gate Opening Gate
Post
Sch. 40
Gate
Frame
16 Ga.
6-Feet
Single to 4’
or Double to
8’
2 3/8” 1 5/8”
Single over 4’
to 12’ or
double over
8’ to 24’
2 7/8” 1 5/8”
Single over
12’ to 18’ or
double over
24’ to 36’
4” 1 5/8”
Single over
18’ or double
over 36’
8 5/8” 1 7/8”
h. Top rails shall be installed in all fences, 1
3/8” diameter.
i. Truss rods, 3/8” diameter shall be located
at each end bay, corner and in all gates. Gates
over eight-feet shall have two truss rods.
j. Prior to installation of posts or fencing the
earth under the proposed fence shall be graded
to natural grade and in as even a grade as is
practical. Chain link shall be placed so that it
is one-inch over natural ground or six-inches
over a concrete under structure or mow-strip.
k. Fencing shall be placed so that twist ends
or barbs are on the bottom of the fence.
2. Other Fencing:
The design and installation of other fencing,
vinyl, block, etc. that may be required as part of
the approval process shall be approved during the
approval or by the Director. Design and
installation shall meet good workman like
practices and standards established by the
industry. As a minimum fences shall be designed
to withstand natural loading that may be placed
upon them such as wind and seismic conditions.
24.05 SURVEY MONUMENTS.
Survey monuments shall be installed as indicated on
the approved plans and drawings. Survey
monuments include but are not limited to; protected
monuments; unprotected monuments; and curb
referencing.
1. Protected monuments:
Typically located in major streets a 2 1/2 “ brass
cap and anchor placed with a monument casting
ring and cover with a concrete ring and base.
Reference standard drawings.
2. Unprotected monument:
Typically located in minor streets a 2 1/2 “ brass
cap and anchor placed in a concrete base. Cap is
to be set below finish pavement level to prevent
damage from snow removal equipment.
Reference standard drawings.
3. Curb references:
Curbs shall be marked with the location of side
lot property lines with a nail or rivet shot into the
top of the curb fronting the property.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
VALIDITY, NOTICES AND EFFECTIVE DATE
25—1
25. AMENDMENTS
25.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT
25.02 AMENDMENTS
25.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT:
This Chapter lists ordinances which have effected a
change upon this ordinance and the standard
drawings when an ordinance is required as outlined
in Chapter 1.
25.02 AMENDMENTS:
Amendments made to the Engineering and Standard
Specifications and Standard Drawings are indicated
by footnotes and references are as follows:
1. Ordinance 02-01E adds administrative
procedures; amends bond requirements,
references to untreated base course, trench repair
requirements; rewrites restoration of public
property; and, amends standard drawings.
Adopted November 26, 2002.
2. Ordinance 05-01E adds minimum clearances
between culinary water and sewer mains, replaces
different pipe colors with magnetic tape on sewer
and land drain laterals, stipulates manhole spacing
and when 60” manholes are required rather than
48”. Adopted February 8, 2005.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
VALIDITY, NOTICES AND EFFECTIVE DATE
26—1
26. VALIDITY, NOTICES AND
EFFECTIVE DATE
26.08 VALIDIT
26.09 CONFLICT WITH GOVERNING
PROVISIONS
26.10 VIOLATION – PENALTY
26.11 SEVERABILITY
26.12 RECESSION
26.13 OFFICE OF RESPONSIBILITY
26.14 EFFECTIVE DATE
26.08 VALIDITY:
This ordinance is a codification and complete rewrite
of the existing Ordinance No. 85-1D, The
Development Standards of the City of Clinton.
26.09 CONFLICT WITH GOVERNING
PROVISIONS:
Should there be a conflict between the provisions of
this Chapter and the provisions of any other
ordinance, agreement, franchise, or other document
governing the excavation of a Public Way, the more
restrictive provisions of the aforesaid documents
shall apply.
26.10 VIOLATION – PENALTY:1
1. Any person, firm, or corporation, whether as
principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating
or causing or permitting the violation of any of
the provisions of this Ordinance or failure to
comply with an order of suspension, revocation,
correction, restoration, repair, stop work or other
direction from the Public Facilities Inspector or
his representative, shall be guilty of a Class C
misdemeanor unless otherwise classified in the
Utah Code Annotated.
2. The violation of any provision of this code or
any other ordinance of the city shall be
punishable by fines and imprisonment according
to state law.
3. Every day any violation of this code, or any
other ordinance of the city, law, rule or regulation
in conjunction with this Ordinance shall continue,
it shall constitute a separate offense.
4. No criminal conviction shall excuse the
Person from otherwise complying with the
provisions of this Chapter.
26.11 SEVERABILITY:
In the event that any provision of this Ordinance is
declared invalid for any reason, the remaining
provisions shall remain in effect.
26.12 RECENSSION:
Upon adoption of this ordinance Clinton City
Ordinance Number 85 – 1D, The Development
Standards of the City of Clinton is rescinded along
with all changes and amendments.
26.13 OFFICE OF RESPONSIBILITY:
The Community Development Director is charged
with management of this ordinance. All
recommended changes to this ordinance are to be
processed through the Community Development
Department.
26.14 EFFECTIVE DATE:
This Ordinance shall take effect upon its adoption
and posting.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
VALIDITY, NOTICES AND EFFECTIVE DATE
26—2
Chapter 27. Telecommunication Cable
9-27-1 General
9-27-2 Permit Required
9-27-3 Cable Installation
9-27-4 Installation Methods “A” and “B”
9-27-5 As Built Drawings
9-27-1 General: This section covers
installation of Underground Cables
(Telecommunications and Fiber Optics) within
the public right of way or in a public utility
easement (PUE).
9-27-2 Permit Required: An Excavation
Permit shall be obtained from Clinton City
Public Works prior to commencing any
installation of telecommunication conduits or
cables.
(1) A permit application shall include the
following:
(a) Plans showing the entire area where conduit
is to be installed. Plans shall meet and show the
following;
(b) Drawings shall be drawn to scale: 1”=20’ or
40’ horizontal; 1”=2’ or 4’ vertical;
(c) All existing and proposed infrastructure that
the proposed construction would cross. To
include but not be limited to storm drains,
irrigation lines, sanitary sewer lines, waterlines,
services, conduit systems and underground
utilities;
(d) Minimum six (6) foot parallel separation
from city infrastructure;
(e) Profile designs shall provide a minimum of
24 inches of vertical clearance between the outer
edges of the conduit being bored to any city
infrastructure;
(f) Clearances to all other utilities shall be a
minimum of 12 inches;
(g) Identify all utility crossings (inclusive of
water and sewer services) of the proposed
conduit.
(h) An accurate profile for the conduit;
(i) Location of all surface infrastructure.
(2) Fees shall be paid as established, by
resolution, by the Clinton City Council and
published in the Clinton City Consolidated Fee
Schedule.
(3) Any changes to the alignment as shown on
the Approved for Construction Drawings of
more that 6” must be approved by the City
Engineer or his appointed representative.
9-27-3 Cable Installation:
(1) Telecommunications Trunk Lines.
(a) Conduit containing cable(s) providing
telecommunications service by connecting
regions or states or by connecting central offices
within a metropolitan area, known as “Trunk
Lines,” shall be installed as described below:
(i) All cable being installed within an open
trench shall be placed within an HDPE SCH 40
conduit;
(ii) Minimum depth of the conduit shall be 48
inches;
(iii) A 6-inch thick flowable fill cap shall be
poured above the conduit;
(iv) Color coded plastic warning tape with a
minimum thickness of 5 mil and a minimum
width of 3 inches shall be installed in the trench
above and centered over the flowable fill cap at
a depth of 12 to 26 inches below the surface;
(b) Conduits crossing under existing paved
streets may be accomplished by jacking or
boring if authorized by the City Engineer.
(2) Telecommunications cables other than Trunk
Lines.
(i) All cable shall be installed within an HDPE
SCH 40 conduit;
(b) Conduits may be installed by open trench or
by jacking or boring with approval from the City
Engineer;
(i) Minimum depth of the conduit shall be 36
inches;
(c) Conduits crossing under existing paved
streets may be accomplished by jacking or
boring if authorized by the City Engineer.
ENGINEERING AND STANDARD SPECIFICATIONS AND DRAWINGS TITLE 9
VALIDITY, NOTICES AND EFFECTIVE DATE
26—3
9-27-4 Installation Methods “A” and “B”:
Two methods are available to a Utility Company
for installation of conduit.
(1) Method “A” is the traditional method in
which a bore profile for the conduit is shown,
including the field verified location (horizontal
and vertical) of all existing utilities.
(2) These requirements apply to not only
longitudinal and lateral street bores but also
utility bores outside paved areas that across
existing utilities.
(a) In addition to requirements of § 9-27-2 plans
for this method shall include:
(i) Plan and profile view are to include the
location of existing utilities and the proposed
location of the conduit;
(ii) Location of boring and receiving pits;
(iii) Existing utilities must be potholed in the
field and their locations shown accurately on the
plans. Pothole locations shall also be identified
on the plans.
(iv) Elevations and proposed clearances of all
utility crossings and structures including sewer
and water lateral service lines.
(3) Method “B” is a two-part approval process in
which the Plan Review is completed in the office
and the Bore Profile approval is deferred to
Field Approval. Method “B” is only allowed
upon approval of the City Engineer or his
designated representative.
(a) This method has the construction drawing
being reviewed and permitted and the Bore
Profile approval being deferred to Field
Approval.
(b) A permit shall be obtained as outlined in § 9-
27-2(1) with the following exception:
(i) Bore Profile: Field verify the exact location
of each existing utility within the alignment
before crossing (no blind boring) and with the
approval of the engineer or his designated
representative, install the conduit according to
the alignment identified on the “Approved for
Construction Drawing”.
(ii) Changes to the alignment as shown on the
Approved for Construction Drawings of more
that 6” must be approved by the City engineer.
9-27-5 As Build Drawings: As built drawings
showing the profile of the installed conduit shall
be provided to the City before a permit is closed
and any bonding is returned.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
TITLE 10. FIRE PREVENTION
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. Repealed
Chapter 3. Repealed
Chapter 4. Repealed
Chapter 5. General Provisions
Chapter 6. Definitions
Chapter 7. Administration
Chapter 8. Fire Code
Chapter 9. Open Burning Regulations
Chapter 10. Cost Recovery
Chapter 11. Appeals
Chapter 12. Ambulance Services
Chapter 13. Fireworks
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. Repealed
Chapter 3. Repealed
Chapter 4. Repealed
Chapter 5. General Provisions
10-5-1 Statement of Purpose
10-5-2 Application
10-5-3 Adoption
10-5-4 Fees
10-5-5 Penalty for Violations
10-5-6 Application of Penalty Provisions
10-5-1 Statement of Purpose. The purpose of this
Title is to establish requirements for providing a
reasonable level of life safety and property protection
from the hazards of fire, explosion, dangerous
conditions or regional emergency.
10-5-2 Application. This Title shall apply to all
actions associated with the systems established in this
Title unless explicitly exempted. Actions being
conducted, by the Clinton City Fire Department,
outside of Clinton City shall be in accordance with
this Title, Interlocal Agreements, and standards of the
fire fighting profession.
10-5-3 Adoption. All rules established in this Fire
Prevention Title may be cited and designated as the
“Fire Code” by reference to the respective Sections.
10-5-4 Fees. The Clinton City Council shall set the
amount of fees required to facilitate actions outlined
in this Title, from time to time, by resolution and
published in the Clinton City Consolidated Fee
Schedule. Consideration of fees shall include but
not be limited to those needed to cover the cost of
administration, inspections, reviews, publications,
and related issues.
10-5-5 Penalty for Violations. Unless otherwise
provided, a violation of the provisions of this Fire
Prevention Title or failure to comply with a lawful
order made per this Title, or constructing or building
in violation of any detailed statement or specification
or plan submitted and approved per this Title, or any
certificate or permit issued as outlined in this Title
shall be a Class "B" misdemeanor. Each separate
violation or noncompliance shall be a separate
offense and any defect or violation requiring
correction or remedy which is not corrected or
remedied within ten (10) days or sooner if
determined to be a mater of public safety by the Fire
Chief, shall be a separate offense.
10-5-6 Application of Penalty Provisions. The
application of the penalty provisions shall not be held
to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited
conditions or the granting of a restraining order by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
History: 05/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
Chapter 6. Definitions
10-6-1 Definitions
10-6-1 Definitions. The following terms as used
within the Fire Prevention Code shall have the
following meanings:
“Aggravated Fire Emergency” means a fire caused
by the owner, occupier ( or others) of property or a
structure, which presents a direct and immediate
threat to public safety, thus requiring immediate
action to mitigate the threat, and the fire:
(1) Is caused or contributed to by the failure to
comply with an order from the State, County, or City
agency, department or official, or
(2) Occurs as a direct result of a deliberate act in
violation of State law or the ordinance or regulation
of the County or City agency, or
(3) A fire that constitutes arson or reckless burning as
defined by the Utah Code.
(4) An alarm that results in the city fire unit being
dispatched and the person transmitting or causing the
transmission of the alarm knows at the time of the
transmission that no fire or fire related emergency
exists.
“Aggravated Medical Emergency” means an alarm
that results in a City emergency medical unit being
dispatched, and the person transmitting, or causing
the transmission of the alarm knows at the time of the
transmission that there are no reasonable grounds for
believing that a medical emergency exists.
"Agricultural Burning" means open burning in
rural areas, essential to farmers and horticulturalists.
A farm or horticultural operation is defined as:
(1) Fruit orchard of 25 or more fruit trees on one
contiguous property, or
(2) Horticulture or agriculture operations on 2
cultivated acres or more of contiguous property, and
(3) Farmers may only burn products incident to
horticulture or agriculture operations, defined as;
prunings, diseased plants, stuble and irrigation ditch
banks.
"Air Contaminant" means any particulate matter or
any gas, vapor, suspended solid, or any combination
thereof, excluding steam and water vapors.
"Air Pollution" means the presence in the ambient
air of one or more air contaminants in quantities or
characteristics and under conditions and
circumstances, and of a duration sufficient to cause or
contribute to injury to human, plant, or animal life or
health or to property or which unreasonably interfere
with the enjoyment of life or use of property, as
determined by the standards, rules, and regulations
adopted by the Committee.
"Ambient Air" means the surrounding or outside
air.
“Approved” means acceptable to the Clinton City
Fire Chief (or his designee) unless otherwise stated.
“Clearing Index" means a number indicating the
predicted rate of clearance of ground level pollutants
from a given area. This number is calculated by the
U.S. Weather Bureau, from daily measurements of
temperature lapse rates and wind speeds and
directions from ground level to ten thousand (10,000)
feet.
"Committee" means Utah Air Conservation
Committee.
"Corporation Counsel" means the City’s attorney.
"Expenses" means the actual labor costs of
government and volunteer personnel including
workers' compensation benefits, fringe benefits,
administrative overhead, costs of equipment, costs of
equipment operation, costs of materials, costs of
disposal, the cost of any contract labor, equipment or
materials, and the similar costs incurred by Clinton
City or any assisting agencies.
"Fire Chief" “Chief” or "Fire Code Official"
means the Clinton City Fire Chief or his duly
authorized representative.
"Fire Department" or "Department of Fire
Prevention" means the City Fire Department.
“Fire Marshal” or “Fire Code Official” means the
fire chief or other designated authority charged with
the administration and enforcement of the code, fire
prevention, and investigation duties related to fire
cause determination.
"Garbage" means waste from the preparation,
handling, storing, cooking or consumption of food
and food products.
"Grossly Negligently Caused Fire/Hazardous
Materials Emergency" means a fire/hazardous
materials incident caused by the negligence of any
person or entity and which presents a direct and
immediate threat to property or public safety and
requires immediate action to mitigate the threat.
"Hazardous Materials" means those chemicals, or
substances defined as such in the International Fire
Code. Definitions of hazardous materials, including
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
those materials regulated elsewhere in the
International Fire Code or other applicable codes.
"Hazardous Materials Emergency" means a
sudden and unexpected release of any substance that
because of its quantity, concentration, or physical,
chemical, or infectious characteristics presents a
direct and immediate threat to public safety or the
environment and requires immediate action to
mitigate the threat.
"Intentionally Caused Fire/Hazardous Materials
Emergency" means a fire/hazardous materials
incident deliberately or recklessly set or caused by
any person or entity and which presents a direct and
immediate threat to property or public safety and
requires immediate action to mitigate the threat.
“Jurisdiction” means Clinton City or any area
covered under contract with Clinton City.
“Key Boxes” means a secure device with a lock
operable only by a fire department master key, and
containing building entry keys and other keys that
may be required for access in an emergency.
“Legal representative of the Jurisdiction” means,
as used in the International Fire Code, the Clinton
City Attorney or other Attorney as designated by the
City Council.
“Listed” means equipment that is shown in a list
published by an approved testing agency qualified
and equipped for experimental testing and
maintaining an adequate periodic inspection of
current productions and whose listing states that the
equipment complies with nationally recognized
standards when installed in accordance with the
manufacturer’s installation instructions.
"Municipality" means Clinton City.
“Nuisance” means any objectionable instance as
outlined in Title 18 or elsewhere in the Clinton City
Code.
"Open Burning" means any burning of combustible
materials resulting in emission of products of
combustion into open air without passage through a
chimney or stack.
"Person" means any individual, public or private
corporation, partnership, association, firm, trust,
estate, the state or any department, institution,
bureau, or agency thereof, any municipal corporation,
county, city and county, or other political subdivision
of the state, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by the law as being subject to
rights and duties.
"Refuse" means any solid waste, including garbage
and trash.
"Salvage Operation" means any business, trade or
industry engaged in whole or part in salvaging or
reclaiming any product or material, including, but not
limited to, metals, chemicals, shipping containers, or
drums.
"Trash" means solids not considered to be highly
flammable or explosive, including, but not limited to,
clothing, rags, leather, plastic, rubber, floor
coverings, excelsior, tree leaves, yard trimmings and
other similar materials.
"Waste" means all solid, liquid, or gaseous material,
including, but not limited to, garbage, trash,
household waste, construction or demolition debris or
other refuse, including that resulting from the
prosecution of any business, trade or industry.
History: 05/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
Chapter 7. Administration
10-7-1 Creation
10-7-2 Office of Primary Responsibility
10-7-3 Creation of Positions
10-7-4 Appointment of Positions
10-7-5 Supervision
10-7-6 Authority to Enforce
10-7-7 Powers and Duties of Chief
10-7-8 Establishment and Duties of Fire
Department
10-7-9 Fire Department Personnel
10-7-10 Removal of Personnel
10-7-11 Authority for Rule Making
10-7-12 Emergency Vehicles
10-7-13 Control of Personnel
10-7-14 Interference with Firemen in Discharge of
Duties
10-7-15 Investigation After Fire - Report
10-7-16 Right to Enter Upon and Inspect Premises
10-7-17 False Alarm
10-7-18 Permits
10-7-1 Creation. There is hereby created a fire
department to be known as the Clinton City Fire
Department.
History: 12/75, 9/84
10-7-2 Office of Primary Responsibility. The
Clinton City Fire Department is the Office of Primary
Responsibility for review and proposing changes to
this Title. The Chief may call on other departments
for assistance in reviewing this Chapter.
History: 05/10
10-7-3 Creation of Positions.
(1) There is hereby created the position Fire Chief of
the Clinton City Fire Department.
(2) There is hereby created the position of Assistant
Fire Chief for Clinton City.
(3) There is hereby created the position Emergency
Manager for Clinton City.
(4) There is hereby created the position of Clinton
City Fire Marshal or Fire Code Official.
History: 12/75, 9/84, 05/10
10-7-4 Appointment of Positions.
(1) The City Council, upon recommendation of the
City Manager shall appoint a Fire Chief for Clinton
City.
(2) The Fire Chief is also designated the Clinton City
Emergency Manager.
History: 05/10
10-7-5 Supervision. The Clinton City Fire Chief
performs under the general guidance and supervision
of the City Manager.
10-7-6 Authority to Enforce.
(1) To accomplish the administration and
enforcement of this Title, the Chief and those
designated by the Chief are hereby authorized to
issue citations for violations of this code.
(2) The Clinton City Fire Marshal is authorized to
issue citations for violations of this code.
History: 05/10
10-7-7 Powers and Duties of Chief.
(1) It is primarily the responsibility of the Chief to
administer the provisions of this Title.
(2) The Chief shall have responsibility for the
supervision of the fire department and shall be
responsible for all Clinton City Firefighters at the
scene of an incident, whether or not the incident is
within the city limits, unless an Interlocal Agreement,
approved by the City Council, dictates otherwise.
(3) The Chief shall be responsible for the
management and operation of ambulance services
provided by the Department. All ambulance services
shall be provided in conformance with the rules and
regulations established by the State under the
Emergency Medical Services System Act.
(4) The Chief is authorized to recommend
agreements with nearby incorporated communities or
other organizations with fire protection.
(5) The Chief shall conduct suitable drills, training
and instruction in the operation and handling of
equipment, first-aid, rescue work, salvage, and
orientation to the buildings in the City, fire
prevention, water supplies and all other matters
generally considered essential to good firemanship
and safety of life and property from fire.
(6) During a fire, the Chief shall have full authority
to take all measures as he shall deem necessary,
subject to state law, to control and extinguish the fire
and for that purpose he is hereby made a special
peace officer.
(7) The Chief shall at least annually report to the
governing body the condition of the fire equipment,
the number of fires and their causes, and the associate
estimated loss together with all other information the
governing body may request or as he shall deem
appropriate.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
(8) The Chief shall make recommendations of
apparatus and equipment to the City Manager, and all
purchases shall be made in the manner designated by
the City.
(9) The Chief shall supervise the maintenance of the
equipment of the department to insure it is in good
repair and order and ready for use.
(10) The Chief shall establish written policies, rules
and regulations for the operation of the department.
(11) The Chief may delegate his duties to any person
employed by the department, but the delegation shall
not relieve the Chief of his responsibility for the
performance thereof.
(12) The Chief shall cause all fires to be investigated
immediately after the occurrence of the fire and
attempt to determine, among other things, whether
the fire was the result of carelessness or of design. A
written report shall be created and maintained
detailing the findings of the investigation to include
the cause of the fire, the time originated, and all other
information as may be relevant to prevent other fires.
(13) The Chief shall report all structural fires to the
Building Official to have the structural stability and
habitability of the structure evaluated. The Building
Official will provide a copy of his findings for
inclusion in the Chiefs report as outlined in § 10-7-
15.
(14) The Chief shall maintain as operational the
Emergency Operations Plan and Emergency
Operations Center and associated equipment.
(15) The Chief shall perform the functions of the
“Fire Code Official” as described in the International
Fire Code.
History: 12/75, 9/84, 05/10
10-7-8 Establishment and Duties of Fire
Department.
(1) The Fire Code shall be enforced by the Fire
Department of Clinton City, which is hereby
established and which shall operate under the
supervision of the Chief.
(2) The Chief shall be in charge of the Fire
Department.
(3) The Chief may delegate the primary
responsibility to the Fire Marshal to enforce the
provisions of this Chapter. The Chief shall make
these appointments through an examination to
determine fitness for the position. The examination
shall be as established by the International Code
Council, based upon the International Fire Code and
shall be open to members and nonmembers of the fire
department.
History: 12/75, 9/84, 05/10
10-7-9 Fire Department Personnel. The Chief
may make recommendations to the City Manager
relating to the employment of firefighters and other
personnel as may be necessary to enforce the
provisions of this Title.
History: 12/75, 9/84, 05/10
10-7-10 Removal of Personnel. The Chief shall
have authority to remove any officer or member of
the Department in accordance to the City Personnel
Policies and subject to confirmation of the City
Manager.
10-7-11 Authority for Rule Making. The Chief of
the Fire Department is hereby authorized to make and
adopt rules and policies in furtherance of the
objectives of this Title. The rules and policies are
subject to the review and approval of the City
Manager.
History: 05/10
10-7-12 Emergency Vehicles. Fire apparatus are
hereby designated authorized emergency vehicles.
History: 12/75, 9/84, 05/10
10-7-13 Control of Personnel. All persons 18 years
or older present at a fire shall be subject to the orders
of the officer in command of a fire scene and shall
render assistance as directed.
History: 12/75, 9/84, 05/10
10-7-14 Interference with Firemen in Discharge of
Duties. It is unlawful to willfully hinder any officer
or fireman in the discharge of his duty at a fire, or in
any manner injure, deface or destroy any engine,
hose or other apparatus belonging to the city or to
interfere with any fire company or person, or who
shall willfully break or injure any water pipe, or in
any way interfere with the water or its source of
supply.
History: 05/10
10-7-15 Investigation After Fire - Report. The
Chief, or other persons as he designates, shall, after
extinguishing a fire, make a prompt and thorough
investigation of the cause of the fire, the time the fire
began, the amount of loss and insurance, a
description of the affected buildings and premises,
and shall secure all other useful information
available, and record the same which shall be
documented and the record kept for the appropriate
period of time.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
History: 12/75, 9/84, 05/10
10-7-16 Right to Enter Upon and Inspect
Premises. Whenever it is necessary to make an
inspection to enforce the provisions of the Fire Code,
or the fire code official has reasonable cause to
believe that there exist conditions or violations, the
fire official shall have the authority to enter the
building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect
the premises. The fire code official shall carry proper
identification when inspecting structures or
premises.. If such buildings or premises are
unoccupied, the code official shall first make a
reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person
having charge or control of the building or premises..
If entry is refused, the Fire Code Official shall make
request to obtain a proper inspection warrant or other
remedy provided by law to secure entry.
History: 12/75, 9/84, 05/10
10-7-17 False Alarm. It shall be unlawful for any
person to turn in or report to the fire department a
false alarm or report of a fire or to tamper or remove
any part of the fire alarm system. A violation of this
section shall be a class B misdemeanor.
History: 12/75, 9/84
10-7-18 Permits.
(1) Where permits are required by the International
Fire Code or other applicable codes, a permit shall be
obtained from the Fire Marshal.
(2) Permits shall be obtained for each separate event,
occurrence.
(3) The Chief shall establish a procedure for issuing
and record keeping of permits.
(4) Requests for Fire Department support of special
events or filming activities shall be as established in
Title 15, Chapter 16, et. seq., of the Clinton City
Code.
History: 12/75, 05/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
Chapter 8. Fire Code
10-8-1 Fire Code
10-8-2 Day Care Family, Family Group
10-8-3 Storage of Flammable or Combustible
Liquids in Outside Above-Ground Tanks
10-8-4 Bulk Storage of Liquefied Petroleum
Gases is to be Restricted
10-8-5 Residential use of Liquefied Petroleum
Gases is to be Restricted
10-8-6 Location of Tanks for Class III-B Liquids
10-8-7 Locations Where Above-Ground Tanks
are Prohibited
10-8-8 Storage of Explosives, Blasting Agents,
and Fireworks
10-8-9 Fire Extinguishing Systems Installation
Requirements
10-8-10 Fire Alarm Systems
10-8-11 Fire Department Connections
10-8-12 Key Boxes
10-8-13 Locking Fire Department Connection
Caps
10-8-14 Private Fire Service Mains and Hydrants
10-8-15 Record Keeping
10-8-16 Adopting Amendments- Appendices to
the Fire Code
10-8-17 Adopted Amendments to the Fire Code
10-8-18 Adopted Appendices to the Fire Code
10-8-1 Fire Code.
(1) The International Fire Code and all applicable
sections of the Model Building Codes, as adopted by
the State, et. seq., pertaining to fire prevention and
fire protection, are hereby adopted and incorporated
by reference as part of this Title.
(2) Changes to and adoption of the amendments to
the Fire Code, adopted by the City, are as outlined in
this Title.
History: 12/75, 9/84, 9/86, 2/89, 05/10
10-8-2 Day Care Family, Family Group. This
section applies to all Day Care Family and Day Care
Family Group as defined in the Clinton City Zoning
Ordinance.
(1) Every Day Care shall meet the requirements of
the Clinton City Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Minimum construction requirements for all Day
Care structures must meet the construction
requirements as per the International Residential
Code for R-3 occupancy or the equivalent.
(3) Every story occupied by clients shall have not
less than two (2) remotely located means of escape.
Every room used for sleeping shall have at least two
(2) means of escape, at least one directly to the
outside.
(4) A fire escape plan showing how to escape from
each room of the dwelling shall be posted in each
room, except the bathroom, and emergency exit drills
shall be held quarterly.
(5) Smoke detectors and alarm systems shall be
installed in accordance with the currently adopted
International Residential Code. In existing homes,
battery operated smoke detectors may be used.
(6) A minimum of one (1) listed fire extinguisher
with a rating of 2A-10BC must be provided and
mounted within five (5) feet of the floor in a
conspicuous and readily available location.
(7) Special protective covers for electrical receptacles
shall be installed in all receptacles accessible to
children.
(8) Heating equipment shall be provided with a
protective guard when in areas accessible to children.
(9) Enclosed storage areas under stairs shall be
protected with one layer of 5/8” Type X sheetrock,
taped and sealed.
(10) Combustible materials shall not be stored in the
furnace room or under the stairs.
(11) Closets must be able to be opened from the
inside.
(12) Artwork and teaching materials shall not exceed
20% of the wall area.
(13) Class 1 flammable liquids (gas) shall not be
stored in the residence and no more than five (5)
gallons of gasoline shall be stored in the garage area.
(14) The breaker box shall be labeled indicating the
area each breaker controls.
(15) House address shall be a minimum of four (4”)
inch characters and plainly legible and visible from
the street.
History: 05/10, 10/10
10-8-3 Storage of Flammable or Combustible
Liquids in Outside Above-Ground Tanks.
(1) Except for the provisions set forth in Chapter 34
of the Fire Code and Chapter 3 of the Clinton City
Zoning Ordinance, the storage of Class I and II
liquids in outside above-ground tanks is prohibited
within all zones of Clinton City.
(2) Bulk plants for Class I, II and III flammable or
combustible liquids are not allowed within the
corporate limits of Clinton City.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
(3) All tanks, without exception, allowed under § (1)
above shall not be installed prior to the obtaining the
necessary permits as required by Section 105 of the
Fire Code and the Clinton City Zoning Ordinance.
History: 12/75, 9/86, 2/89, 1/91, 4/93, 05/10
10-8-4 Bulk Storage of Liquefied Petroleum
Gases is to be Restricted.
(1) Limitations referred to in Chapter 38 of the Fire
Code, the International Fuel Gas Code and the
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance, are established for
all storage of LP-Gas along with the following:
(a) They shall only be permitted in Zones A-1, MP-1
and CP-2.
(b) The aggregate capacity of any one installation
shall be a maximum of 2000 gallons water capacity
in heavily populated and congested commercial areas
of the city.
(2) Cylinders at locations, awaiting use or resale,
open to the public shall be protected against vehicle
impact by means, which are in accordance with good
engineering practice where vehicle traffic normally is
expected. Cylinders shall also be protected by either:
(a) An enclosure with at least a six (6) feet high
industrial-type fence or other approved protection
method. At least two means of emergency access
from the fenced area or other enclosure shall be
provided. Clearance of at least three (3) feet shall be
provided for emergency access to the required means
of egress. If guard service is provided, it shall be
extended to the LP-Gas installation. Guard personnel
shall be properly trained; or,
(b) A lockable ventilated metal cabinet or rack that
prevents tampering with valves and pilferage of the
cylinder shall be provided.
(3) Weed burners using liquefied petroleum gas will
be permitted in agricultural zones only.
History: 12/75, 9/84, 9/86, 2/89, 05/10
10-8-5 Residential use of Liquefied Petroleum
Gases is to be Restricted. Storage and use of
Liquefied Petroleum Gases within residential zones
or area shall be restricted as established in the
International Fire Code and the Clinton City Zoning
Ordinance.
10-8-6 Location of Tanks for Class III-B
Liquids.
(1) Lubricating oil which has been drained from
motor vehicles shall be stored and handled as a Class
III-B liquid. Above-ground tanks for the storage of
Class III-B liquids, excluding unstable liquids, shall
not exceed one thousand (1,000) gallons. They shall
only be allowed in zones PZ, CP-2, and MP and shall
be considered a conditional use and prior to
installation must receive conditional use approval
from the Planning Commission.
(2) Tanks which are part of a listed heating system
designed for space heating or heating of water shall
be approved as part of the construction approval
process in accordance with the Model Building
Codes and do not require conditional use approval of
the Planning Commission.
History: 05/10
10-8-7 Locations Where Above-Ground Tanks
are Prohibited. The storage of Class I and Class II
liquids in above-ground tanks shall only be permitted
in zones MP-1 and A-1. During construction, in areas
outside of these zones, above ground tanks shall also
be authorized upon written permit by the Fire
Department.
History: 05/10
10-8-8 Storage of Explosives, Blasting Agents,
and Fireworks. The limits referred to in Chapter 33
of the International Fire Code, in which storage of
explosives and blasting agents is prohibited, apply
everywhere within the city limits.
History: 12/75, 9/86, 2/89, 05/10
10-8-9 Fire Extinguishing Systems Installation
Requirements.
(1) Control valves, wall mount O.S. & Y and P.I.V.
valves for automatic sprinklers shall not be located
more than five (5) feet above finished floor or grade
level.
(2) When an automatic fire sprinkler system serves
two (2) or more occupancies, the automatic fire
sprinkler system or a smoke/heat detection system
shall be designed and installed so as to indicate on
the main alarm panel and remote annunciatr the
location of a fire within the building.
History: 05/10
10-8-10 Fire Alarm Systems.
(1) Fire Alarm systems shall be divided into alarm
zones when required by the Chief.
(2) When two (2) or more alarm zones are required,
or the system installed is an addressable system,
visible annunciation shall be provided in an area near
the front main entrance. Visible annunciation shall be
located where it can be read from outside of the front
main entrance or it may be located on the exterior of
the building in a location within ten (10) feet of the
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
front main entrance. A key zone map shall be located
next to the main fire alarm panel and/or the
annunciator panels. The key zone map shall include a
floor plan of the building and be color-coded to
coordinate separate notification zones or in an
addressable system, the separate types of notification
devices. The information that is indicated on the
remote annunciator panel(s) is to match the
information that is provided on the main fire alarm
panel. This map shall be covered with a protective
covering. The main fire alarm panel shall be located
in an area which is deemed the most constantly
attended location, such as the main office, reception
desk/area or the main corridor shared by separate
occupancies. The main fire alarm panel may be
installed elsewhere in the building as approved by the
Chief with the installation of a fully functioning
remote annunciator in the areas listed above.
History: 05/10
10-8-11 Fire Department Connections.
(1) The required Fire Department Connection (FDC)
of automatic fire sprinkler systems shall be of the
Freestanding Fire Department Connection type and
when practicable, shall be located at the front of the
building at a minimum distance that is equal to 1 ½
times the height of the building. Freestanding FDC’s
are to be installed as per Clinton City City Fire
Department FDC Installation Policy. A fire hydrant
shall be located within fifty (50) feet of the FDC. The
alarm bell shall be installed on the street side of the
building. In the event that the front main entrance of
the building is located on other than the street side of
the building, an additional alarm bell shall also be
located on the front side of the building. The Chief
shall approve the location of the FDC and the alarm
bell.
(2) KNOX Locking FDC Plugs shall be provided for
all newly constructed FDC's. Existing FDC's shall be
provided with KNOX Locking FDC Plugs upon
required replacement of the break-away type FDC
caps due to breakage or removal, or as deemed
necessary by the Chief. Both inlets on Siamese FDC's
are to be provided with KNOX Locking FDC Plugs
albeit one FDC cap is in need of replacement.
History: 05/10
10-8-12 Key Boxes. Key boxes shall be installed on
all non residential, occupiable building with a
monitored fire alarm system. The key box shall be of
an approved type and shall contain keys and/or other
devices necessary to gain access to all doors and
rooms throughout the building. Key boxes shall be
installed in an improved location.
History: 05/10
10-8-13 Locking Fire Department Connection
Caps. KNOX Locking FDC Plugs shall be provided
for all newly constructed FDC's. Existing FDC's shall
be provided with KNOX Locking FDC Plugs upon
required replacement of the break-away type FDC
caps due to breakage or removal, or as deemed
necessary by the Chief. Both inlets on Siamese FDC's
are to be provided with KNOX Locking FDC Plugs
albeit one FDC cap is in need of replacement.
History: 05/10
10-8-14 Private Fire Service Mains and Hydrants.
(1) Testing, inspection, maintenance, and repair of
private fire hydrants shall be the responsibility of the
property owner. Private fire hydrants shall be
maintained in an operable condition at all times.
Testing, inspection, and maintenance of private fire
hydrants shall be conducted on an annual basis and
after each use.
(2) The annual maintenance shall include steps as
promulgated in the Private Fire Hydrant Testing,
Inspection and Maintenance Policy.
(3) Visual identification of Private Fire Hydrants
shall be accomplished by painting the screw on
“Caps” of the hydrant black.
(4) If a private fire hydrant is defective, has been
damaged or otherwise been rendered inoperable
repairs or other necessary efforts must be made to
render the hydrant fully operational within ten (10)
working days. All repair work shall be preapproved
by the Clinton City Public Works Department and
inspected and approved by Clinton City Public
Works Department after repairs have been made. If
the property owner fails to comply within the ten (10)
working days a fine of not more than One Hundred
Dollars ($100.00) will be levied against the property
owner each day the hydrant remains out of service.
(5) Every five (5) years, a fire flow test of the fire
service main piping shall be conducted as outlined in
National Fire Protection Association (NFPA)
Standard 291 Recommended Practice for Fire Flow
Testing and Marking of Hydrants. Fire flow tests
shall be conducted by a person trained in the
procedures specified in NFPA 291 and the
conducting of the test shall be coordinated with
Clinton City Public Works Department.
(6) Written documentation of the testing and
maintenance required in § (4) above, and (5) above
shall be provided to the Public Works and Fire
Departments upon the completion.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
(7) In the event that any private fire hydrant is in
violation of this Title or other action not in
compliance with the requirements set forth here the
responsible party, owner or lessee shall, at his own
expense, correct the offending condition upon notice
by the City as established in §10-11-4 of the Utah
State Code Annotated. If the owner or lessee fails to
comply with this Section within the time set in the
notice from the City, the Public Works Direct shall so
report to the City Manager and the Manager may
instruct the Public Works Director to abate the
nuisance as a hazardous or inconvenient condition in
the manner provided by law.
History: 05/10, 10/10
10-8-15 Record Keeping.
(1) All certified contractors providing services,
testing, installations, repair and/or maintenance of
fire prevention systems to commercial facilities
within the City are required to enroll and utilize the
City approved single-point repository service
company for reporting the rendered service
information. This reporting information must be
filed with the single-point repository service within
five (5) working days of the completion of services to
the commercial facility.
(2) The single-point repository service company shall
be a third party records repository which shall
organize, maintain and monitor the received records,
providing information to the City and the commercial
facility pertaining to the records status and timely
notifications on required inspection timetables. Fees
for this provided service shall be paid directly from
the certified contractors to the City approved singlepoint
repository service company.
(2) In addition, a copy of the record of each periodic
inspection, test, servicing, repairs and maintenance
shall be maintained on the commercial facilities
premises, or other approved location, for a period of
not less than three (3) years, unless a different period
of time is specified in the International Fire Code
(IFC) or other appropriate standard. Records shall be
made available to the Fire Official, and if requested, a
copy provided to him.
History 02/16 - Ord. 16-01
10-8-16 Adopting Amendments – Appendices to
the Fire Code.
(1) Based upon recommendations from the Chief the
City Council may make ordinances that are more
restrictive than the Fire Code, in order to meet the
public safety needs of the City. More restrictive
requirements need not be approved by the State as
outlined in § (2) below.
(2) Amendments to the State adopted Fire Code
proposed by the Chief shall be forwarded to the City
Council to be adopted by ordinance. Amendments
adopted by the Council shall not be finalized until
forwarded to the State Fire Prevention Board for
approval and forwarded with a recommendation to
the State Legislature for appropriate action. Once
enacted by the State Legislature the amendments
shall be added to this Title.
(3) Adoption of appendices’ to the Fire Code may be
proposed, by the Chief, to the City Council and
adopted by Ordinance. Once enacted by the Council
the appendices shall be added to this Title by
reference.
(4) Amendments to appendices’ to the Fire Code may
be proposed, by the Chief to the City Council and
adopted by Ordinance. Once enacted by the Council
the amendments shall be added to this Title.
(5) The Chief shall provide to the Utah Fire
Prevention Board one copy of each ordinance enacted
under this section and Utah State Code §53-7-106.
History: 12/75, 9/84, 05/10
10-8-17 Adopted Amendments to the Fire Code.
Reserved
History: 05/10
10-8-18 Adopted Appendices to the Fire Code.
(1) Appendix “A” is adopted by reference as a guide
to be followed in setting up a board of appeals with
the following amendments:
(a) A101.2 Membership. The membership of the
board shall consist of five voting members having
qualifications appropriate for dealing with appeals to
the Fire Code. Members shall be nominated by the
Chief subject to appointment by the Mayor with the
advice and consent of the City Council. Members
shall serve without remuneration or compensation,
and shall be removed from office prior to the end of
their appointed terms only for cause.
(b) A101.7 Meetings. The board shall meet at least
annually and at intervals, to be determined by the
chairman. In any event, the board shall meet within
fifteen (15) days after notice of appeal has been
received.
(c) A101.10 Procedures. The board shall be operated
in accordance with procedures developed by the
Chief and adopted by the board.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
(2) Appendix “B” is adopted by reference.
(3) Appendix “C” is adopted by reference.
(4) Appendix “D” is adopted by reference.
History: 05/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
Chapter 9. Open Burning Regulations
10-9-1 Open Burning Regulations
10-9-2 Burning Restrictions
10-9-3 Burning
10-9-4 Rules Associated with Open Burning
10-9-5 Community Waste Disposal
10-9-6 Fire Department Burns
10-9-1 Open Burning Regulations. Open burning
is subject to Rule R307-202. Emission Standards:
General Burning adopted by the Utah Division of
Environmental Quality, and this chapter. All burns
are subject to the "clearing index" system approved
and coordinated by the Utah State Department of
Environmental Quality.
History: 7/70, 6/83, 9/84, 05/10
10-9-2 Burning Restrictions. No person shall
burn any trash, garbage, or other waste or conduct
any salvage operation by means of an open fire
except as provided in Sections § Error! Reference
source not found. and 10-9-4.
History: 05/10
10-9-3 Burning.
(1) When not prohibited by other laws or by other
officials having jurisdiction, and provided that no
nuisance is created, the following types of open
burning are permitted.
(a) The burning of prunings from fruit trees when
they come from an orchard with twenty-five (25) or
more fruit trees.
(b) The burning of weed growth along fence lines on
cultivated lands, canals, or irrigation ditches.
(c) The burning of stubble incident to horticultural or
agricultural operations on property of a contiguous
two (2) acres or more of cultivated property.
(d) The controlled heating of orchards or other crops
to lessen the chances of their being frozen, so long as
the emissions from the heating shall not violate
minimum standards as set by the Committee.
(e) Outdoor grills, fireplaces, and similar devices
whose primary purpose is the preparation of food.
(f) Campfires and fires used solely for recreational
purposes, under four (4) feet in diameter and under
the control of a person eighteen (18) years of age or
older.
(g) Indoor fireplaces.
(h) Properly operated industrial flares for combustion
of flammable gases.
(2) Except for items (1)(e), (1)(f), and (1)(g) above,
before conducting any open burning described in §
10-9-3 above, the applicant shall, furnish to a
representative of the Fire Department the following
information: The date, place, time of day, and length
of time the burning is proposed to be carried on,
purpose and proposed extent of the burning, the
name, address, and age of the person to be in control
of the burning and any other information the
representative may reasonably require.
History: 05/10
10-9-4 Rules Associated with Open Burning.
(1) All fires shall be kept a minimum of twenty five
(25) feet from any combustible buildings, fences, or
structures.
(2) Any fire deemed a Nuisance, as to dangerous to
human life or health determined by the Fire
department will be extinguished immediately.
(3) An adequate means, in terms of equipment and
manpower, to control or extinguish, if necessary, all
fires is provided at all times there is a possibility that
the fire may become uncontrolled.
(4) No fire shall be left unattended at any time.
(5) All fires shall be extinguished at once if wind
velocity exceeds 20 miles per hour or becomes so
strong as to blow sparks that could possibly set fire to
surrounding materials.
(6) All fires shall be extinguished at dark.
(7) No open burning shall be allowed in any
subdivision except as provided in this act.
(8) All burning of refuse, waste, trash, or garbage is
prohibited.
History: 6/83, 9/84, 05/10
10-9-5 Community Waste Disposal. No open
burning shall be done at sites used for disposal of
community trash, garbage, and other wastes except
when authorized for a specific period of time by the
Fire Chief or Designee on the basis of justifiable
circumstances reviewed and weighed in terms of
pollution effects and other relevant considerations at
an appropriate hearing following written application.
History: 05/10
10-9-6 Fire Department Burns.
(1) As provided in Utah State Code § 19-2-114, the
provisions of R307-202 are not applicable to the
controlled burning of not more than two structures
per year by an organized and operating fire
department for the purpose of training fire service
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
personnel when the United States Weather Service
clearing index is above 500.
(2) Other municipalities desiring to conduct a
training burn as outlined in § (1) above shall
coordinate the training with the Chief and the burn
shall not be counted as one of the Fire Department’s
burns unless coordinated training is conducted and
with the Chief’s concurrence.
History: 05/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
Chapter 10. Cost Recovery
10-10-1 Purpose
10-10-2 Recovery Authorization Procedure
10-10-3 Liability
10-10-4 Expense Recovery
10-10-5 Uniform Fire Cost Recovery
10-10-1 Purpose. This chapter shall provide
procedures for recovering costs incurred by the City
for City assistance rendered in responding to
hazardous material emergencies, aggravated fire
emergencies and aggravated medical emergencies
pursuant to 53-2-105, Utah Code Annotated.
10-10-2 Recovery Authorization Procedure. The
City is hereby empowered to recover expenses from
any person whose intentional or gross negligence act
caused the City and/or assisting agencies to incur any
expenses directly associated with responding to a
hazardous material emergency, aggravated fire
emergency or an aggravated medical emergency.
These expenses may be collected in accordance with
the following procedures:
(1) The Chief shall determine responsibility for the
emergency incident and notify the responsible party
in person or by mail (first class, postage pre-paid)of
the City’s determination of responsibility and the
expenses to be recovered.
(2) The notice shall specify that the party determined
to be responsible may appeal the Chief’s decision to
the City Manager. Any appeal shall be filed, in
writing, with the City Recorder’s Office not more
than thirty days from the date of service of notice.
The date of service of notice shall be the date of
personal delivery or three days after the date of
mailing.
(3) In the event the party determined to be
responsible appeals the Chief’s decision, the City
Manager shall hold a hearing to consider any issues
raised by the appeal. At the hearing the appealing
party and the City shall be entitled to present
evidence in support of their respective positions. The
City Manager shall issue a final decision assessing
responsibility and expenses.
10-10-3 Liability. The payment of expenses
determined owing under this chapter does not
constitute an admission of liability or negligence in
any legal action for damages.
10-10-4 Expense Recovery. In the event any person
determined to be responsible for the payment of
hazardous material emergency expenses, aggravated
fire expenses or aggravated medical expenses fails to
make payment to the City within thirty (30) days
after a final determination of any appeal to the City
Manager, or thirty (30) days from the deadline for
appeal in the event no appeal is filed, the City may
initiate legal action to recover from the determined
responsible party the expenses determined to be
owing, including the City’s reasonable attorney’s
fee’s and cost of the recovery.
10-10-5 Uniform Fire Cost Recovery. In an effort
to uniformly bill for apparatus and personnel by fire
departments in response to fire and Hazmat calls, a
uniform cost recovery schedule has been
recommended by the Davis County Fire Officers
Association. All costs for fire apparatus and
personnel incurred by Clinton City shall be billed as
outlined on the Cost Recovery Fee Table. All fees’
shall be reviewed from time to time by the City
Council and set by resolution as part of the Clinton
City Consolidation Fee Schedule.
History: 10/04
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
Chapter 11. Appeals
10-11-1 Application to Appeal
10-11-2 Action by Chief Upon an Appeal
10-11-3 Terms of Office
10-11-4 Meetings
10-11-5 Appeal to the Boards Decision
10-11-1 Application to Appeals. Pursuant to
Section 108 and Appendix “A” of the Fire Code,
appeals to the requirements of the Fire Code must be
submitted, in writing, to the Chief and must be filed
within thirty (30) days of notice of the action taken
by the Chief, Fire Marshal, or other authorized agent
to the Department.
10-11-2 Action by Chief Upon an Appeal. Upon
receipt of written appeal, the Chief shall convene an
appeals board and follow the appeals process as
outlined in Section 108 and Appendix “A” of the Fire
Code and this chapter.
10-11-3 Terms of Office. Members shall be
appointed at the time an appeal is filed with the City
Manager and will remain a member of the board until
the appeal has been resolved.
10-11-4 Meetings. The board shall meet as often as
deemed necessary by the chairman in order to resolve
the filed appeal.
10-11-5 Appeal to the Boards Decision. Upon the
completion of the appeals process established in the
Fire Code, any person aggrieved by the decision of
that board may appeal the decision to the City
Manager. The appeal must be in writing and filed
with the office of the City Manager within thirty (30)
days of the board's decision.
History: 05/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
Chapter 12. Ambulance Services
10-12-1 Purpose
10-12-2 Service Established
10-12-3 Rates and Charges
10-12-1 Purpose. The City Council finds that it
is in the best interests of the health and safety of
the citizens of the City for ambulance transport
services to be provided by the City Fire
Department. In order for the ambulance service
to be self-supporting and in order to deliver the
highest quality of patient care, the Fire
Department shall be authorized to charge the
user of ambulance services for the reasonable
costs of providing those services, including those
EMT or paramedic services used in ambulance
transport. The City Council also finds that it is
necessary to provide emergency and
nonemergency ambulance services as well as
ambulance services outside of the corporate
limits of the City in order to operate a selfsupporting
ambulance service which will not
require subsidy from the General Fund.
10-12-2 Service Established. The Fire
Department shall provide ambulance services
under the direction and supervision of the Chief.
10-12-3 Rates and Charges. The rates and
charges for ambulance and paramedic transport
services provided by the Fire Department shall
be those maximum rates and charges determined
by rule of the State Emergency Medical Services
Committee under the provisions of the
Emergency Medical Services System Act which
rates and charges reflect the reasonable cost of
providing ambulance services.
History: 05/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
Chapter 13. Fireworks
10-13-1 Fireworks
10-13-2 Utah Fire Prevention Board Rules
10-13-3 Limitations
10-13-4 Definitions
10-13-5 Sale, Discharge and Possession of
Fireworks Restricted
10-13-6 Application to Sell Fireworks
10-13-7 Posting of Permit
10-13-8 Regulations Governing all Fireworks
10-13-9 Permanent Structures
10-13-10 Temporary Stands
10-13-11 Seizure of Firworks – Suspension or
Revocation of Permit
10-13-12 Days when Fireworks may be Sold
10-13-13 Days when Fireworks may be
Discharged
10-13-14 Hours when Fireworks may be
Discharged
10-13-15 Discharge of Fireworks Restricted
10-13-16 Business Exempt from this Chapter
10-13-17 Applicants for a Public Display of
Fireworks or Use of Fireworks for
Theatrical, Concert, Filming or Other
Uses
10-13-18 Prohibited Acts and Activities
10-13-1 Fireworks. The sale, exposure for, use,
distribution or possession of fireworks or
pyrotechnics within Clinton City, except as
hereinafter provided, is declared by the City
Council to be against the public health, safety
and welfare of the citizens of Clinton City, Utah.
History: 9/11
10-13-2 Utah Fire Prevention Board Rules.
Rules, specifications, standards or requirements
promulgated by the Utah Fire Prevention Board
as permitted or required by the various sections
of the Fire Prevention and Fireworks Act (§ 53-
7-201 et seq., of the Utah Code (as amended))
are included and adopted as part of this Chapter.
History: 9/11
10-13-3 Limitations. The Clinton City Council,
in order to preserve the public health, safety, and
welfare, reserves the right and retains the
authority to further limit or ban the use of
fireworks or pyrotechnics within Clinton City
beyond the guidelines established in this
Chapter.
History: 9/11
10-13-4 Definitions. Definitions listed below
are generally accepted by the industry; however
the State Fire Marshal Office, State of Utah,
periodically publishes definitions in conjunction
with the “Approved Fireworks List”. Where a
conflict exists between the Fire Marshal
Definitions and those contained in this Section,
the Fire Marshal Definitions take precedence.
“Firework” means any composition or device
manufactured or used for the purpose of
producing a visible or audible effect by
combustion, deflagration, or detonation but does
not include model rockets, toy pistol caps,
emergency signal flares, snakes or glow worms,
party poppers, wire sparklers under 36 inches in
length, matches, or class “A” and “B”
explosives.
“Ground and Hand-Held Sparkling Device”
means:
(1) Any cylindrical tube or fountain not
exceeding ¾” of inside diameter and containing
not more than 75 grams of pyrotechnic
composition which produces a shower of color
and sparks upon ignition and may whistle or pop;
(2) Any cardboard or heavy paper cone (cone
fountain) containing up to 50 grams of
pyrotechnic composition which produces a
shower of color and sparks upon ignition and
may whistle or pop;
(3) Any cylindrical tube, or illuminating torch
containing up to 100 grams of pyrotechnic
composition which produces colored fire upon
ignition;
(4) Any pyrotechnic device or wheel capable of
being attached to a post or tree containing up to
six “driver” units or tubes not exceeding ½” in
inside diameter that each contain not more than
60 grams of pyrotechnic composition per driver
unit which revolves upon ignition producing a
shower of color and sparks and sometimes a
whistling effect;
(5) Any device similar in design and effect to a
“wheel” capable of being placed on the ground
(ground spinner) and ignited; and,
(6) Any narrow paper fuse-less tube (filter
sparkler) filled with pyrotechnic composition
that produces color and sparks when the popper
at one end of the tube is ignited.
“Ground Audible Device” means any paper or
cardboard tube containing not more than 50
milligrams of pyrotechnic material that travels
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
along the ground (chaser) upon ignition and
often produces a whistling and/or popping effect.
“Combination Fireworks Device” means any
device containing combinations of two or more
of the effects described in subsection (1) or (2).
“Trick Noisemaker” means:
(1) Any tube or sphere containing pyrotechnic
composition that upon ignition produces white or
colored smoke (smoke device) as its primary
effect; and,
(2) Any device that produces a small report
intended to surprise the user, including:
(a) A booby trap which is a small tube with a
string protruding from both ends that ignites the
friction-sensitive composition in the tube when
the string is pulled;
(b) A snapper which is a small paper-wrapped
device containing a minute quantity of explosive
composition coated on bits of sand which
explodes producing a small report;
(c) A trick match which is a kitchen or book
match coated with a small quantity of explosive
or pyrotechnic composition that produces a small
shower of sparks when ignited; and,
(d) A cigarette load which is a small wooden
peg coated with a small quantity of explosive
composition that produces a small report when
the cigarette is ignited; and,
(e) An auto burglar alarm which is a tube
which contains pyrotechnic composition that
produces a loud whistle and smoke when ignited.
A small quantity of explosive, not exceeding 50
milligrams, may also be used to produce a small
report. A squib is used to ignite the device.
“Permanent Structure” means an unmovable
building, securely attached to a foundation,
housing a business licensed to sell merchandise
in addition to fireworks.
“Retail Sales Locations” means both permanent
structures and temporary stands where fireworks
are sold.
“Temporary Stand” means a nonpermanent
structure used exclusively for the sale of
fireworks.
History: 06/99
10-13-5 Sale, Discharge and Possession of
Fireworks Restricted. It is a Class “B”
misdemeanor for any person, firm, partnership or
corporation to offer for sale, expose for sale, sell,
or possess, or use, or explode any fireworks in
violation of the State Fireworks Act of l983 (ll-3-
l et seq. Utah Code Annotated) and all rules and
regulations related as established by the State of
Utah. The sale of Class C fireworks permitted by
the Act and regulations shall only be made in
compliance with the restrictions established by
the State, this Chapter and after acquiring a
business license, as required in Title 15 of the
Clinton City Code of Ordinances, with the
exception of those persons only selling toy
pistols, toy canes, toy guns, or sparklers. A
violation of this Chapter or of the State
Fireworks Act and its accompanying regulations
shall be deemed to be a violation of the
Ordinances of Clinton City subject to the
penalties set forth by the State and in10-5-5of the
Clinton City Code of Ordinances.
History: 06/99; 9/11
10-13-6 Application to Sell Fireworks.
(1) Prior to applying for a Clinton City Business
License per § 15-12, all applicants for a business
license to sell fireworks shall obtain a permit
from the Clinton City Fire Department. The
application for a permit shall contain, at a
minimum, the following information:
(a) Describe the location where the fireworks are
to be sold and a description of the location as
being a temporary stand or in a permanent
structure;
(b) If a Temporary Stand, a description or
drawing of the site where the Stand is to be
located showing any parking stalls that will be
unavailable for use while the Stand is in place;
(c) Be accompanied by certificates of insurance
evidencing liability coverage in the minimum
amount of $1,000,000.00 and property damage
coverage in the minimum amount of
$1,000,000.00 and naming the City as an
additional insured. The certificates of insurance
shall state that the City will be given 10 days
written notice prior to any cancellation of the
insurance by the insurance company;
(d) Be accompanied by a certificate of insurance
evidencing product liability coverage in a
minimum amount of $1,000,000.00; and,
(e) Be accompanied by a copy of the applicant’s
Utah Sales Tax License.
(2) Applications shall be made a minimum of
fourteen (14) working days prior to the time
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
when the applicant wishes to begin selling
fireworks within the time constraints set forth in
this Chapter.
History: 06/99; 9/11
10-13-7 Posting of Permit.
(1) Permits issued pursuant to this Chapter shall
be posted in a conspicuous place in a temporary
stand and in a conspicuous place in the vicinity
of the fireworks in a permanent structure.
(2) The Permit shall be available for presentation
upon request by duly authorized officials.
History: 06/99
10-13-8 Regulations Governing all Fireworks
Retail Sales Locations.
(1) All retail sales locations shall be under the
direct supervision of a responsible person who is
eighteen (18) years of age or older.
(2) Those selling fireworks at retail sales
locations shall be at least sixteen (16) years of
age or older.
(3) A salesperson, at least eighteen (18) years of
age, shall remain at the sales location at all times
unless suitable locking devices or secured metal
storage containers are provided to prevent the
unauthorized access to the merchandise by
others.
(4) Fireworks shall not be sold to any person
under the age of sixteen (16) years, unless
accompanied by an adult.
(5) All retail sales locations shall be kept clear of
dry grass or other combustible material for a
distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet in all
directions.
(6) Storage of fireworks for sale shall not be
located in residential areas.
(7) Smoking shall not be permitted within 50
feet of any fireworks, either on display for retail
sale or being stored. “Smoking Prohibited
Within 50 Feet” or similarly worded signs shall
be conspicuously posted at all sales and storage
locations. Sign lettering shall be not less than 2”
high with a minimum 3/8” stroke on a
contrasting background.
(8) A sign, clearly visible to the general public,
shall be posted at all fireworks sales locations,
indicating the legal dates for discharge of
fireworks as set forth in this Chapter. Sign
lettering shall be not less than 1” high with a
minimum 3/16” stroke on a contrasting
background.
(9) A sign, clearly visible to the general public,
shall be posted at all fireworks sales locations,
indicating the hours for discharge of fireworks as
set forth in this Chapter. Sign lettering shall be
not less than 1” high with a minimum 3/16”
stroke on a contrasting background.
(10) All retail sales locations shall be equipped
with an approved portable fire extinguisher
having a combined rating of at least 2A 10BC.
(11) No amount of retail storage or retail sales of
fireworks shall, by its presence, create a distinct
hazard to the life or safety of the customer,
employee or property.
(12) All retail fireworks sales shall be located in
permanent structures or temporary stands, as
defined in this Chapter.
History: 06/99; 9/11
10-13-9 Permanent Structures.
(1) Display of Class “C” common state approved
explosives inside of buildings shall be so located
to ensure constant visual supervision.
(2) In all retail sales locations in permanent
structures, the area where Class “C” common
state approved explosives are displayed or stored
shall be at least fifty (50) feet from any
flammable liquid or gas, or other highly
combustible material.
(3) In permanent structures, retail sales displays
of Class “C” common state approved explosives
shall not be placed in locations that would
impede egress from the building.
(4) Class “C” common state approved explosives
shall only be stored, handled, displayed, and sold
as packaged units, with unexposed fuses, within
a permanent structure.
(5) Display of Class “C” common state approved
explosives inside of buildings protected
throughout with an automatic fire sprinkler
system shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent
of the area of the retail sales floor or exceed six
hundred (600) square feet, whichever is less.
(6) Display of Class “C” common state approved
explosives inside of buildings not protected with
an automatic fire sprinkler system shall not
exceed one hundred twenty-five (125) pounds of
pyrotechnic composition. Where the actual
weight of the pyrotechnic composition is not
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
known, twenty-five (25) percent of the gross
weight of the consumer fireworks, including
packaging, shall be permitted to be used to
determine the weight of the pyrotechnic
composition.
(7) Display of Class “C” common state approved
explosives inside of buildings shall not exceed a
height greater than six (6) feet above the floor
surface.
(8) Rack storage of Class “C” common state
approved explosives inside of buildings is
prohibited.
History: 06/99; 9/11
10-13-10 Temporary Stands.
(1) Temporary stands shall meet the
requirements of the latest edition of the
International Building Code adopted by the City.
In addition, tents having an area in excess of two
hundred (200) square feet shall comply with
I.F.C., Chapter 24. Each licensee shall pay the
inspection fee and shall be inspected prior to any
sales.
(2) Each stand, trailer or tent less than two
hundred (200) square feet shall have a minimum
three-foot (3ft) wide unobstructed aisle running
the length of the stand, inside and behind the
counter.
(3) All tents where customers enter inside shall
have a minimum three-foot (3ft) wide
unobstructed aisle and two (2) separate exits
located a reasonable distance apart, so located
that if one is blocked the other will be available.
(4) Temporary stands, trailers or tents for the
sale of Class “C” common state approved
explosives shall be located in properly zoned
areas, at least fifty (50) feet from other
temporary stands, LPG, flammable liquid or gas
storage and dispensing units.
(5) If the temporary stand or trailer is used for
overnight storage of Class “C” common state
approved explosives, it shall be equipped with
suitable locking devices to prevent unauthorized
entry. Tents shall not be used for overnight
storage of Class “C” common state approved
explosives unless on-site security is provided.
(6) Temporary stands shall not be illuminated or
heated by any device requiring an open flame or
exposed heating elements. All heaters and light
devices shall be approved by the Clinton City
Fire Marshal.
(7) The general public shall not be allowed to
enter a temporary stand or trailer.
(8) A person shall not be allowed to sleep in a
temporary stand.
(9) A temporary stand shall be removed within
seven (7) days after the sales period has ended,
as provided in this Chapter.
(10) The area used for sales of Class “C”
common state approved explosives in stands,
trailers or tents shall be arranged to permit the
customer to only touch or handle pre-packaged
Class “C” common state approved explosives.
All non pre-packaged Class “C” common state
approved explosives shall be displayed in a
manner which prevents the fireworks from being
handled by the customer without the direct
intervention of the retailer who shall be able to
maintain visual contact with the customer.
(11) No person shall be allowed to sleep in any
temporary stand, trailer or tent in which Class
“C” common state approved explosives are
stored or sold.
(12) All illumination shall be installed in
accordance with the temporary wiring section of
the National Electric Code and approved by the
authority having jurisdiction (AHJ).
History: 06/99; 9/11
10-13-11 Seizure of Fireworks –
Suspension or Revocation of License.
Fireworks sold or offered for sale in violation of
this Chapter may be seized and destroyed and the
Permit of the person selling or offering fireworks
for sale may be suspended. Other violations of
this Chapter may be grounds for seizure of the
fireworks and suspension or revocation of the
Permit.
History: 06/99; 9/11
10-13-12 Days When Fireworks May
be Sold. Fireworks may be sold on dates
established within the Rules set by the State.
History: 06/99, 9/11
10-13-13 Days When Fireworks May be
Discharged. Fireworks may be discharged on
dates established within the Rules set by the
State.
History: 06/99, 9/11
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
10-13-14 Hours When Fireworks May be
Discharged. A person may discharge Class C
common state approved explosives in the City as
follows:
(1) Between the hours of 11 a.m. and 11 p.m.,
except that on July 4 and July 24, the hours are
11 a.m. to midnight:
(a) Beginning on July 1 and ending on July 7;
and
(b) Beginning on July 21 and ending on July 27;
(2) Between the hours of 11 a.m. on December
31 and ending at 1 a.m. on the following day;
(3) Between the hours of 11 a.m. on the Chinese
New Year's Eve and ending at 1 a.m. on the
following day.
History: 9/11, 4/12
10-13-15 Discharge of Fireworks Restricted.
(1) It shall be unlawful to discharge any
fireworks within one hundred (100) feet of
temporary stands, LPG, flammable liquid, or gas
storage and dispensing units.
(2) It shall be unlawful to discharge any
fireworks within twenty (20) feet of any
residence, dwelling or other structure.
(3) It shall be unlawful to discharge any
fireworks in public rights-of-way, parks, or other
public properties.
History: 06/99
10-13-16 Businesses Exempt from This
Chapter.
(1) This Chapter does not apply to the product
inventories of firework manufacturers, importers,
distributors or wholesalers designed for shipment
directly out of the State.
(2) Fireworks displays sponsored by the City.
History: 06/99, 9/11
10-13-17 Applicants for a Public
Display of Fireworks or Use of Fireworks for
Theatrical, Concert, Filming or Other Uses.
(1) The Fire Department, upon receipt of
application in writing, and upon proof of liability
insurance may grant a permit for the public
display of fireworks by religious, fraternal or
civic organizations, fair associations, or other
organizations or groups of individuals when such
display is to be handled by a competent State of
Utah licensed operator, to be approved by the
Chief of the Clinton City Fire Department. The
display shall be of such character, and so located,
discharged, or fired, as in the opinion of the
Chief, after proper inspection, shall not be
hazardous to property or endanger any person(s).
After such permit shall have been granted,
possession, use and distribution of fireworks for
such display, shall be lawful for that purpose
only.
(2) The City may require that the processes
outlined in Title 15, Chapter 16 apply to any of
these activities.
(3) Applicants shall:
(a) Complete an “Application for Public Display
of Fireworks” provided by the Clinton City Fire
Department which shall set forth the date, hour,
and place of making such display; the name(s) of
the person(s), firm, partnership, corporation,
association or group of individuals making the
display; and the name of the person(s) in charge
of the igniting, firing, setting off, exploding or
causing to be exploded such fireworks;
(b) Provide a site plan of location where the
fireworks are to be discharged and viewed;
(c) Provide a complete list of fireworks to be
discharged;
(d) Indicate the place of storing of fireworks;
location of the storage place shall be subject to
the approval of the Chief of the Clinton City Fire
Department if within the City;
(e) Be accompanied with a certificate, acceptable
to the Fire Chief, from the owner of the property
where fireworks will be discharged and viewed;
(f) Be accompanied by certificates of insurance
evidencing liability coverage in a minimum
amount of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00)
per occurrence, with a total aggregate of four
million dollars ($4,000,000.00) designed for the
payment of all damages, which may be caused
either to a person(s) or to property, by reason of
the display so as aforesaid licensed, and arising
from any acts of the licensee, his agents or
employees and naming Clinton City Corporation
its officers, officials and employees as additional
insured:
(i) City may require higher limits based upon
potential impact of event;
(ii) The certificates of insurance shall state that
the City will be given ten (10) days written
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 10 Fire Prevention
notice prior to any cancellation of the insurance
by the insurance company;
(iii) Liability insurance shall be for the use and
benefit of any person(s) injured or the owner of
any property damaged, who is authorized to
maintain an action thereon, or his heirs,
executors, administrators, successors or assigns;
(g) Be accompanied with a Hold Harmless
Agreement (as provided by the City);
(h) Be accompanied by a copy of the applicant’s
Utah State license as applicable;
(i) Applications shall be made a minimum of
fifteen (15) working days prior to the date of
display; and,
(j) No permit granted hereunder shall be
transferable.
History: 06/99; 9/11
10-13-18 Prohibited Acts and
Activities: It shall be unlawful for any person
to:
(a) Ignite, explode, project or otherwise fire or
use, or permit the ignition, explosion, or
projection of any fireworks:
(i) Across or over public rights-of-way.
(ii) In, over or onto public parks, or other public
property or the property of another.
(b) Ignite, explode, or otherwise make use of any
fireworks within one hundred feet (100') of any
fireworks stand.
(c) Ignite, explode, project or otherwise fire or
make use of any fireworks within twenty feet
(20') of any residence, dwelling or other
structure.
(d) Ignite or discharge any fireworks within or
throw the same from a motor vehicle.
(e) Place any ignited article of fireworks into or
near a motor vehicle or near any person or group
of people.
(f) Throw any ignited article of fireworks into or
at a motor vehicle, or at or near any person or
group of people.
Ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use,
or assist in the ignition, explosion or projection
of any fireworks in a location where such use has
been prohibited by order of the Fire Marshal. It
is a violation of this section for a person who
ignites or assists in igniting fireworks in a lawful
location to allow the fireworks to be launched
into, projected over, or to land in a prohibited
area. No person shall be prosecuted under this
section when acting reasonably under authority
of a permit issued by the City.
History: 01/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 11 Firearms
TITLE 11. FIREARMS
Chapter 1. Discharge of Firearms Prohibited
Chapter 1. Discharge of Firearms Prohibited
11-1-1 Discharge of Firearms Prohibited
11-1-2 Hunting
11-1-3 Throwing Missiles
11-1-4 Penalty for Violation
11-1-1 Discharge of Firearms Prohibited.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to discharge any gun,
rifle, or pistol within the City limits, except:
(a) In self defense when legally allowed to do so;
(b) By any peace officer in the discharge of his duty;
(c) In the case of target shooting, if in a proper place
and breastwork or battery for the protection of the
citizens and property has been erected, and written
approval of such structure has been given by the
Police Chief; and
(d) In the case of the lawful slaughter of livestock in
an area designated for agricultural use, for personal
consumption, at a location that is more than six
hundred feet (600') from any building, where the
shooting is not in a direction and distance that would
endanger persons, property, or motorists and provided
that the person discharging the firearm has received
written approval to do so by the City's Police
Department.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to release any arrow,
bolt, or similar projectile from a longbow, compound
bow, crossbow or any similar implement within the
City limits, except:
(a) In self defense when legally allowed to do so;
and,
(b) In the case of target shooting, if in a proper place
and breastwork or battery for the protection of the
citizens and property has been erected, and written
approval of such structure has been given by the
Police Chief.
History: 6/82, 9/84, 9/85, 8/96, 05/13
11-1-2 Hunting.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to engage in the act
of hunting or to carry an uncased firearm in the open
under conditions which may reasonably be construed
as hunting in the area within the corporate limits of
Clinton City.
(2) As used in this Section, "hunting" is the search for
or pursuit of any wild game animal, bird, or mammal,
with the purpose of capturing or killing or attempting
to capture or kill the animal, regardless of whether
such kill or capture is actually effected. "Hunting"
shall not be construed to mean the pursuit of such
game animals through the use of snares or animal
traps or when the game is to be taken by falconry.
(3) Nothing under this Chapter shall be construed so
as to prevent the Department of Wildlife Resources
(DWR) from controlling, maintaining, or otherwise
managing wildlife within Clinton City.
(a) Persons having received written authorization
from DWR to participate in a special management
hunt within Clinton City, shall:
(i) Not use any firearm while hunting;
(ii) Not discharge any arrow, missile, or other
projectile within six hundred feet (600') from any
building, across any roadway, or in a direction which
may endanger persons or property.
(iii) Be responsible for any injury or damage caused
while participating in the hunt;
(iv) Notify the Police Department of the specific
dates and times that the hunt will occur; and
(v) Comply with all DWR regulations, rules, and
instructions, and comply with all other statutes and
ordinances.
(b) Subsection (a) shall not apply to DWR officers or
other peace officers acting within the course and
scope of their enforcement responsibilities.
History: 6/82, 9/84, 9/85, 8/96, 05/13
11-1-3 Throwing Missiles. It is unlawful for any
person to willfully or carelessly throw or propel any
stone, stick, or other missile or to shoot any weapon
whereby any person may be hit or hurt or whereby
any window may be broken or other property may be
injured or destroyed.
History: 05/13
11-1-4 Penalty for Violation. The violation of the
provisions of this chapter shall constitute a class B
misdemeanor.
History: 6/82, 9/84, 9/85, 05/99, 05/13
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
TITLE 12. FRANCHISES
Chapter 1. Gas
Chapter 2. Rescinded
Chapter 3. Power
Chapter 4. Rocky Mountain Power
Chapter 5. Telecommunications
Chapter 6. Cable TV Franchises
Chapter 1. Gas
12-1-1 Grant of Franchise for System
12-1-2 Placement
12-1-3 Rules and Regulations
12-1-4 Grant of Franchise for Gas
12-1-5 Measurement
12-1-6 Rates and Prices
12-1-7 Right of Assignment
12-1-8 Term
12-1-9 Condition
12-1-10 Nature of Franchise
12-1-11 Excavations, etc.; Indemnification
12-1-1 Grant of Franchise for System. There is
hereby granted to Mountain Fuel Supply Company, a
Utah corporation, its successors or assigns,
hereinafter called grantee, the right, privilege, and
franchise to construct, maintain and operate in the
present and future streets, alleys and parkways, and
other public places in Clinton City, a system of gas
mains, supply pipes, and laterals with all necessary or
desirable appurtenances, for the purpose of supplying
gas for light, heat, power and other purposes to
Clinton City, the inhabitants thereof, and persons and
corporations beyond the corporate limits thereof, for
the term and under the conditions hereinafter set
forth.
History: 5/62, 9/84
12-1-2 Placement. All mains, pipes, and laterals
shall be so laid as to interfere as little as possible with
traffic over the streets and alleys. The location of all
mains, pipe lines, and laterals may be fixed under the
supervision of the city council.
History: 5/62, 9/84
12-1-3 Rules and Regulations. Grantee may make
and enforce reasonable rules and regulations in the
conduct of its business and may require before
furnishing service the execution of a contract
therefore. Grantee shall have the right to contract
with each consumer with reference to the installation
of service pipe lines and the control of service pipes
from the connection thereof with the supply lines of
the grantee in the streets, to and including the meter
located on the consumer's premises. For the purpose
of securing safety and good service to the consumer
and in the public interest, grantee shall have the right
to prescribe the sizes and kinds of the pipe to be used
by the consumer in conveying gas on consumer's
premises and shall have the right to refuse service to
any consumer who neglects or refuses to comply with
the rules and regulations of the grantee prescribing
such conditions. Grantee shall have the right to
classify the consumers of said gas in the corporate
limits of Clinton City, according to the time of use,
character of use, quantity of gas required, and such
other conditions as may be reasonable; and subject to
the regulations herein provided for and the rights
herein prescribed and such reasonable classifications,
the grantee shall furnish gas without unjust
discrimination and at a uniform price to all consumers
of the same class, and to all persons along the
established lines or mains of the grantee, who have
properly observed such rules and regulations and
acceded to the rights herein reserved to said grantee.
History: 5/62, 9/84
12-1-4 Grant of Franchise for Gas. The right is
hereby granted unto the said grantee to furnish,
distribute, supply, sell and require payment for gas to
all persons and corporations in Clinton City, through
the said system of gas mains, supply pipes and
laterals, and to do all things necessary and incident
thereto, in accordance with the terms and conditions
herein specified.
History: 5/62, 9/84
12-1-5 Measurement. The gas furnished by the
grantee shall be sold and delivered to the consumers
through standard meters and Clinton City reserves the
right to test the accuracy of any meter in service by a
competent officer or agent appointed for that purpose
by the mayor and city council.
History: 5/62, 9/84
12-1-6 Rates and Prices. The rates and prices
which the grantee, its successors or assigns, may
charge for gas and gas service furnished and
delivered and the conditions of service under the
terms of this franchise shall be fixed in accordance
with the laws and constitution of the State of Utah
and the laws and constitution of the United States.
History: 5/62
12-1-7 Right of Assignment. Permission is hereby
granted unto the said Mountain Fuel Supply
Company, its successors or assigns, to assign this
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
franchise and all rights hereunder, and upon
assignment of this franchise in accordance herewith,
said successors or assigns, whether individuals or
corporations, shall become entitled to all the rights
and privileges herein granted and shall assume all the
obligations and duties herein provided.
History: 5/62
12-1-8 Term. This franchise and all the rights
herein granted shall terminate at the end of 50 years
after the date of passage of this ordinance, unless
sooner terminated by virtue of the provisions herein
contained.
History: 5/62, 9/84
12-1-9 Condition. This act and the rights herein
conferred shall be null and void unless within 90 days
after the passage and posting hereof the said grantee,
its successors or assigns, shall file with the clerk of
Clinton City a written instrument, declaring its
acceptance of the terms and conditions hereof and its
intention to be bound by and perform the same, and
unless construction of the gas distribution system is
begun within six (6) months after passage and posting
hereof.
History: 5/62, 9/84
12-1-10 Nature of Franchise. This franchise is
granted in consideration of the acceptance by the
grantee of the terms and conditions of this chapter as
hereinbefore provided and the commencement of
construction by the grantee within the time above
provided of the necessary facilities to accomplish gas
service to Clinton City, thereby making the
advantages of said service available to said town and
its inhabitants.
History: 5/62, 9/84
12-1-11 Excavations, etc.; Indemnification. When
the grantee shall make or cause to be made
excavations, or shall place obstructions in any street,
alley, or other public place, the public shall be
protected by barriers and lights placed, erected and
maintained by the grantee; and in the event of injury
to any person or damage to any property by reason of
negligence of the grantee in the construction,
operation or maintenance of the gas distribution
system of the grantee, the grantee shall indemnify and
keep harmless Clinton City from any and all liability
in connection therewith and comply with Title 9 of
the Clinton City Code.
History: 5/62, 9/84
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
Chapter 2. Rescinded
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
Chapter 3. Power
12-1-1 Purpose
12-1-2 Franchise Grant
12-1-3 Term
12-1-4 Acceptance by Company
12-1-5 Non-Exclusive Franchise
12-1-6 City Regulatory Authority
12-1-7 Extension of City Limits
12-1-8 Indemnification
12-1-9 Franchise Fee
12-1-10 Annexation
12-1-11 Small Power Production and Cogeneration
12-1-12 City Authority
12-1-13 Plan, Design, Construction and
Installation of Company Facilities
12-1-14 Company Excavations and Relocations
12-1-15 No Waiver
12-1-16 Transfer of Franchise
12-1-17 Changing Conditions
12-1-18 Amendment
12-1-19 Non-Contestability - Breach of Contract
12-1-20 Notices
12-1-21 Early Termination, Revocation or
12-1 Forfeiture
12-1-22 Severability
12-3-1 Purpose. The purpose of this franchise
ordinance is to grant to PacifiCorp, doing business as
Utah Power & Light Company, its successors and
assigns, a non-exclusive right to use the public streets,
alleys, public ways and public places within Clinton
City for its business purposes, under the constraints
and for the consideration enumerated in this franchise
ordinance.
History: 4/93
12-3-2 Franchise Grant. There is hereby granted
to PacifiCorp, doing business as Utah Power & Light
Company, its successors and assigns (herein
sometimes called the "Company"), the franchise right,
privilege, and authority to construct, maintain and
operate in, under, along, over and across the present
and future streets, alleys, public ways and public
places in Clinton, Utah (herein sometimes called the
"City"), and its successors, electric light and power
lines, together with all the necessary or desirable
appurtenances (including underground conduits and
structures, poles, towers, wires, transmission lines,
and telegraph and telephone lines for its own use), for
the purpose of supplying electric power and energy to
said City, the inhabitants thereof and persons and
corporations beyond the limits thereof, for light, heat,
power and other purposes. This franchise does not
grant to the Company the right, privilege or authority
to engage in the community antenna (or cable)
television business, although nothing herein contained
shall preclude the Company one (1) from permitting
those lawfully engaged in such business to utilize
Company's facilities within the City for such
purposes, or two (2) from providing such service if
appropriate authority is obtained.
History: 5/43, 9/84, 4/93
12-3-3 Term. The term of the franchise granted
herein is for a period from and after its effective date,
until June 1, 2018. The Company shall pay all costs
of legal notices required for the public hearing prior
to ordinance adoption and the ordinance publication
costs thereafter.
History: 4/93
12-3-4 Acceptance by Company. Within thirty
days after the passage of this ordinance, the Company
shall file an unqualified written acceptance thereof,
with the City Recorder of Clinton, otherwise the
ordinance and the rights granted herein shall be null
and void.
History: 4/93
12-3-5 Non-Exclusive Franchise. The right to use
and occupy said streets, alleys, viaducts, bridges,
roads, lanes, and other public ways for the purposes
herein set forth is not, and shall not be deemed to be,
an exclusive franchise, and the City reserves the right
to itself make or grant a similar use in the said public
ways and places to any other person, firm, or
corporation.
History: 4/93
12-3-6 City Regulatory Authority. The City
expressly reserves, and the Company expressly
recognizes the City's right and duty to adopt, from
time to time, in addition to the provisions herein
contained, such ordinances and rules and regulations
as may by the City be deemed necessary in the
exercise of its police power for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of its citizens and their
properties or exercise any other rights, powers, or
duties required or authorized, under the Constitution
of the State of Utah, the law of Utah, or City
Ordinance.
History: 4/93
12-3-7 Extension of City Limits. Upon the
annexation of any territory to the City, the right and
franchise granted herein shall extend to the territory
so annexed to the extent the City has authority. All
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
facilities owned, maintained, or operated by the
Company located within, under, or over any public
ways of the territory so annexed shall thereafter be
subject to all terms hereof.
History: 4/93
12-3-8 Indemnification. The City shall in no way
be liable or responsible for any loss or damage to
property or any construction, operation or
maintenance by the Company of its lines and
appurtenances hereunder. The Company shall
indemnify, defend and hold the City harmless from
and against claims, demands, liens and all liability or
damage of whatsoever kind on account of or arising
from the grant of this Franchise, the exercise by the
Company of the related rights, or from the operations
of the Company within the City, and shall pay the
costs of defense plus reasonable attorneys' fees. The
City shall (a) give prompt written notice to the
Company of any claim, demand or lien with respect
to which the City seeks indemnification hereunder
and (b) unless in the City's judgment a conflict of
interest exists between the City and the Company
with respect to such claim, demand or lien, permit the
Company to assume the defense of such claim,
demand, or lien with counsel satisfactory to City. If
such defense is not assumed by the Company, the
Company shall not be subject to liability for any
settlement made without its consent. Notwithstanding
any provision hereof to the contrary, the Company
shall not be obligated to indemnify, defend or hold
the City harmless to the extent any claim, demand or
lien arises out of or in connection with any negligent
act or failure to act of the City or any of its officers or
employees.
History: 4/93
12-3-9 Franchise Fee.
(1) As further consideration for this franchise, which
provides for the use by the Company of the streets
and other public places within the City, the Company
shall pay to the City a franchise fee in the amount of
six percent (6%) of the gross revenue, as defined
below in subsection (4). Any sums paid by the
Company as gross receipts based utility revenue tax
under the provisions of any other City ordinances
shall be credited against the fee due hereunder.
(2) Within forty five days after the last day of each
calendar year month, the Company shall file with the
City's finance officer, a report of such gross revenues
for such month, together with a check for the amount
due. Such report shall contain a statement of gross
revenues and any deductions made because of
adjustments or corrections as herein provided.
Within thirty (30) days from the submission of the
statement of gross revenues and franchise fee owing,
or within such reasonable additional time as he may
request, the finance officer shall investigate the
statement and determine the accuracy of the amounts
reported, and if the finance officer finds any
mathematical errors, report them to the company for
correction. If the franchise fee as paid shall be found
deficient, the Company shall promptly remit the
difference, and if the fee as paid be found excessive,
the City shall promptly refund the difference. In the
event of a disagreement, the Company shall make
payment under protest during the resolution of the
dispute between the parties or through the courts.
Neither payment of the franchise fee nor failure to
make such investigation shall be deemed to stop the
City or the Company in any way or prevent
subsequent investigation by either and collection or
return of any amount properly due. The aforesaid
thirty (30) day period is not intended and shall not act
as a statute of limitations or repose, which shall be
governed by State law.
(3) The records of the Company pertaining to the
report(s) required in this Section shall be open for
inspection by the City and its duly authorized
representative’s at all reasonable hours for the
purpose of verification. The Company will advise the
City of the identity of consumers and suppliers of
electric power wheeled by the Company to consumers
within the City, to the extent the Company is able to
provide such information.
(4) "Gross Revenue" refers to any revenue of the
Company derived from the sale and use of electric
power within the corporate limits of the City, plus
revenues derived from wheeling electric power to
consumers within the City, but excluding those
revenues derived from wheeling electric power to
consumers within the City pursuant to wheeling
obligations in existence at the effective date of this
ordinance.
History: 4/93; Ord. 15-10, 11/15
12-3-10 Annexation. When any property owned by
the Company becomes eligible for voluntary
annexation to the City, the Company will petition to
annex that property upon request by the City,
provided that no condition of such annexation shall
impair the Company's ownership of its property.
Except as herein provided, the Company agrees to
comply with all terms and conditions imposed upon
the annexation by the City which are no more
stringent than those generally imposed upon property
owners seeking annexation of their land to the City.
The foregoing obligation shall not apply with respect
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
to the Company's transmission corridor(s) extending
beyond City boundaries, except to the extent that such
corridor is or will be contiguous to and parallel with a
City boundary.
History: 4/93
12-3-11 Small Power Production and
Cogeneration. The City expressly reserves the right
to engage in the production of electric energy, both
from conventional power plants and from
cogeneration and small power production facilities.
The Company agrees to negotiate long term contracts
consistent with other Company contracts of a similar
nature being entered into at that time, to purchase
City-generated power made available for sale,
consistent with state and federal law.
History: 4/93
12-3-12 City Authority. The City's Mayor, or any
successor head of the executive branch of
government, is hereby designated the official of the
City having full power and authority to take
appropriate action for and on behalf of the City and
its inhabitants to enforce the provisions of this
Franchise and to investigate any alleged violations or
failures of the Company to comply with the
provisions hereof or to adequately and fully discharge
its responsibilities and obligations hereunder. The
failure or omission of the Mayor to so act shall not
constitute any waiver or estoppel. The Mayor may
delegate certain oversight responsibilities to the
department directors responsible for construction
within the public rights-of-way or for the finances of
the City. When acting as the Mayor's designee, a
department director shall have all the power and
authority conferred herein upon the Mayor. In order
to facilitate such duties of the Mayor, the Company
agrees to grant the Mayor reasonable access to the
books and records of the Company insofar as they
relate to any matters covered by this Franchise; to
provide the Mayor with such reasonable and
necessary reports containing or based on information
readily obtainable from the Company's books and
records as he may from time to time request with
respect to the electric service supplied under this
Franchise; and to provide the Mayor, upon request
not more than every two years, a list of utility related
real property owned or leased by the Company within
the City.
History: 4/93
12-3-13 Plan, Design, Construction and
Installation of Company Facilities.
(1) Upon request by the City or the Company not
more often than every year, the Company and the City
shall meet for the purpose of exchanging information
and documents regarding construction and other
similar work within the City, with a view towards
coordinating their respective activities in those areas
where such coordination may prove mutually
beneficial. Any information regarding future capital
improvements that may involve land acquisition shall
be treated with confidentiality upon request.
(2) In addition to the installation of underground
electric distribution lines as provided in the
applicable Rules and Regulations of the Public
Service Commission, the Company shall, upon
payment of all charges provided in its tariffs or their
equivalent, place newly constructed electric
distribution lines underground in new residential
subdivision areas as may be required by subdivision
regulations adopted by the City.
(3) The City shall have the right without cost to the
City to use all poles and suitable overhead structures
owned by the Company within the City for City wires
used by the City in connection with its fire alarms and
police signal systems; provided, however, that the
Company shall assume no liability nor shall it have to
incur, directly or indirectly, any additional expense in
connection therewith, and the use of said poles and
structures by the City shall be in such a manner as not
to constitute a safety hazard or to interfere with the
Company's use of same. Nothing herein shall be
construed to require the Company to increase pole
size, or alter the manner in which Company attaches
its equipment to poles, or alter the manner in which it
operates and maintains its equipment. Such City
attachments shall be installed and maintained in
accordance with the reasonable requirements of
Company and the then current National Electrical
Safety Code pertaining to such construction. Further,
said City attachments shall be attached or installed
only after written approval by the Company, which
approval will be timely processed and will not be
unreasonably withheld.
(4) Whenever the Company proposes to install new
underground conduits or replace existing
underground conduits within or under the present and
future streets, alleys or public ways in the City, it
shall, prior to the commencement of such work,
advise, or cause to be advised, the City of such work
and shall allow the City, at its own expense, to share
the trench of the Company to lay its own conduit
therein, provided that such action by the City will not
unreasonably interfere with the Company's facilities
or delay the accomplishment of the project.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
(5) All electric distribution facilities constructed by
the Company within the City shall be located so as to
cause minimum interference with public use of
streets, alleys and other public ways and places, and
shall be maintained in good repair and condition.
Facilities located on, upon, over and under property
in which the City has a property interest shall be
constructed, installed, maintained, cleared of
vegetation, renovated or replaced in accordance with
applicable rules and regulations of the City. The
Company will acquire permits in accordance with
such rules and regulations, and the City may inspect
the manner of such work and require remedies as may
be necessary to assure compliance. It is understood
that this work involves the health, safety, and welfare
of the community and from time to time must be done
under circumstances which will make the prior
acquisition of a permit infeasible.
(6) The Company shall continue to use its best efforts
to take measures which will result in its facilities
within the City meeting the standards required by
applicable Federal and State air and water pollution
laws. Upon the City's request, the Company will
provide the City with a status report of such
measures.
(7) All electric lines, poles, towers, pipes, conduits,
equipment, property and other structures or assets
installed or used under authority of this Franchise
shall be used, constructed and maintained in
accordance with applicable federal, state and city
laws, codes and regulations, as required by law.
(8) If, during the course of work on its facilities, the
Company causes damage to or alters any street, alley,
right-of-way or public property, the Company shall
(at its own cost and expense and in a manner
approved by the City's Director of Public Works)
replace and restore it in as good a condition as existed
before the work commenced. Except in case of
emergency, Company shall, prior to commencing
work in the public way or street or other public
places, make application for a permit to perform such
work from the City Engineer or other agency
designated by the City. Such permit shall not be
unreasonably withheld. The Company will abide by
all applicable ordinances and all reasonable rules,
regulations and requirements of the City Engineer for
such work(s).
History: 4/93
12-3-14 Company Excavations and Relocations.
(1) The Company shall have the right to excavate in,
occupy and use any and all such streets, alleys,
viaducts, bridges, roads, lanes, public ways and other
public places subject to the conditions and
requirements of the ordinances and rules and
regulations of the City; provided, however, that the
Company shall not, pursuant to this Franchise, place
any poles, mains, cables, structures, pipes, conduits or
wires on, over, or within any City park, pleasure
ground or other recreational area owned by the City.
Nothing contained herein shall preclude the City from
granting a revocable permit therefore, or effect
already existing rights.
(2) Whenever the City shall, in the interest of the
public convenience, necessity, health, safety or
welfare, require the relocation or reinstallation of any
property of the Company or its successors in any of
the streets, alleys, rights-of-way or public property of
the City, it shall be the obligation of the Company,
upon notice of such requirement to promptly
commence work to remove and relocate or reinstall
such property as may be reasonably necessary to meet
the requirements of the City. Such relocation,
removal or reinstallation by the Company shall be at
no cost to the City. Any money and all rights to
reimbursement from the State of Utah, the federal
government or other parties to which the Company
may be entitled for work done by the Company
pursuant to this paragraph, shall be the property of
Company. City shall assign or otherwise transfer to
Company all right it may have to recover costs for
such work performed by the Company and shall
support the efforts of the Company to obtain
reimbursement; provided that the City shall not be
required to incur or expend any costs or legal fees.
History: 4/93
12-3-15 No Waiver. Neither the City nor the
company shall be excused from complying with any
of the terms and conditions of this Franchise by any
failure of the other, or any of its officers, employees,
or agents, upon any one or more occasions to insist
upon or to seek compliance with any such terms and
conditions.
History: 4/93
12-3-16 Transfer of Franchise. The Company shall
not transfer or assign any rights under this Franchise
to another entity, except transfers and assignments by
operation of law, unless the City shall first give its
approval in writing, which approval shall not be
unreasonably withheld; provided, however, inclusion
of this Franchise as property subject to the lien of the
Company's mortgage(s) shall not constitute a transfer
or assignment.
History: 4/93
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
12-3-17 Changing Conditions. The Company and
the City recognize that many aspects of the electric
utility industry are currently the subject of discussion,
examination and inquiry by different segments of the
industry and affected regulatory authorities and that
these activities may ultimately result in fundamental
changes in the way the Company conducts its
business and meets its service obligations. In
recognition of the present state of uncertainty
respecting these matters, the Company and the City
each agree, on request of the other during the term of
this Franchise, to meet with the other and discuss in
good faith whether it would be appropriate, in view of
developments of the kind referred to above during the
term of this Franchise, to amend this Franchise or
enter into separate, mutually satisfactory
arrangements to effect a proper accommodation of
any such developments.
History: 4/93
12-3-18 Amendment. At any time during the term
of this Franchise, the City through its city council, or
the Company may propose amendments to this
Franchise by giving 30 days written notice to the
other of the proposed amendment(s) desired, and both
parties thereafter, through their designated
representatives, will, within a reasonable time,
negotiate in good faith in an effort to agree upon
mutually satisfactory amendment(s). No amendment
or amendments to this Franchise shall be effective
until mutually agreed upon by the City and the
Company and formally adopted as an ordinance
amendment.
History: 4/93
12-3-19 Non-Contestability - Breach of Contract.
(1) Neither the City nor the Company will take any
action for the purpose of securing modification of this
Franchise before either the Public Service
Commission or any Court of competent jurisdiction;
provided, however, that neither shall be precluded
from taking any action it deems necessary to resolve
difference in interpretation of the Franchise nor shall
the Company be precluded from seeking relief from
the Courts in the event Public Service Commission
orders, rules or regulations make performance under
the Franchise illegal.
(2) In the event the Company or the City fails to
fulfill any of their respective obligations under this
Franchise, the City, or the Company, whichever the
case may be will have a breach of contract claim and
remedy against the other in addition to any other
remedy provided by law, provided that no remedy
which would have the effect of amending the specific
provisions of this Franchise shall become effective
without such action which would be necessary to
formally amend the Franchise.
History: 4/93
12-3-20 Notices. Unless otherwise specified herein,
all notices from the Company to the City pursuant to
or concerning this Franchise shall be delivered to the
City Recorder's Office. Unless otherwise specified
herein, all notices from the City to the Company
pursuant to or concerning this Franchise shall be
delivered to the President of Utah Power & Light
company at 201 South Main, 23rd Floor, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84111 and such other office as the
Company may advise the City of by written notice.
History: 4/93
12-3-21 Early Termination, Revocation or
Forfeiture.
(1) The City may terminate or revoke this Franchise
and all rights and privileges herein provided for any
of the following reasons:
(a) The Company fails to make timely payments of
the Franchise Fee as required under Section 8 of this
Franchise and does not correct such failure within
thirty (30) calendar days after written notice by the
City of such failure;
(b) The Company, by act or omission, materially
violates a duty or obligation herein set forth in any
particular within the Company's control, and with
respect to which redress is not otherwise herein
provided. In such event, the City, acting by or
through its Council, may after hearing determine that
such failure is of a material nature; and thereupon,
after written notice given Company of such
determination, Company shall have six (6) months
from the date it receives notice to remedy the
conditions identified in the notice. After the
expiration of such six (6) months period and failure to
correct such conditions, the City may declare this
Franchise forfeited, and thereupon the Company shall
have no further rights or authority hereunder,
provided, however, that any such declaration of
forfeiture shall be subject to judicial review as
provided by law, and provided further that in the
event such failure is of such nature that it cannot be
reasonably corrected within the six (6) months time
provided above, the City shall provide additional time
for the reasonable correction of such alleged failure in
lieu of the six (6) months time provided above.
(c) The Company becomes insolvent, unable or
unwilling to pay its debts, is adjudged bankrupt, or all
or part of its facilities should be sold under an
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
instrument to secure a debt and is not redeemed by
the Company within thirty (30) days.
(2) No franchise revocation or termination may be
affected under this Section 21 until the City Council
shall first adopt an ordinance terminating the
Franchise and set forth therein the reasons therefore,
following not less than thirty (30) days prior written
notice to the Company of the public hearing on the
ordinance. The Company shall have an opportunity
at the public hearing to be heard upon the proposed
termination and, if terminated, the Council shall make
findings of fact and state its reasons for such action.
(3) Nothing contained herein shall be deemed to
preclude Company from pursuing any legal or
equitable rights or remedies it may have to challenge
the action of the City Council or any successor
governing body of the City following said ordinance's
adoption.
History: 4/93
12-3-22 Severability. If any section, sentence,
paragraph, term or provision hereof is for any reason
determined to be illegal, invalid, or superseded by
other lawful authority including any state or federal
regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof or
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid by any court of
common jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct, and independent provision and such
determination shall have no effect on the validity of
any other section, sentence, paragraph, term or
provision hereof, all of which will remain in full force
and effect for the term of the Franchise or any
renewal or renewals thereof.
History: 4/93, 6/04
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
Chapter 4. Electric Utility Franchise and General
Utility Easement
12-4-1 Grant of Franchise and General Utility
Easement
12-4-2 Term
12-4-3 Acceptance by Company
12-4-4 Non-Exclusive Franchise
12-4-5 City Regulatory Authority
12-4-6 Indemnification
12-4-7 Annexation
12-4-8 Plan, Design, Construction and
Installation of Company Facilities
12-4-9 Relocation of Electric Facilities
12-4-10 Subdivision Plat Notification
12-4-11 Vegetation Management
12-4-12 Renewal
12-4-13 No Waiver
12-4-14 Transfer of Franchise
12-4-15 Amendment
12-4-16 Notices
12-4-17 Severability
12-4-18 Waiver of Jury Trial
12-4-1 Grant of Franchise and General Utility
Easement. The City hereby grants to Rocky
Mountain Power the right, privilege and authority to
construct, maintain, operate, upgrade, and relocate its
electrical distribution and transmission lines and
related appurtenances, including underground
conduits and structures, poles, towers, wires, guy
anchors, vaults, transformers, transmission lines, and
communication lines (collectively referred to herein
as “Electric Facilities”) in, under, along, over and
across the present and future streets, alleys, and
rights-of-way, not including City parks, buildings or
other spaces not associated with City-owned rightsof-
way (collectively referred to herein as “Public
Ways”) within the City, for the purpose of supplying
and transmitting electric power and energy to the
inhabitants of the City and persons and corporations
beyond the limits thereof.
12-4-2 Term. The term of this Franchise and
General Utility Easement is for ten (10) years
commencing on the date of acceptance by the
Company as set forth in Section 3 below.
12-4-3 Acceptance by Company. Within sixty
(60) days after the passage of this ordinance by the
City, Rocky Mountain Power shall file an unqualified
written acceptance thereof, with the City Recorder
otherwise the ordinance and the rights granted herein
shall be null and void.
12-4-4 Non-Exclusive Franchise. The right to use
and occupy the Public Ways of the City shall be
nonexclusive and the City reserves the right to use the
Public Ways for itself or any other entity that
provides service to City residences; provided,
however, that such use shall not unreasonably
interfere with Rocky Mountain Power’s Electric
Facilities or Rocky Mountain Power’s rights as
granted herein.
12-4-5 City Regulatory Authority. In addition to
the provision herein contained, the City reserves the
right to adopt such additional ordinances and
regulations as may be deemed necessary in the
exercise of its police power for the protection of the
health, safety and welfare of its citizens and their
properties or exercise any other rights, powers, or
duties required or authorized, under the Constitution
of the State of Utah, the laws of Utah or City
Ordinance.
12-4-6 Indemnification. The City shall in no way
be liable or responsible for any loss or damage to
property or any injury to, or death, of any person that
may occur in the construction, operation or
maintenance by Rocky Mountain Power of its
Electric Facilities. Rocky Mountain Power shall
indemnify, defend and hold the City harmless from
and against claims, demands, liens and all liability or
damage of whatsoever kind on account of Rocky
Mountain Power’s use of the Public Ways within the
City, and shall pay the costs of defense plus
reasonable attorneys' fees for any claim, demand or
lien brought thereunder. The City shall: (a) give
prompt written notice to Rocky Mountain Power of
any claim, demand or lien with respect to which the
City seeks indemnification hereunder; and (b) permit
Rocky Mountain Power to assume the defense of such
claim, demand, or lien. If such defense is not
assumed by Rocky Mountain Power, Rocky Mountain
Power shall not be subject to liability for any
settlement made without its consent. Notwithstanding
any provision hereof to the contrary, Rocky Mountain
Power shall not be obligated to indemnify, defend or
hold the City harmless to the extent any claim,
demand or lien arises out of or in connection with any
negligent or willful act or failure to act of the City or
any of its officers or employees.
12-4-7 Annexation.
(1) Extension of City Limits; Upon the annexation of
any territory to the City, the rights granted herein shall
extend to the annexed territory to the extent the City has
such authority. All Electrical Facilities owned,
maintained, or operated by Rocky Mountain Power
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
located within any public ways of the annexed territory
shall thereafter be subject to all of the terms hereof.
(2) Notice of Annexation; When any territory is
approved for annexation to the City, the City shall, not
later than ten (10) working days after passage of an
ordinance approving the proposed annexation, provide
by certified mail to Rocky Mountain Power: (a) each
site address to be annexed as recorded on county
assessment and tax rolls; (b) a legal description of the
proposed boundary change; and (c) a copy of the City’s
ordinance approving the proposed annexation. The
notice shall be mailed to:
Rocky Mountain Power Customer Contact Center
Attn: Annexations
P.O. Box 400
Portland, Oregon 97207-0400
With a copy to:
Rocky Mountain Power
Attn: Office of the General Counsel
1407 West North Temple, Room 320
Salt Lake City, UT 84116
12-4-8 Plan, Design, Construction and
Installation of Company Facilities.
(1) All Electrical Facilities installed or used under
authority of this Franchise shall be used, constructed
and maintained in accordance with applicable federal,
state and city laws, codes and regulations.
(2) Except in the case of an emergency, Rocky
Mountain Power shall, prior to commencing new
construction or major reconstruction work in the Public
Ways, apply for any permit from the City as may be
required by the City’s ordinances, which permit shall
not be unreasonably withheld, conditioned, or delayed.
Rocky Mountain Power will abide by all applicable
ordinances and all reasonable rules, regulations and
requirements of the City, and the City may inspect the
manner of such work and require remedies as may be
reasonably necessary to assure compliance.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, Rocky Mountain Power
shall not be obligated to obtain a permit to perform
emergency repairs, however shall provide notification
to the City of any underground work concerning the
emergency.
(3) All Electric Facilities shall be located so as to cause
minimum interference with the Public Ways of the City
and shall be constructed, installed, maintained, cleared
of vegetation, renovated or replaced in accordance with
applicable rules, ordinances and regulations of the City.
(4) If, during the course of work on its Electrical
Facilities, Rocky Mountain Power causes damage to or
alters the Public Way or public property, Rocky
Mountain Power shall (at its own cost and expense and
in a manner reasonably approved by the City) replace
and restore it in as good a condition as existed before
the work commenced.
(5) In addition to the installation of underground
electric distribution lines as provided by applicable
state law and regulations, Rocky Mountain Power shall,
upon payment of all charges provided in its tariffs or
their equivalent, place newly constructed electric
distribution lines underground as may be required by
City ordinance.
(6) The City shall have the right without cost to use all
poles and suitable overhead structures owned by Rocky
Mountain Power within Public Ways for City wires
used in connection with its fire alarms, police signal
systems, or other public safety communication lines
used for governmental purposes; provided, however,
any such uses shall be for activities owned, operated or
used by the City for a public purpose and shall not
include the provision of CATV, internet, or similar
services to the public. Provided further, that Rocky
Mountain Power shall assume no liability nor shall it
incur, directly or indirectly, any additional expense in
connection therewith, and the use of said poles and
structures by the City shall be in such a manner as to
prevent safety hazards or interferences with Rocky
Mountain Power’s use of same. Nothing herein shall be
construed to require Rocky Mountain Power to increase
pole size, or alter the manner in which Rocky Mountain
Power attaches its equipment to poles, or alter the
manner in which it operates and maintains its Electric
Facilities. City attachments shall be installed and
maintained in accordance with the reasonable
requirements of Rocky Mountain Power and the current
edition of the National Electrical Safety Code
pertaining to such construction. Further, City
attachments shall be attached or installed only after
written approval by Rocky Mountain Power in
conjunction with Rocky Mountain Power’s standard
pole attachment application process. Rocky Mountain
Power shall have the right to inspect, at the City’s
expense, such attachments to ensure compliance with
this Section 8.6 and to require the City to remedy any
defective attachments; provided that the City will not be
charged for minor inspections of such attachments.
(7) Rocky Mountain Power shall have the right to
excavate the Public Rights of Ways subject to
reasonable conditions and requirements of the City.
Before installing new underground conduits or
replacing existing underground conduits, Rocky
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
Mountain Power shall first notify the City of such work
by written notice and shall allow the City, at its own
expense, (to include a pro rata share of the trenching
costs), to share the trench of Rocky Mountain Power to
lay its own conduit therein, provided that such action by
the City will not unreasonably interfere with Rocky
Mountain Power’s Electrical Facilities or delay project
completion.
(8) Before commencing any street improvements or
other work within a Public Way that may affect Rocky
Mountain Power’s Electric Facilities, the City shall give
written notice to Rocky Mountain Power.
12-4-9 Relocations of Electric Facilities.
(1) The City reserves the right to require Rocky
Mountain Power to relocate its Electric Facilities within
the Public Ways in the interest of public convenience,
necessity, health, safety or welfare at no cost to the
City. Within a reasonable period of time after written
notice, Rocky Mountain Power shall promptly
commence the relocation of its Electrical Facilities.
Before requiring a relocation of Electric Facilities, the
City shall, with the assistance and consent of Rocky
Mountain Power, identify a reasonable alignment for
the relocated Electric Facilities within the Public Ways
of the City.
(2) The City shall assign or otherwise transfer to
Company all right it may have to recover the cost for
the relocation work and shall support the efforts of
Rocky Mountain Power to obtain reimbursement
(3) Rocky Mountain Power shall not be obligated to
pay the cost of any relocation that is required or made a
condition of a private development. If the removal or
relocation of facilities is caused directly or otherwise by
an identifiable development of property in the area, or
is made for the convenience of a customer, Rocky
Mountain Power may charge the expense of removal or
relocation to the developer or customer. For example,
Rocky Mountain Power shall not be required to pay
relocation costs in connection with a road widening or
realignment where the road project is made a condition
of or caused by a private development.
12-4-10 Subdivision Plat Notification. Before the
City approves the Final Plat of any new subdivision
and before recordation of that Plat, the City shall
obtain Rocky Mountain Power’s approval of
Electrical Facilities, including underground facilities
to be installed by the developer, and associated rights
of way depicted on the plat. A copy of the plat shall
be mailed for approval to Rocky Mountain Power:
Rocky Mountain Power
Attn: Estimating Department
635 N 1200 W
Layton, Utah 84041
12-4-11 Vegetation Management. Rocky Mountain
Power or its contractor may prune all trees and
vegetation which overhang the Public Ways where
Rocky Mountain Power electrical facilities exist,
whether such trees or vegetation originate within or
outside the Public Ways, to prevent the branches or
limbs or other part of such trees or vegetation from
interfering with Rocky Mountain Power’s Electrical
Facilities. Such pruning shall comply with the
American National Standard for Tree Care
Operation (ANSI A300) and be conducted under the
direction of an arborist certified with the International
Society of Arboriculture. A growth inhibitor
treatment may be used for trees and vegetation
species that are fast-growing and problematic. Rocky
Mountain Power shall use commercially reasonable
good-faith efforts to provide advance notice to private
property owner(s) prior to conducting vegetation
management work. Nothing contained in this Section
shall prevent Rocky Mountain Power, when necessary
and with the approval of the owner of the property on
which they may be located, from cutting down and
removing any trees which overhang streets.
12-4-12 Renewal. At least 120 days prior to the
expiration of this Franchise, Rocky Mountain Power
and the City either shall agree to extend the term of
this Franchise for a mutually acceptable period of
time or the parties shall use best faith efforts to
renegotiate a replacement Franchise. Rocky
Mountain Power shall have the continued right to use
the Public Ways of the City as set forth herein in the
event an extension or replacement Franchise is not
entered into upon expiration of this Franchise.
12-4-13 No Waiver. Neither the City nor Rocky
Mountain Power shall be excused from complying with
any of the terms and conditions of this Franchise by any
failure of the other, or any of its officers, employees, or
agents, upon any one or more occasions to insist upon
or to seek compliance with any such terms and
conditions.
12-4-14 Transfer of Franchise. Rocky Mountain
Power shall not transfer or assign any rights under
this Franchise to another entity, except transfers and
assignments by operation of law, or to affiliates,
parents or subsidiaries of Rocky Mountain Power
which assume all of Rocky Mountain Power’s
obligations hereunder, unless the City shall first give
its approval in writing, which approval shall not be
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
unreasonably withheld, conditioned or delayed;
provided, however, Rocky Mountain Power may
assign, mortgage, pledge, hypothecate or otherwise
transfer without consent its interest in this Franchise
to any financing entity, or agent on behalf of any
financing entity to whom Rocky Mountain Power (1)
has obligations for borrowed money or in respect of
guaranties thereof, (ii) has obligations evidenced by
bonds, debentures, notes or similar instruments, or
(iii) has obligations under or with respect to letters of
credit, bankers acceptances and similar facilities or in
respect of guaranties thereof.
12-4-15 Amendment. At any time during the term
of this Franchise, the City through its City Council, or
Rocky Mountain Power may propose amendments to
this Franchise by giving thirty (30) days written
notice to the other party of the proposed
amendment(s) desired, and both parties thereafter,
through their designated representatives, will, within
a reasonable time, negotiate in good faith in an effort
to agree upon mutually satisfactory amendment(s).
No amendment or amendments to this Franchise shall
be effective until mutually agreed upon by the City
and Rocky Mountain Power and formally adopted as
an ordinance amendment, which is accepted in
writing by Rocky Mountain Power.
12-4-16 Notices. Unless otherwise specified herein,
all notices from Rocky Mountain Power to the City
pursuant to or concerning this Franchise shall be
delivered to the City Recorder's Office. Unless
otherwise specified herein, all notices from the City
to Rocky Mountain Power pursuant to or concerning
this Franchise shall be delivered to:
Regional Business Management Director,
Rocky Mountain Power,
70 North 200 East, Room 122,
American Fork, Utah, 84003
(or such other office as Rocky Mountain Power may
advise the City of by written notice)
12-4-17 Severability. If any section, sentence,
paragraph, term or provision hereof is for any reason
determined to be illegal, invalid, or superseded by
other lawful authority including any state or federal
regulatory authority having jurisdiction thereof or
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid by any court of
common jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a
separate, distinct, and independent provision and such
determination shall have no effect on the validity of
any other section, sentence, paragraph, term or
provision hereof, all of which will remain in full force
and effect for the term of the Franchise or any
renewal or renewals thereof.
12-4-18 Waiver of Jury Trial. To the fullest extent
permitted by law, each of the parties hereto waives
any right it may have to a trial by jury in respect of
litigation directly or indirectly arising out of, under or
in connection with this agreement. Each party further
waives any right to consolidate any action in which a
jury trial has been waived with any other action in
which a jury trial cannot be or has not been waived.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
Chapter 5. Telecommunications
12-5-1 Definitions
12-2-2 Levy of Tax
12-2-3 Rate
12-2-4 Rate Limitation and Exemption
Therefrom
12-2-5 Effective Date of Tax Levy
12-2-6 Changes in Rate or Repeal of the Tax
12-2-7 Interlocal Agreement fro Collection
of the Tax
12-2-8 Repeal of Inconsistent Taxes and
Fees
12-5-1 Definitions. As used in this ordinance:
(1) "Commission" means the State Tax
Commission.
(2)
(a) Subject to Subsections (2) (b) and (c),
"customer" means the person who-is obligated
under a contract with a telecommunications
provider to pay for telecommunications service
received under the contract.
(b) For purposes of this ordinance, "Customer"
means:
(i) the person who is obligated under a contract
with a telecommunications provider to pay for
telecommunications service received under the
contract; or
(ii) if the end user is not the person described in
Subsection (2) (b) (i), the end user of
telecommunications service.
(c) "Customer" does not include a reseller:
(i) of telecommunications service; or
(ii) for mobile telecommunications service, of a
serving carrier under an agreement to serve the
customer outside the telecommunications
provider's licensed service area.
(3)
(a) "End User" means the person who uses a
telecommunications service.
(b) For purposes of telecommunications service
provided to a person who is not an individual,
"end user" means the individual who uses the
telecommunications service on behalf of the
person who is provided the telecommunications
service.
(4) "Gross Receipts” attributed to the
municipality means those gross receipts from a
transaction for telecommunications services that
is located within the municipality for the
purposes of sales and use taxes under Utah Code
Title 59, Chapter 12, Sales and Use Tax Act and
determined in accordance with Utah Code
section 59-12-207.
(5) "Gross Receipts from Telecommunications
Service" means the revenue that a
telecommunications provider receives for
telecommunications service rendered except for
amounts collected or paid as:
(a) a tax, fee, or charge:
(i) imposed by a governmental entity;
(ii) separately identified as a tax, fee, or charge
in the transaction with the customer for the
telecommunications service; and
(iii) imposed only on a telecommunications
provider;
(b) sales and use taxes collected by the
telecommunications provider from a customer
under Title 59, Chapter 12, Sales and Use Tax
Act; or
(c) interest, a fee, or a charge that is charged by a
telecommunications provider on a customer for
failure to pay for telecommunications service
when payment is due.
(6) "Mobile Telecommunications Service" is as
defined in the Mobile Telecommunications
Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec. 124.
(7) "Municipality" means Clinton City Corp.
(8) "Place of Primary Use":
(a) for telecommunications service other than
mobile telecommunications service, means the
street address representative of where the
customer's use of the telecommunications service
primarily occurs, which shall be:
(i) the residential street address of the customer,
or
(ii) the primary business street address of the
customer; or
(b) for mobile telecommunications service, is as
defined in the Mobile Telecommunications
Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec. 124.
(9) Notwithstanding where a call is billed or
paid, "Service Address" means:
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
(a) if the location described in this Subsection (9)
(a) is known, the location of the
telecommunications equipment:
(i) to which a call is charged; and
(ii) from which the call originates or terminates;
(b) if the location described in Subsection (9) (a)
is not known but the location described in this
Subsection (8) (b) is known, the location of the
origination point of the signal of the
telecommunications service first identified by:
(i) the telecommunications system of the
telecommunications provider; or
(ii) if the system used to transport the signal is
not a system of the telecommunications provider,
information received by the telecommunications
provider from its service provider, or
(c) if the locations described in Subsection (9)
(a) or (b) are not known, the location of a
customer's place of primary use.
(10)
(a) Subject to Subsections (9) (b) and (9) (c),
"Telecommunications Provider" means a person
that:
(i) owns, controls, operates, or manages a
telecommunications service; or
(ii) engages in an activity described in
Subsection (9) (a) (i) for the shared use with or
resale to any person of the telecommunications
service.
(b) A person described in Subsection (9) (a) is a
telecommunications provider whether or not the
Public Service Commission of Utah regulates:
(i) that person; or
(ii) the telecommunications service that the
person owns, controls, operates, or manages.
(c) "Telecommunications Provider" does not
include an aggregator as defined in Utah Code
Section 54-8b-2.
(11) "Telecommunications Service" means:
(a) telephone service, as defined in Utah Code
Section 59-12-102, other than mobile
telecommunications service, that originates and
terminates within the boundaries of this state; and
(b) mobile telecommunications service, as
defined in Utah Code Section 59-12-102:
(i) that originates and terminates within the
boundaries of one state; and
(ii) only to the extent permitted by the Mobile
Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec.
116 et seq.
12-5-2 Levy of Tax. There is hereby levied a
municipal telecommunications license tax on the
gross receipts from telecommunications service
attributed to this municipality.
12-5-3 Rate.
(1) The rate of the tax levy shall be 3.5% of the
telecommunication provider's gross receipts from
telecommunications service that are attributed to
the municipality subject to the following:
(2) If the location of a transaction is determined
to be other than this municipality then the rate
imposed on the gross receipts for
telecommunications services shall be the lower
of (1) the rate imposed by the taxing jurisdiction
in which the transaction is located or (2) the rate
for non- mobile telecommunication services shall
be the rate imposed by the municipality in which
the customers service address is located; or for
mobile telecommunications service, the rate
imposed by the municipality of the customer's
primary place of use.
12-5-4 Rate Limitation and Exemption
Therefrom. This rate of this levy shall not
exceed four percent (3.5%) of the
telecommunication provider's gross receipts from
telecommunication service attributed to the
municipality unless a higher rate is approved by a
majority vote of the voters in this municipality
that vote in:
(1) a municipal general election;
(2) a regular general election; or
(3) a local special election.
12-5-5 Effective Date of Tax Levy. This tax
shall be levied beginning the earlier of July 1,
2007 or the first day of any calendar quarter after
a 75 day period beginning on the date the
Commission received notice pursuant to Utah
Code Section 10-1-403 that this municipality has
enacted this ordinance.
12-5-6 Changes in Rate or Repeal of the
Tax. This ordinance is subject to the
requirements of Utah Code Section 10-1-403. If
the tax rate is changed or the tax is repealed, then
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
the appropriate notice shall be given as provided
in Utah Code Section 10-1-403.
12-5-7 Interlocal Agreement for Collection
of the Tax. On or before the effective date of
the ordinance, the municipality shall enter into
the uniform interlocal agreement with the
Commission as described in Utah Code Section
10-1405 for the collection, enforcement, and
administration of this municipal
telecommunications license tax.
12-5-8 Repeal of Inconsistent Taxes and
Fees.
(1) Any tax or fee previously enacted by this
municipality under authority of Utah Code
Section 10-1 - 203 or Utah Code Title 11,
Chapter 26, Local Taxation of Utilities
Limitation is hereby repealed.
(2) Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted
to repeal any municipal ordinance or fee which
provides that the municipality may recover from
a telecommunications provider the management
costs of the municipality caused by the activities
of the telecommunications provider in the rightsof-
way of the municipality, if the fee is imposed
in accordance with Utah Code Section 72-7-102
and is not related to the municipality's loss of use
of a highway as a result of the activities of the
telecommunications provider in a right of way, or
increased deterioration of a highway as a result
of the activities of the telecommunications
provider in a right-of -way nor does this
ordinance limit the municipality's right to charge
fees or taxes on persons that are not subject to
the municipal telecommunications license tax
under this ordinance and locate
telecommunications facilities, as defined in Utah
Code Section 72-7-108, in this municipality.
History 6/04; Ord. 15-10, 11/15
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 12 Franchises
Chapter 6. Cable TV Franchises
12-6-1 Definitions
12-6-2 Levy of Tax
12-6-3 Requirement to Acquire Franchise
12-6-4 General Requirement
Chapter 1. Definitions
12-6-1 Definitions
12-6-1 Definitions. As used in this ordinance:
“Cable TV Franchise” means the non-exclusive
authorization issued by the City which authorizes
the construction and operation of the Cable
Television System within the City.
“Cable TV Provider” means any individual,
partnership, association, joint stock company,
trust, corporation, or governmental entity (but
not the City) using the public rights-of-way to
provide multiple video programming services to
subscribers.
“Cable Television Services” means (1) the oneway
transmission to subscribers via cable of (a)
multiple video programming, or (b) other
programming services; and, (2) subscriber
interaction, if any, which is required for the
selection or use of such video programming or
other programming services.
“Cable Television System” consists of a set of
closed transmission paths and associated signal
generation, reception, and control equipment that
is designed to provide Cable Television Services
which includes video programming and which is
provided to multiple subscribers within the City.
“City Rights-of-Way” means the surface of, and
the space above and below, any public street,
highway, freeway, bridge, land path, alley, court,
boulevard, sidewalk, parkway, way, lane, public
way, drive, circle, or other public rights-of-way,
including, but not limited to, public utility
easements, dedicated utility strips, or rights-ofway
dedicated for compatible uses.
12-6-2 Levy of Tax. There is hereby levied a
municipal franchise tax of 5% on the gross
receipts from Cable TV services attributed to this
municipality.
12-6-3 Requirement to Acquire Franchise.
Any Cable TV Provider wishing to provide
Cable TV Services within the City must receive a
City Cable TV Franchise prior to any access to
City Rights-of-Way or provision of services to
City subscribers.
12-6-4 General Requirements. Each
Franchise, whether new or renewal, shall be a
separate and new document compliant with all
City Ordinances, laws and regulations in effect at
the time of the Franchise approval.
History: Ord.15-10, 11/15
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 13 Garbage and Waste
TITLE 13. GARBAGE AND WASTE
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. Repealed
Chapter 3. General
Chapter 4. Definitions
Chapter 5. Collection of Residential Solid
Waste
Chapter 6. Standards for Commercial Solid
Waste
Chapter 7. Garbage Dumps and Disposal of
Solid Waste
Chapter 8. Community Clean Up Dumpster
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. Repealed
Chapter 3. General
13-3-1 Purpose
13-3-2 Authorization
13-3-3 Contracting
13-3-4 Responsibility of Administration
13-3-5 Office of Primary Responsibility
13-3-6 Enterprise Fund
13-3-7 Fees and Charges
13-3-8 Disputes and Complaints
13-3-9 Regulations
13-3-10 Penalty
13-3-11 Abatement of Nuisance
13-3-1 Purpose. The purpose of this Title is:
(1) To protect the health, safety and welfare of the
citizens of Clinton City and to insure the maintenance
of the general aesthetics expected by its citizens and
visitors.
(2) To create and establish the Clinton City Solid
Waste Collection System, directed and controlled by
the City Council.
(3) To establish procedures and standards by which
the System and all citizens of Clinton will deal with
waste.
(4) To establish procedures and standards by which
all conveyors of waste are expected to operate within
the City.
History: 3/10
13-3-2 Authorization.
(1) The collection, removal and disposal of
residential solid waste shall be performed by the City
or its licensee under the supervision of the City
Manager. The City may require that certain persons
contract independently to provide their own
collection service from a recognized collection
provider.
(2) This Title does not restrict persons engaged in the
business of commercial landscaping and lawn care to
collect, remove and dispose of community waste as
incident to the business. However, this Title does
establish standards for transporting community waste.
History: 3/10
13-3-3 Contracting.
(1) The City Council may make or let contracts or
enter into agreements or licenses with any persons for
the removal of garbage or waste matter. Before a
contract is entered into by the City, bids shall be
called for. A notice inviting bids shall be printed once
in a newspaper published and circulated within the
City.
(2) In establishing a contract the Council may require
the contractor to provide a bond payable to the City,
in a sum satisfactory to the City Council, conditioned
upon the performance of the duties imposed by this
Title and the terms of any contract or agreement
entered into with the City.
(3) Procedures for termination of any contract entered
into under this Title shall be established in the
contract.
History: 3/10
13-3-4 Responsibility of Administration. The
City Manager shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this Title. Any powers
granted or duties imposed upon the City may be
delegated by the City Manager to persons or entities
acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of
the City.
History: 3/10
13-3-5 Office of Primary Responsibility. The
City Manager is the Office of Primary Responsibility
for this Title.
History: 3/10
13-3-6 Enterprise Fund. There is hereby
established the Solid Waste Enterprise Fund which
shall operate independently from the General Fund
and as a self sustaining entity within the City budget.
History: 3/10
13-3-7 Fees and Charges. Fees and charges
associated with the Clinton City Solid Waste
Collection System shall be set by the City Council
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 13 Garbage and Waste
and adopted by resolution, from time to time, and
published in the Clinton City Consolidated Fee
Schedule. Billing and collection shall be
accomplished as established in Title 2, Chapters 12
and 13.
History: 3/10
13-3-8 Disputes and Complaints.
(1) In all cases of disputes or complaints concerning
the place where garbage receptacles shall be placed
while waiting for the removal of their contents, where
placement is not specifically fixed by this chapter, the
City Manager shall designate the place, and his
decision shall be final.
(2) In all cases of disputes or complaints concerning
the rates of collection fees to be charged when the
same are not specifically fixed by this chapter, the
City Manager shall fix and designate the collection
fee to be charged. The collection fee shall be
presented to the City Council and be incorporated
into the Consolidated Fee Schedule.
History: 3/10
13-3-9 Regulations. The City may adopt
regulations as are necessary to implement this Title
and its objectives.
History: 12/89
13-3-10 Penalty. Any violation of the provisions of
this Title shall be a class C misdemeanor.
History: 9/84
13-3-11 Abatement of Nuisance. Any accumulation
of garbage or waste in violation of this Title or other
action not in compliance with the requirements set
forth here the responsible party, owner or lessee shall,
at his own expense, correct the offending condition
upon notice by the City as established in 10-11-4 of
the Utah State Code Annotated. If the owner or lessee
fails to comply with this Section within the time set in
the notice from the City, the Code Enforcement
Officer shall so report to the Manager and the
Manager may instruct the Code Enforcement Officer
to abate the nuisance as a hazardous or inconvenient
condition in the manner provided by law.
History; 3/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 13 Garbage and Waste
Chapter 4. Definitions
13-4-1 Definitions
13-4-1 Definitions. The following are definitions
as they apply to this Title.
“Approved Garbage Containers”
(1) “for Residential Uses” means 90-gallon
containers distributed by the City. These containers
are designed specifically for automated collection,
and have permanently attached, tight-fitting lids.
(2) “for Commercial Uses” means those containers
provided by commercial disposal companies,
constructed of metal and designed to be rainproof, fly
proof, water tight, and with lids adequate to prevent
the spread of solid waste by animals or the elements.
Containers shall be tightly closed in a manner as to
prevent offensive odors or flies. Where required as
part of the approval of a development, containers
shall be kept in the approved enclosures with gates.
(3) “for Construction or Bulk Use” means
temporary containers provided by commercial
disposal companies, of metal construction, intended
for generators of combustible and non-combustible
materials related to construction or other bulk
removal needs, where garbage will not be deposited.
Approved containers shall be located on the site as
established in Title 5, Chapter 8 of the City Code.
Containers shall be removed immediately upon
fulfilling the need for the container. A lid is not
required for these containers; however no container is
to be transported without being secured to prevent the
contents from becoming dislodged or leaking onto the
streets or public ways of the City.
History: 12/89; 3/10
“Bulky Waste” means wastes that are not capable of
being stored in the approved automated solid waste
containers and cannot be picked up by automated
collection vehicles, including items such as
appliances, furniture, large tree branches, lawn sod
and Christmas trees, etc.
"City Manager" means the City Manager of the City
or his duly authorized representative.
History: 3/10
“Commercial Solid Waste” means garbage, rubbish,
trash, food wastes, etc. resulting from the normal
activities of commercial or other than residential
users.
History: 12/89; 3/10
“Commercial User” means an enterprise not
serviced by the City, such as a business, association,
corporation, manufacturer, hotel, motel, resort, multifamily
dwelling of more than three units,
governmental or public entity or church, etc.
History: 12/89; 3/10
“Community Waste” means lawn cutting, clippings
from bushes and shrubs, leaves and trees and tree
branches.
History: 12/89
“Full Container” means any container for solid
waste when the lid can not be closed to the normal
position or when the solid waste reaches the rim of
the container for construction or bulk use containers
that do not have a lid.
History: 11/09
"Garbage" means waste from the preparation,
handling, storing, cooking or consumption of food
and food products.
History: 8/84
“Green Waste” means branches and clippings from
bushes, shrubs and trees.
History: 11/09
“Hazardous Waste” means any chemical,
compound, mixture, substance or article which is
designated by the United States Environmental
Protection Agency, the State of Utah Department of
Environmental Quality to be ‘hazardous’ as that term
is defined by or pursuant to Federal, State or local
law.
History: 3/10
“Residence” means an occupied dwelling unit such
as a single family dwelling, or multi-family dwelling
of three or less units, not including hotels, motels, or
multi family residential developments.
History: 12/89; 3/10
“Residential Solid Waste” means garbage, rubbish,
trash, food wastes, etc. resulting from the normal
activities of households.
History: 12/89
“Solid Waste” means a general term that applies to
Commercial Solid Waste or Residential Solid Waste.
History: 3/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 13 Garbage and Waste
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 13 Garbage and Waste
Chapter 5. Collection of Residential Solid
Waste
13-5-1 Creation of Collection Department
13-5-2 Collection – Reserved for City or
Contractor
13-5-3 Contract
13-5-4 Residential Collection
13-5-5 Containers
13-5-6 Additional Containers
13-5-7 Closing of Garbage Containers Required
13-5-8 Containers - Authorized Persons to Move
13-5-9 Time and Place of Pickup
13-5-10 Containers – Unauthorized Garbage and
Waste
13-5-1 Creation of Collection Department. The
Clinton City Solid Waste Collection System is
established, directed and controlled by the City
Manager.
History: 5/62; 9/84; 12/89
13-5-2 Collection - Reserved for City or
Contractor. The City, in order to more effectually
promote and protect the public health and safety and
reduce the danger and hazard of fire and
conflagrations, reserves unto itself or its licensee or
contractor the exclusive right to collect, transport and
dispose of, or cause to be collected, transported and
disposed of, all residential solid waste produced or
found within the corporate limits of the City. It is
unlawful for any person, except as provided in this
chapter, to collect, transport or dispose of any
garbage or waste matter within the City, except as
provided by this chapter.
History: 3/10
13-5-3 Contract.
(1) The City shall grant a contract to an independent
contractor to operate a residential solid waste
collection and sanitary disposal pickup route within
the City upon the terms and conditions as the City
Council shall require by contract.
(2) The holder of a contract shall be answerable to the
City Manager for the conduct and operation of solid
waste disposal. In the event of a complaint by any
user of the residential solid waste collection system
that can not be resolved by the City Manager, the
holder of the contract shall be entitled to a hearing
before the City Council prior to the revocation of any
contract.
History: 5/62; 9/84; 12/89; 3/10
13-5-4 Residential Collection.
(1) The City or its agent shall collect, remove and
dispose of all residential solid waste, the removal of
which is not otherwise provided for by the
establishment or institution as herein provided. All
solid waste shall be collected, removed and disposed
of frequently and in a manner as established per § 13-
3-3.
(2) Except as otherwise expressly permitted by this
Title, no residential solid waste shall be moved or
hauled away or transported upon the streets or public
ways of the City except by the City or its agent and
except by authorized persons hauling commercial
solid waste as hereinafter provided. It is unlawful for
any person, except as permitted in § (3) below, to
haul or remove residential solid waste in the City.
(3) Nothing contained in this Title shall preclude
persons from hauling their own bulk or community
waste over the streets of the City.
(4) Nothing in this Title shall be construed as
eliminating the charge made for solid waste service.
History: 12/89
13-5-5 Containers.
(1) All residential solid waste to be collected by the
City shall be placed only in approved containers
issued to them by the City. Use of containers issued
by others for residential solid waste disposal is
prohibited.
(2) Container rental, collection and waste disposal
will be provided to a user at a charge per month as
established in § 13-3-7.
(3) Where bulk or community waste is being hauled
by other than the City or commercial haulers, persons
shall place bulk or community waste in suitable and
sufficient receptacles, receptacles with tight-fitting
lids, or properly and sufficiently treated water
resistant bags manufactured specifically for the use.
Loads shall be secured as required in § 13-7-12.
(4) Users within the City shall be issued one
approved container by the City. The City retains title
to the containers and the residential users make rental
payments for use of the containers.
(5) Users renting containers furnished by the City
shall be responsible for containers.
(6) Users shall keep the container free from
destructive or decorative markings, shall maintain the
original color thereof, and shall keep the inside of the
containers clean and free from build-up of fungus or
bacteria or any other type of contaminant that causes
odors or facilitates deterioration of the inside or
outside of containers.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 13 Garbage and Waste
(7) Users shall report to the City Public Works
Department any damage to or malfunctioning
containers that limit their usefulness for receipt of
residential solid waste so that it may be returned to
the supplier or repaired or replaced by the Public
Works Department.
(8) Containers lost or missing through no fault of the
user, shall be replaced by the City without charge.
(9) Containers furnished by the City are issued to
specific users by number and are nontransferable.
Upon discontinuance of use by a resident, containers
shall be returned to the City.
History: 5/62, 9/84, 12/89, 3/10
13-5-6 Additional Containers.
(1) A residential user may request an additional
container from the City.
(2) Additional containers will be provided to a user at
an additional charge per month. The charge for
rental, collection and waste disposal shall be set as
established in § 13-3-7 and the charge shall be
incurred for a minimum of four (4) months.
(3) At the time the user determines the additional
container or containers are no longer needed, the City
may be contacted for return of the containers. The
additional charge shall be dropped from the monthly
billings upon return of the containers provided the
four (4) months minimum has been met.
(4) Additional containers are subject to availability.
Providing initial containers to new residents will take
priority over additional containers.
History: 12/89; 3/10
13-5-7 Closing of Garbage Containers Required.
Approved containers shall not be overfilled to the
extent that the contents may be spilled during the
process of pickup and dumping into the garbage
collection vehicle.
History: 12/89; 3/10
13-5-8 Containers - Authorized Persons to Move.
No person other than those to whom a container is
issued or their agent, or any employee or licensee of
the City shall move, remove or interfere with any
container or the contents thereof.
History: 3/10
13-5-9 Time and Place of Pickup.
(1) All solid waste collection by the City shall be
placed on the edge of the street next to the driveway
on the opposite side of the driveway approach from
the mailbox, but in no event within ten feet of a
mailbox, and with the container's wheels as close to
the curb as reasonably possible, with the hinge
thereof to curbside and the lid opening facing toward
the street. When snow or street construction prevents
placing of the container against the curb, the
container shall be placed not over two feet from the
edge of the snow or construction and in a manner that
will not obstruct traffic or unduly impede the snow
plowing activities of the City. In areas of the City
where there is no curb or gutter, containers shall be
placed off of the traveled portion of the street, but
close enough to the street that the container can be
picked up without undue difficulty.
(2) Containers shall not be placed or permitted to
block driveways or through traffic.
(3) Containers shall not be set out upon the street for
collection prior to the evening of the day before
collection and shall be set out prior to 6:00 a.m. on
the day of collection unless collection is not desired
by the resident.
(4) All empty containers or garbage receptacles must
be removed from the street as soon as practicable
after being emptied, and in every case, must be
removed from the street the same day they are
emptied.
(5) Those physically unable to wheel containers to
curbside may arrange with the City Manager for
proper pickup.
(6) It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle upon a
public street within the City during the hours of
garbage pickup on the street in a manner that
interferes with access thereto by the garbage
collection vehicle.
History: 12/89, 3/10
13-5-10 Containers – Unauthorized Garbage and
Waste. Goods and material which are not residential
and/or are prohibited by the disposal facility shall not
be placed in City provided containers. These items
include:
(1) Any loads the majority of which consists of
combustible material;
(2) Hazardous waste of any kind;
(3) Any material that when incinerated clearly
conducts electricity;
(4) Explosives;
(5) Medical or pathological wastes;
(6) Animal or human body parts or remains;
(7) Any materials the majority of which is liquid;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 13 Garbage and Waste
(8) Appliances or sinks, toilets, tubs, etc.;
(9) Construction debris of bulk proportions.
(10) Large metal objects of any kind;
(11) Large sealed containers of any kind;
(12) Motor vehicles or related parts;
(13) Any item exceeding two feet by two feet by five
feet in dimensions;
(14) Wood having a cross section exceeding nine
inches or five feet in length;
(15) Any vessel or vehicle containing material that is
on fire, “Hot Load”;
(16) Drywall; and,
(17) Unauthorized garbage and waste shall also
include the following:
(a) Commercial Solid Waste; and
(b) Bulky Wastes.
History: 3/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 13 Garbage and Waste
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 13 Garbage and Waste
Chapter 6. Standards for Commercial Solid
Waste
13-6-1 Application
13-6-2 Collection Required
13-6-3 License Required
13-6-4 Commercial Collection
13-6-5 Containers
13-6-6 Disposal by Producers of Waste Matter
13-6-7 Enclosures
13-6-8 Oil and Grease Containers
13-6-1 Application. This chapter shall apply to
Commercial, Construction and Bulk users creating
commercial solid waste, combustible or noncombustible
waste and not serviced as described in
Chapter 5 above.
History: 3/10
13-6-2 Collection Required. All commercial
construction sites, light manufacturing, multi-family
and other generators of commercial solid waste, not
classified a residence as stated in this Title, shall
procure commercial solid waste removal through a
commercial carrier.
History: 3/10
13-6-3 License Required. All commercial solid
waste haulers must apply for and receive a business
license to operate within the City.
History: 3/10
13-6-4 Commercial Collection.
(1) All solid waste shall be collected, removed and
disposed of with such frequency and in such a
manner as to preclude the development of odor,
habitat for rodents or other animals, accumulation of
flies and other insects, or a general nuisance to the
community.
(2) All commercial containers shall be of a design
intended for the use provided by the disposal
company providing the service.
(3) In the event that a container becomes full or
develops an odor or other offensive nature prior to a
regularly scheduled dumping the commercial user
shall call for the container to be dumped immediately.
History: 3/10
13-6-5 Containers.
(1) Users shall acquire containers.
(2) Every commercial container shall be well painted,
shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition and
shall be properly marked in a conspicuous place.
(3) Commercial containers shall not be filled to a
level where commercial solid waste will fall from the
container or so that the lid will not close.
(4) Containers shall be watertight and metal lined and
constructed so as to prevent the contents from falling
or spilling from the container.
History: 3/10
13-6-6 Disposal by Producers of Waste Matter.
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed
to prohibit any producer of combustibles or noncombustibles,
except garbage, from hauling to an
approved dumping or waste disposal site in vehicles
adequately covered and secured to prevent any of the
contents from being dislodged from the vehicle.
History: 3/10
13-6-7 Enclosures. While on site containers shall
be kept in the required enclosures with the gates
closed when not in the process of being used or
emptied. Enclosures shall be maintained as originally
approved and gates kept in good repair.
History: 3/10
13-6-8 Oil and Grease Containers. Businesses
using oil and grease receptacles for disposal of fry oil
or grease shall store the containers either in the
container enclosure described in § 13-6-7 above or
within the business.
History: 3/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 13 Garbage and Waste
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 13 Garbage and Waste
Chapter 7. Garbage Dumps and Disposal of
Solid Waste
13-7-1 Garbage Dumps Prohibited
13-7-2 Limitations Upon Dumping
13-7-3 Disposal of Community Waste
13-7-4 Accumulation of Solid Waste Prohibited
13-7-5 Burning of Solid Waste Prohibited
13-7-6 Dumping Solid Waste Prohibited
13-7-7 Composting Permitted
13-7-8 Transportation of Commercial or
Residential Solid Waste into the City
Prohibited
13-7-9 Residential or Commercial Solid Waste
Prohibited in Public Containers
13-7-10 Disposal by Producers of Commercial or
Residential Solid Waste
13-7-11 Littering of Commercial or Residential
Solid Waste
13-7-12 Transportation of Commercial or
Residential Solid Waste
13-7-13 Collection – Vehicle Regulations
13-7-14 Hazardous Waste
13-7-15 Storing Commercial or Residential Solid
Waste Accessible to Rodents Prohibited
13-7-16 Private Dumpsters
13-7-1 Garbage Dumps Prohibited. It shall be
unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to
establish, create, institute, or maintain any solid waste
dump, landfill or any type of solid waste disposal of
any kind or nature whatsoever within the corporate
limits of the City. This is not intended to limit
temporary storage by the City when dealing with city
clean-up activities.
History: 5/62, 9/84, 3/10, 7/10
13-7-2 Limitations Upon Dumping. Temporary
storage of solid waste may be permitted only in
places as are designated by the City Council.
Dumping shall be subject to rules and regulations as
may be formulated by the City Council. Until
changed by City ordinance, all authorized waste
generated within the City shall be delivered to the
Davis County Solid Waste Management and Energy
Recovery Special Service District "Burn Plant" or to
NARD, as the District shall direct.
History: 12/89
13-7-3 Disposal of Community Waste.
(1) Community waste may be disposed of by
residents and business establishments in vehicles
provided by them subject to regulation by the City
Council as to the places of disposal. The type of
vehicle used shall be designed to avoid spillage upon
public ways of the City, hazards to safety and the
prevention of nuisances.
(2) The City Council from time to time may provide
for the collection and disposal of community waste as
it may decide to collect and haul in connection with
its regular solid waste collection and disposal service.
In the event community waste disposal service
should require a charge to be made by the City, the
determination of the charge will be made as
established in § 13-3-7.
(3) Green waste, tree trimmings, tree limbs, tree
trunks, and tree stumps are accepted, from citizens, at
the City Public Works Yard for chipping and
mulching during limited hours based upon the
following guidelines.
(a) Green waste exceeding eight (8) inches in
diameter will not be accepted for this service.
(b) Persons leaving green waste at the Public Works
Yard without having it inspected or at times when
green waste is not accepted will be considered in
violation of § 13-7-2.
History: 12/89, 11/09
13-7-4 Accumulation of Solid Waste Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate
commercial or residential solid waste or cause
commercial or residential solid waste to be deposited
upon any street or alley or upon any premises in the
City.
History: 9/84, 12/89, 3/10
13-7-5 Burning of Solid Waste Prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any person to burn garbage,
market waste, manure, or other solid waste in the
open air or in any furnace or stove within the City
unless expressly allowed by state regulations, county
health and burning ordinances, or Title 10 of the City
Code.
History: 12/89
13-7-6 Dumping Solid Waste Prohibited.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
deposit, or dump garbage, ashes, market waste, paper
boxes, cartons, trade waste, manure or night soil, or
any other solid waste upon any lot within the City
whether the lot is occupied or vacant and whether the
person so placing, depositing or dumping the solid
waste is the owner, tenant, occupant or lessor thereof
or has the same under his jurisdiction and control.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
deposit, or dump any material in a receptacle
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 13 Garbage and Waste
intended for recycling of a specific material for which
the receptacle is not intended.
(3) It shall be unlawful for any person to place,
deposit, or dump any garbage, ashes, market waste,
paper boxes, carton, trade waste, manure or night
soil, or any other solid waste adjacent to any
receptacle intended for recycling even if the
receptacle is intended for the material.
History: 12/89, 06/08
13-7-7 Composting Permitted.
(1) Notwithstanding any other provision of this
chapter, it is lawful to compost yard wastes, including
grass clippings, leaves, plant trimmings, wood ashes,
and vegetable kitchen scraps (but not including
animal wastes) if the following conditions are met:
(a) Compost piles or containers are located in the rear
or side yard, not visible from a public street, and no
greater than five feet in height;
(b) The compost piles or containers are at least five
feet from the property line or separated from adjacent
property by a solid wall;
(c) Compost piles are maintained so that they do not
generate an offensive odor or harbor rodents;
(d) The maximum size of any pile or container is five
feet in height by five feet in width by five feet in
length; and
(e) The compost is enclosed, screened or otherwise
maintained to minimize insects or pests. The pile or
container shall not permit surface run-off or leachate
to another property.
(2) The Community Development Director may
authorize for educational purposes or communal
garden the creation of a composting demonstration
area visible to the public at a City park or other
facility.
(3) No composting shall be permitted at any location
where it is determined to be a fire hazard by the
Clinton City Fire Department.
History: 3/10
13-7-8 Transportation of Commercial or
Residential Solid Waste into the City Prohibited.
No person, firm, corporation, or association shall
bring into the City from beyond the corporate
boundaries thereof any commercial or residential
solid waste or other debris, for the purpose of having
it picked up and disposed of by the City solid waste
collection department.
History: 5/62, 9/84, 12/89
13-7-9 Residential or Commercial Solid Waste
Prohibited in Public Containers. It shall be
unlawful for residential and commercial users to
deposit residential or commercial solid waste in
public containers designated for public users on
public property.
History: 12/89
13-7-10 Disposal by Producers of Commercial or
Residential Solid Waste. Nothing contained in this
chapter shall be construed to prohibit any producer of
commercial or residential solid waste, except
garbage, from hauling to an approved dumping or
waste disposal site.
History: 3/10
13-7-11 Littering of Commercial or Residential
Solid Waste.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or
corporation to throw, discard, leave or deposit or in
any manner dispose of any solid waste, green waste
or litter of any kind or nature whatever upon, in, or
about any public street, alley, roadway, or in, or upon
any public or private property within Clinton City.
History: 9/84
(2) In case any person is responsible for the leakage
or deposit of garbage or solid waste matter upon, in,
or about any public street, alley, roadway, or in, or
upon any public or private property within Clinton
City, the person shall pay the costs of removing the
leakage, garbage or solid waste matter.
History: 3/10
13-7-12 Transportation of Commercial or
Residential Solid Waste. It shall be unlawful for
any person, firm, or corporation to transport, haul, or
convey any commercial or residential solid waste
without properly covering and securing the load.
History: 9/84; 3/10
13-7-13 Collection - Vehicle Regulations.
(1) Any person authorized or permitted to collect,
remove and dispose of solid waste within the City
and conveying garbage collected upon or along any
public street or other public place in the City shall
have a vehicle with a body which shall be watertight
and metal lined and constructed so as to prevent the
contents from falling or spilling.
(2) Every vehicle used in the collection of solid
waste, combustible and non-combustible matters shall
be well painted, shall be kept in a clean and sanitary
condition, properly maintained, and marked in a
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 13 Garbage and Waste
conspicuous place to show its classification and
number.
History: 3/10
13-7-14 Hazardous Waste. No hazardous waste
shall be placed in City provided containers.
Hazardous waste shall be handled, stored, and
disposed in accordance with state and federal
standards.
History: 3/10
13-7-15 Storing Commercial or Residential Solid
Waste Accessible to Rodents Prohibited. It is
unlawful to store, deposit or keep commercial or
residential solid waste in a place accessible to
rodents.
13-7-16 Private Dumpsters. Owners or occupants
of a property who utilize a private dumpster and want
it to be located within the public right-of-way shall
obtain a permit, for the specific time the dumpster
will be used, from Public Works.
(1) Dumpsters placed in the street shall be located
against the curb and distanced from corners, drives,
mailboxes, fire hydrants, etc. as set in § 16-7-1.
(2) Where it is impractical to comply with (1) above
the dumpster may be placed where it will obstruct the
owner/occupants drive as long as the drive remains
accessible for the owner’s/occupant’s vehicles.
(3) Nighttime markings, dumpsters to remain in the
street after sunset shall:
(a) Be marked with reflective tape, at least six (6)
square inches in size, located between 36 and 48
inches above the bottom of the dumpster on each
corner of the dumpster; or,
(b) Have approved traffic barricades located at each
street side corner.
(4) Dumpsters shall not be placed on a curb or
sidewalk.
(5) Dumpsters may be placed on private property;
however the property owner or occupant shall be
responsible for any damage to the improvements
within the public right-of-way.
(6) Dumpsters associated with building construction
sites shall comply with § 5-8-1.
(7) Restrictions related to placement of dumpsters
during winter limited parking times shall be
established based upon the application, proposed
location, and length of time. Winter dumpster
placement within the right-of-way may be denied.
(8) The Clinton City Council, from time to time, may
set and amend a fee associate with a permit for a
private dumpster to be published in the Clinton City
Consolidated Fee Schedule.
History: 3/10, 07/12
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 13 Garbage and Waste
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 13 Garbage and Waste
Chapter 8. Community Clean Up Dumpster
13-8-1 Community Clean Up Dumpster
13-8-2 Public Works’ Responsibilities
13-8-3 Customer’s Responsibilities
13-8-4 Scheduling
13-8-5 Placement of Dumpster
13-8-6 Use of Dumpster
13-8-7 Items Not Allowed in Dumpster.
13-8-1 Community Clean Up Dumpster. In an
effort to keep Clinton City clean and beautiful the
City Council has created a community clean up
dumpster program.
History: 3/10
13-8-2 Public Works’ Responsibilities. The
Public Works Director is responsible for the
maintenance, scheduling, and transporting of the
dumpsters.
History: 3/10
13-8-3 Customer’s Responsibilities. The
customer scheduling the Dumpster is responsible for
the contents of the Dumpster and may be required to
remove items placed in the dumpster if they are in
violation of this Chapter.
History: 3/10
13-8-4 Scheduling.
(1) City residents may contact the Public Works
Department to schedule the delivery of a dumpster to
be placed in their neighborhood.
(2) Dumpsters will be delivered on Mondays with a
Thursday pick up or delivered on a Thursday with a
Monday pick up, except holidays that fall on these
days.
(3) If a dumpster becomes full before the scheduled
pick up day one (1) additional request for the
dumpster to be dumped may be called in to Public
Works, however the following conditions apply:
(a) If the regularly scheduled day for dumpster
pickup is Monday, the call for an additional dump
must be requested for and scheduled by noon on the
previous Friday.
(b) If the regularly scheduled day for dumpster
pickup is Thursday, the call for an additional dump
must be requested for and scheduled by noon on the
previous Wednesday.
(4) Dumpsters may be scheduled by the same caller
for no more than 1 dumpster per month.
(5) Dumpsters will be scheduled for no more than
three (3) months in advance.
(6) The Dumpster will not be available during the
winter months of December, January and February.
History: 3/10
13-8-5 Placement of Dumpster.
(1) Public Works will deliver the dumpster as close to
the requested address as possible but it will not be
placed on private property or in areas that would
interfere with traffic.
(2) No one is allowed to move the dumpster except
the Public Works Department.
History: 3/10
13-8-6 Use of Dumpster.
(1) Fees associated with the use of the Dumpster shall
be established by the City Council, from time to time,
and published in the Clinton City Consolidated Fee
Schedule.
(2) Dumpsters are intended for use by the
neighborhood and not for the exclusive use of the
residence calling for the delivery.
(3) Dumpsters are not intended for the citizenry at
large, rather individuals not in the neighborhood
where the dumpster is located shall schedule the
dumpster for their neighborhood rather than use a
dumpster requested by others.
(4) Use of a dumpster by other than Clinton City
residents prohibited.
(5) Dumpsters should not be loaded over the top.
History: 3/10
13-8-7 Items Not Allowed in Dumpster. A list of
items that are not allowed to be placed in the
dumpster shall be posted on the side of the dumpster.
History: 3/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 14 Health
TITLE 14. HEALTH
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. General Provisions
Chapter 3. Definitions
Chapter 4. Licensing
Chapter 5. Sanitary Rules and Regulations
Chapter 6. Enforcement
Chapter 7. Irrigation Water
Chapter 8. Miscellaneous Health and Safety
Regulations
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. General Provisions
14-2-1 Creation
14-2-2 Area of Authority
14-2-3 Regulations
14-2-4 Responsibility of Administration
14-2-5 Office of Primary Responsibility
14-2-1 Creation. Clinton City joins with Davis
County and other participating towns and cities of
Davis County in the creation of a full time citycounty
health department in Davis County, Utah.
14-2-2 Area of Authority. The city-county health
department known as the Davis County Department
of Health, is authorized and empowered to act within
the incorporated limits of Clinton City, in accordance
with authority granted to a city-county health
department in Title 26A, Chapter 1, Section 101, et
seq., Utah Code (as amended). This Davis County
Department of Health shall be organized and
administered in accordance with the ordinance of
September 2, 1954, duly enacted by the Board of
County Commissioners, and applicable amendments
thereto.
14-2-3 Regulations. The Clinton City Council
shall have power and retains the right to adopt
regulations controlling the manner and circumstances
under which the systems established by this Title
may be used, in addition to the regulatory provisions
set forth expressly in this Title.
14-2-4 Responsibility of Administration. The
Clinton City Manager shall administer, implement,
and enforce the provisions of this Title. Any powers
granted or duties imposed upon Clinton City may be
delegated by the City Manager to persons or entities
acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of
Clinton City.
14-2-5 Office of Primary Responsibility. The
Clinton Community Development Department is the
Office of Primary Responsibility for review and
proposing changes to this Title. The Community
Development Director may call on other departments
for assistance in reviewing this Chapter.
History: 01/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 14 Health
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 14 Health
Chapter 3. Definitions
14-3-1 Definitions
14-3-1 Definitions. For the purpose of this Title,
the following words and phrases shall, when used in
this Title, have the meanings respectively ascribed to
them by this section:
“City” means Clinton City.
“Community Development” means the Clinton City
Community Development Department.
“Fireworks” means any composition or device
manufactured or used for the purpose of producing a
visible or audible effect by combustion, deflagration,
or detonation but does not include model rockets, toy
pistol caps, emergency signal flares, snakes or glow
worms, party poppers, wire sparklers under 36 inches
in length, matches, or class “A” and “B” explosives.
"Food" includes all articles used for food, drink,
confectionery or condiment by man, whether simple,
mixed or compound, except milk and milk products
produced under the State Dairy Laws.
"Food Establishment" includes any place where
food is manufactured, packed, kept, stored, prepared,
dispensed, offered or exposed for sale, trade or
barrier.
“Health Department” means the Davis County
Department of Health.
“License” means Clinton City Business License.
“Person” means any individual, public or private
corporation, partnership, association, firm, trust,
estate, the state or any department, institution,
bureau, or agency thereof, any municipal corporation,
county, city and county, or other political subdivision
of the state, or any other legal entity whatsoever
which is recognized by the law as being subject to
rights and duties.
History: 01/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 14 Health
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 14 Health
Chapter 4. Licensing
14-4-1 License - Required
14-4-2 License - Requirements
14-4-3 Preparation of License
14-4-1 License - Required.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to open any food
establishment or to sell, offer or expose for sale or
consumption any food or food products, beverages,
milk or water unless a License to conduct the same
has been secured from the Community Development
Business License Administrator for this purpose
unless otherwise stated in this Title.
(2) Applications for any License shall be on forms
provided by the Business License Administrator.
(3) Any person properly registered and participating
in a City sponsored festival or instruction period,
with a limited time of operation, is not required to
obtain a License for the period of instruction or
festival. This does not exempt the participant from
requirements of the County Health Inspector or State
Food Code.
14-4-2 License - Requirements. No License to
conduct a food establishment shall be issued or
reissued by the Business License Administrator of the
City unless the same has first been approved by the
County Health Inspector, who shall not approve the
issuance of the License unless the proposed food
establishment complies with all of the requirements
of the state Food Code.
14-4-3 Preparation of License. A License
necessary to carry out the provisions of this chapter
shall be prepared and furnished by the Business
License Administrator as established in Title 15 of
the City Code.
History: 01/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 14 Health
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 14 Health
Chapter 5. Sanitary Rules and Regulations
14-5-1 Wholesome Food Act Adoption
14-5-2 Title 4, Chapters 3 and 4 of Utah Code,
Adopted
14-5-3 Standards of Purity
14-5-4 Rules and Regulations – Council
Authority
14-5-5 Interference Prohibited
14-5-1 Wholesome Food Act Adoption. The Act
titled "Utah Wholesome Food Act" located in Title 4,
Chapter 5, Utah Code (as amended), together with all
amendments that may hereafter be made by state law,
is hereby adopted by this reference and made a part
of the ordinances of this City.
14-5-2 Title 4, Chapters 3 and 4 of Utah Code,
Adopted. Chapter 3, titled "Utah Dairy Act," and
Chapter 4, titled "Eggs," of Title 4, Utah Code (as
amended), together with all amendments that may
hereafter be made by state law, are hereby adopted by
this reference and made a part of the ordinances of
this City.
14-5-3 Standards of Purity. The standard of
purity of food under this chapter shall be the same as
prescribed by the state law and as that proclaimed by
the Secretary of the United States Department of
Agriculture, the food inspection divisions and the
service and regulatory announcements of the Bureau
of Chemistry, United States Department of
Agriculture, or any amendments thereto. The above
standards and the standards of the state law shall be
used as a basis for food establishments under the
terms of this chapter.
14-5-4 Rules and Regulations - Council
Authority. The county health officer shall prepare
rules and regulations relating to the establishment and
operation of certified food establishments. The rules
and regulations shall be effective even if the Council
does not take formal action to adopt them.
14-5-5 Interference Prohibited. It is unlawful for
any person to tear down, deface, or remove any card
or flag placed for quarantine or other purposes by the
Health Department without the consent of the Board
or in any manner to hinder, interfere with, or delay
the Board, or an Officer of the Board in the
performance of their duties.
History: 01/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 14 Health
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 14 Health
Chapter 6. Enforcement
14-6-1 License - Revocation
14-6-2 License - Surrender of Certificate
14-6-3 Misleading Advertising Prohibited
14-6-4 Penalties
14-6-1 License - Revocation. The County Health
Inspector shall have the power to revoke any License
certificate issued to any food establishment under the
provisions of this Title, in the event that the food
establishment fails to keep up the standards required
under the rules and regulations adopted for certified
food establishments. Non-licensed establishments
allowed under § 14-4-1(3) are subject to this section.
14-6-2 License - Surrender of Certificate. It is
unlawful for any person to fail, refuse or neglect to
surrender upon demand a License certificate to the
county health officer, or his deputy, after the same
has been revoked or suspended in accordance with
the provisions of this chapter.
14-6-3 Misleading Advertising Prohibited. It is
unlawful for any person to advertise any food
establishment in a manner as to mislead the public or
to give the impression that establishment has an
unrevoked License as provided in the provisions of
this chapter.
14-6-4 Penalties.
(1) Any person who is found guilty of violating any
of the provisions of these rules and regulations, either
by failing to do those acts required herein or by doing
a prohibited act, is guilty of a class "C" misdemeanor.
(2) Each day a violation is committed or permitted to
continue shall constitute a separate violation.
(3) The City Attorney may initiate legal action, civil
or criminal, requested by Community Development
to abate any condition that exists in violation of these
rules and regulations.
(4) In addition to other penalties imposed by a court
of competent jurisdiction, any person(s) found guilty
of violating any of these rules and regulations shall
be liable for all expenses incurred by Community
Development in removing or abating any nuisance,
source of filth, cause of sickness or infection, health
hazard, or sanitation violation.
History: 01/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 14 Health
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 14 Health
Chapter 7. Irrigation Water
14-7-1 Use Restrictions
14-7-2 Hydrant Operation
14-7-1 Use Restrictions. It is unlawful for any
person to:
(1) Use or cause to be used any untreated or
nonpotable water from a pressure irrigation system
for other than irrigation purposes;
(2) Interconnect or cause to be interconnected the
potable and nonpotable portions, distribution systems
or service lines of dual water supplies or extensions
thereof;
(3) Install or cause to be installed in the same trench
or trenches the distribution or service lines for
potable and nonpotable water. Install a pipe joint,
(union, nipple, or other connection) of either type of
water system across, above, or under a pipe in an
existing trench of the other system;
(4) Connect or cause to be connected a service line to
any distribution system or main line without authority
of the district, municipality, company, or person
having jurisdiction of the nonpotable water supply;
(5) Extend or cause to be extended into any building
a nonpotable water supply system or service line;
(6) Connect or cause to be connected to any fire
hydrant, a nonpotable water supply system or service
line;
(7) Expose or cause to be exposed any portions of a
nonpotable water supply system or extensions or
service line thereof, without identifying the same by
distinctive coloring or other suitable means sufficient
to distinguish the same from potable water supply
systems, extensions, or service lines; or
(8) Contaminate or cause to be contaminated any
source of supply, distribution system, or service line
furnishing or carrying nonpotable water.
14-7-2 Hydrant Operation. All hydrant or garden
hose bib control valves for the distribution of
nonpotable water shall be painted red.
History: 01/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 14 Health
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 14 Health
Chapter 8. Miscellaneous Health and Safety
Regulations
14-8-1 Dead Animals or Offensive Substances;
Keeping or Disposing of Prohibited
14-8-2 Dead Animals or Offensive Substances -
Duty to Remove
14-8-3 Keeping Animal Premises in Unsanitary
Condition Prohibited
14-8-4 Empty Buildings
14-8-5 Manufacturing Waste or Unsound
Containers - Nuisance When
14-8-6 Fireworks
14-8-1 Dead Animals or Offensive Substances;
Keeping or Disposing of Prohibited. It is unlawful
for any person to:
(1) Leave exposed in any street, avenue, highway,
alley, lot, public ground or watercourse within the
City the carcasses of any dead animal, or any
unsound meat, fish, or other substance, or to permit
the same to be done with his consent; or,
(2) To make, use, keep or permit in his dwelling,
shop, store, factory, outbuilding, cellar, yard, lot or
other place within the City any noxious or offensive
liquid or substance prejudicial to the health of the
citizens; or,
(3) To throw any filth, offal or other offensive matter
into any street, avenue, highway, public ground,
alley, lot or watercourse in the City, or to permit or
cause the same to run in any watercourse.
14-8-2 Dead Animals or Offensive Substances -
Duty to Remove. It shall be the duty of all persons
owning or having charge of animals which die or are
found dead to have the dead animals removed at their
own expense to an authorized solid waste facility or
to an authorized byproducts company, and all putrid
meats, fish, clippings of hides, pelts or other
offensive substances shall likewise be disposed of. If
the persons whose duty it is to dispose of the animals,
putrid meats, fish, clippings of hides, pelts or other
offensive substances shall fail for twenty four (24)
hours to discharge their duties as required in this
Chapter, the Health Official is authorized to have the
same disposed of at the expense of the party whose
duty it may be to dispose of the same.
14-8-3 Keeping Animal Premises in Unsanitary
Condition Prohibited. Animal Enclosures: It is
unlawful for any person having charge of any stable,
stall, shed, run, apartment or yard in which any
animal is kept, or any place within the limits of the
City in which manure or liquid discharges of any
animal accumulate or collect, to permit a stable, stall,
shed, run, apartment or yard to be kept in an unclean
or unsanitary condition.
14-8-4 Empty Buildings. The owners or agents or
persons in charge of unoccupied buildings or
structures within the City limits shall keep the
buildings and structures closed and securely locked.
14-8-5 Manufacturing Waste or Unsound
Containers - Nuisance When. Whenever there is
found in or about any lot or piece of ground any dirt
gathered in cleaning yards; waste of manufacturing
products or materials; or any rags, damaged
merchandise, wet, broken or leaking barrels, casks or
boxes of any materials which are offensive or tend to
decay, to become putrid or to render the atmosphere
offensive or unwholesome, the same shall be deemed
a nuisance, and it shall be unlawful for any person
occupying or owning the premises to fail to abate the
nuisance.
History: 01/10
14-8-6 Fireworks.
(1) Except as otherwise provided under § (3) below,
it is unlawful for any person within the limits of the
City to discharge, explode or set off any rocket,
squib, firecracker, Roman candle, cannon, gun, rifle,
pistol or any other firearm or fireworks, or
combustible or explosive matter whatever without
first obtaining a valid permit issued by the Clinton
City Fire Department.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to sell or to offer for
sale or have in their possession or custody any rocket,
squib, firecracker, Roman candle, fire balloon or
other combustible or explosive fireworks or any
article for the making of pyrotechnical display,
except sparklers and cap pistols and caps, without
first obtaining from the City a License to sell or offer
for sale or have in their custody any such article.
(3) Subject to the prohibitions provided in § (4)
below, class “C” common state approved explosives,
as defined in the Utah fireworks act, Utah Code
Annotated section 53-7-201 et seq., may be
discharged without a permit three (3) days before, on
the day of, and three (3) days following July 4, July
24, January 1, and on the Chinese New Year.
(4) Prohibited Acts And Activities: It shall be
unlawful for any person to:
(a) Ignite, explode, project or otherwise fire or use, or
permit the ignition, explosion, or projection of any
fireworks:
(i) Across or over public rights-of-way.
(ii) In, over or onto public parks, or other public
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 14 Health
property or the property of another.
(b) Ignite, explode, or otherwise make use of any
fireworks within one hundred feet (100') of any
fireworks stand.
(c) Ignite, explode, project or otherwise fire or make
use of any fireworks within twenty feet (20') of any
residence, dwelling or other structure.
(d) Ignite or discharge any fireworks within or throw
the same from a motor vehicle.
(e) Place any ignited article of fireworks into or near
a motor vehicle or near any person or group of
people.
(f) Throw any ignited article of fireworks into or at a
motor vehicle, or at or near any person or group of
people.
(g) Ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use,
or assist in the ignition, explosion or projection of
any fireworks in a location where such use has been
prohibited by order of the fire marshal. It is a
violation of this section for a person who ignites or
assists in igniting fireworks in a lawful location to
allow the fireworks to be launched into, projected
over, or to land in a prohibited area. No person shall
be prosecuted under this section when acting
reasonably under authority of a permit issued by the
City.
History: 01/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
TITLE 15. LICENSES
Chapter 1. General Provisions
Chapter 2. Home Based Businesses
Chapter 3. Alcoholic Beverage Licenses
Chapter 4. Denial, Suspension or Revocation
of a License
Chapter 5. Base Fees and Bonding
Chapter 6. Employees for Alcohol
Establishments
Chapter 7. Restaurants
Chapter 8. Service Stations
Chapter 9. Reserved (Burglar and Robbery
Alarm Systems)
Chapter 10. Christmas Tree Business
Chapter 11. Solicitors, Peddlers, Vendors and
Temporary Businesses
Chapter 12. Sale of Fireworks
Chapter 13. Towing Services
Chapter 14. Tobacco Specialty Business
Chapter 15. Repealed
Chapter 16. Film/Filming Requirements and
Restrictions
Chapter 17. Sexually-Oriented Business
Chapter 18. Newsracks
Chapter 19. Repealed
Chapter 1. General Provisions
15-1-1 Statement of Purpose
15-1-2 Application
15-1-3 Adoption
15-1-4 Fees
15-1-5 Responsibility of Administration
15-1-6 Office of Primary Responsibility
15-1-7 The Business License Official
15-1-8 Definitions
15-1-9 Business License Required
15-1-10 Exemptions from Business License
Requirements
15-1-11 Business License Official – Duties and
Responsibilities
15-1-12 Business License Application
15-1-13 Issuance of a Business License
15-1-14 Renewals of Business Licenses
15-1-15 Enforcement
15-1-16 Payment Dates of Business License Fees
15-1-17 Term of Business Licenses
15-1-18 Business License Fees
15-1-19 Exemptions to Business License Fees
Requirements
15-1-20 Transfer of License Restricted
15-1-21 Display of Licenses
15-1-22 Reciprocal Recognition of Business
Licenses
15-1-23 Constructive Notice of Time Periods
15-1-24 Temporary Interior Business Licenses
15-1-1 Statement of Purpose. The purpose of this
Title is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
Clinton City residents by establishing regulations
related to the issuance of business licenses and
operation of business within the City. The objectives
of this Title are:
(1) To protect human life, health and the aesthetics of
the City;
(2) In the interest of public convenience, safety, and
welfare;
(3) To prohibit illicit operation of business;
(4) To manage and control specific business;
(5) To protect the environment;
(6) To establish legal authority to carry out all
inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures
necessary to ensure compliance with this Title; and,
(7) To establish guidelines when dealing with
business.
History: 10/10
15-1-2 Application. This Title shall apply to all
businesses and person’s operating businesses in
Clinton City.
History: 10/10
15-1-3 Adoption. All rules established in this Title,
Licenses, and regulations related to business, items
set forth in this Title are enacted and adopted and
made a part of the City Code. Rules, regulations, and
schedules adopted in connection with this Title may
be cited and designated as the “Licensing Code” by
reference to the respective Sections.
History: 10/10
15-1-4 Fees. The Clinton City Council shall set the
amount of fees required to facilitate the actions
outlined in this Title, from time to time, by resolution
and published in the Clinton City Consolidated Fee
Schedule. Consideration of fees shall include but not
be limited to those needed to cover the cost of
administration, inspections, reviews, publications,
and related issues.
History: 10/10
15-1-5 Responsibility of Administration. The
City Manager shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this Title. Any powers
granted or duties imposed upon the City may be
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
delegated by the City Manager to persons or entities
acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of
the City.
History: 10/10
15-1-6 Office of Primary Responsibility. The
Clinton City Community Development Department is
the Office of Primary Responsibility for review and
proposing changes to this Title. The Community
Development Director may call on other departments
for assistance in reviewing this Chapter.
History: 10/10
15-1-7 The Business License Official. The
Business License Official, or other person appointed
by the City Manager, shall be responsible for the
implementation of this Title to include but not limited
to issue of licenses, record keeping, and enforcement
of programs.
History: 10/10
15-1-8 Definitions. The following definitions shall
be applicable throughout this Title unless a different
meaning is clearly intended.
“Applicant” means any person applying for any
license provided for in the Title. If the person is a
partnership or corporation, then each partner, officer
or director is considered an applicant and must
qualify accordingly.
“Application” means a formal written request for the
issuance of any license permitted under this Title.
“Authorized Officers” means those persons
authorized by the City or other entities to inspect
businesses and enforce the provisions of this Title or
other applicable regulations, including peace officers,
ordinance enforcement officers, and employees of the
Health Department, Fire Department, Community
Development Department, City Attorney’s Office or
the City Manager.
“Business” means and includes all trades,
professions, occupations, or activities engaged in
within Clinton City, carried on for the purpose of gain
or economic profit, except that the acts of employees
rendering service to employers shall not be included
in the term "business" unless otherwise specifically
provided.
“Business License Official” means the individual or
his/her designee who is in the Community
Development Department who oversees business
licensing.
“City” spelled with a capital “C” means Clinton City.
“City Attorney’s Office” means the contract
attorney serving Clinton City.
“City Manager” means the chief executive officer of
Clinton City.
“City Recorder” means the Clinton City Recorder.
“Community Development Department” means the
Community Development Department of Clinton City
to include the functions of Building Inspection,
Business Licensing, Planning, and other functions
assigned to the Department.
“Consolidated Fee Schedule” means the schedule of
fees adopted each year by resolution of the Clinton
City Council setting forth the various fees charged by
the City.
“Daycare Center, Family” means any noncommercial,
private residence being used by the
owners/residents for the caring of a minimum of one
(1) but not more than eight (8) children, including the
owners / residents children under the age of six (6)
for a minimum of three (3) but less than twenty-four
(24) hours per day, in accordance with Utah Rule
430-90, Child Care Centers. With operators licensed
by the Utah State Department of Health, Bureau of
Child Care Licensing.
“Daycare Center, Family Group” means any noncommercial,
private residence being used by the
owners/residents for the caring of up to but not more
than twelve (12) children, including the
owners/residents children under the age of six (6), for
a minimum of three (3), but less than twenty-four (24)
hours per day, in accordance with Utah rule 430-90,
Child Care Centers. With operators licensed by the
Utah State Department of Health, Bureau of Child
Care Licensing.
“Employee” means all individuals who work for an
employer for salary commission or wages and who
are subject to the direction and control of such
employer.
“Engaging in Business” includes, but is not limited
to the sale of real or personal property at retail or
wholesale, the bartering or trading of property or
services, the manufacturing of goods or property and
the rendering of personal services for others for a
consideration by persons engaged in any profession,
trade, craft, business, occupation or other calling,
except the rendering of personal services by an
employee to his employer under any contract of
personal employment.
“Fire Department” means the Clinton City Fire
Department.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
“Health Department” means the Davis County
Health Department.
“Home Occupation” means a portion of a private
residence being used by the owners/residents
conducting a business that the average neighbor,
under normal conditions, WOULD be aware of its
existence. The use of a portion of a dwelling as an
office, studio or work room for occupations which are
customarily conducted in the home and are incidental
to the primary use as a home or residence. Home
Occupations shall be in compliance with the
regulations and provisions contained in Chapter 2 of
this Title.
“Home Office” means a portion of a private
residence being used by the owners/residents
conducting a business that the average neighbor,
under normal conditions, WOULD NOT be aware of
its existence. The use of a portion of a dwelling as an
office, studio or work room for businesses which are
customarily conducted in the home and are incidental
to the primary use as a home or residence. Home
Offices shall be in compliance with the regulations
and provisions contained in Chapter 2 of this Title.
“License Official” or “Official” means Business
License Official.
“Licensee” means the person who has obtained any
type of license provided for in this Title. The term
shall also include any employee or agent of the
licensee.
“Person” means any natural person, partnership,
joint venture, society, association, club, trustee, trust,
or corporation, or any officer, agent, employee,
factor, or other personal representative of any thereof,
in any capacity, acting either for himself or for any
other natural person under either personal
appointment or pursuant to law.
“Place of Business” means each separate location
maintained or operated by the licensee, whether or
not under the same name, within the City from which
business is engaged in.
“Police Department” means the Clinton City Police
Department.
“Premises” means any land, structure, place, item of
equipment or appurtenance connected or used
therewithin any business, and also, any personal
property which is either affixed to or is otherwise
used in connection with the operation of any business.
“Preschool, Residential Neighborhood” means any
non-commercial, private premises being used by the
owners/residents for the instruction and care of up to
eight (8) children, related and unrelated, between the
ages of three (3) and six (6) years of age for up to
three (3) hours at any one time, conducted no more
than five (5) times per week and where meals are not
served. Preschool-age children of the owner/resident
shall be included in the number of children allowed in
the preschool.
"Related Children" means children for whom the
child care provider is the:
(1) Parent, legal guardian, or step-parent;
(2) Grandparent, step-grandparent, or greatgrandparent;
(3) Sibling or step-sibling; or
(4) Aunt, uncle, step-aunt, step-uncle, great-aunt, or
great-uncle.
“Specified Anatomical Areas” means:
(1) Less than completely and opaquely covered
human genitals, pubic region, buttock and female
breast below a point immediately above the top of the
areola; and
(2) Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered.
“Specified Sexual Activities” means:
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; or,
(3) Fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region or female breast.
“Specified Sexual Activities” means:
(1) Human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation or
arousal;
(2) Acts of human masturbation, sexual intercourse or
sodomy; or
(3) Fondling or other erotic touching of human
genitals, pubic region or female breast.
“Temporary Interior Business” means any business
which intends to conduct business at any single place
of business for 90 days or less, and whose place of
business is located within the building confines of a
licensed non-temporary business.
“Violated” or “Violating” means that there exists
reasonable cause to believe that any ordinance, code,
statute or law has been or is being violated and is not
limited to pleas of guilty or convictions for violating
said ordinances, codes, statutes or laws.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
History: 3/80, 12/97, 01/99, 04/12
15-1-2 Business License Required.
(1) Unless otherwise provided, it shall be unlawful
for any person to engage in any business within the
City without first having obtained a business license
pursuant to this Title. A separate license shall be
required for each type of business defined herein and
for each place of business. Each day of Noncompliance
shall constitute a separate violation.
(2) In addition to any criminal prosecution or civil
proceedings, if any person found violating this
section later applies for a license and if a license is
granted, the penalty fees shall be as follows:
(a) Penalty fees shall be 100 percent of the license
fees for the first year, and the business shall pay an
additional penalty for each year or portion of a year in
which the business operated without a license. The
penalty fee for each year or portion of a year, other
than the first year, without a license shall be an
amount equal to 125 percent of the current license
fees.
(b) The City Manager may reduce or waive the
penalty fees to be paid by a business operating
without a license, for the first year, for the purpose of
encouraging unlicensed business to properly license.
(3) Any Person aggrieved by the decision of the
License Official’s final order, shall have the right to
appeal to the City Manager by filing a written appeal
with the License Official within ten (10) days
following the effective date of the action or decision
complained of. A time for hearing shall be fixed and
not less than five (5) days notice thereof shall be
given to the appellant. Following the hearing the City
Manager shall make and enter findings of fact and an
order, and that decision shall be final and conclusive.
A copy of the findings of fact, order, and decision
shall be mailed to the appellant to the name and
address provided in the written appeal.
(4) Any appeal of an order of the City Manager after
a hearing on a summary action, or after a hearing on
appeal from action of the License Official, may be
filed in Davis Count District Court.
History: 3/80, 12/97, 01/99, 10/10
15-1-3 Exemptions from Business License
Requirements.
(1) Upon the written request of a majority of the
members of the City Council filed with the City
Recorder and Business License Official, any license
provided for in this title shall be issued free of charge
to any person suffering from any physical or mental
disability, or of an age that shall render him incapable
of performing manual labor; to any poor person with
extraordinary problems of support.
(2) Vegetable and fruit stands which sell produce
grown solely on the seller’s property which is located
in Clinton City shall be exempt from all requirements
imposed by this Title.
(3) Upon the written request, with valid proof of IRS
“501c(3)” status, to the Business License
Administrator any license provided for in this title
may be issued free of charge to any number of
persons working solely for the benefit of any worthy
charity or for a worthy public enterprise. However,
if solicitor badges are required these shall be paid for.
Appeals to the decision of the Business License
Administrator may be made as set in § (1) above.
History: 3/80, 01/99, 05/12, 8/12
15-1-4 Business License Official - Duties and
Responsibilities. It shall be the duty and
responsibility of the Business License Official to:
(1) Enforce the provisions of this Title;
(2) Collect all business license fees and all alcoholic
beverage license fees;
(3) Process all applications and renewals of all
licenses provided for in this Title;
(4) Obtain the necessary approvals from the various
City departments and divisions before issuing any
business license or alcoholic beverage license;
(5) Deny, suspend or revoke licenses as provided in
Chapter 4 of this Title; and,
(6) Maintain a record and list of all licenses issued.
History: 01/99
15-1-5 Business License Application. The Clinton
City Business License Application shall be in such
format and require such information as the License
Official deems necessary to enforce this Title,
including but not limited to:
(1) The name, date of birth and home address of the
person applying for the license;
History: 10/10
(2) The registered name of the business, if applicable;
(3) The federal tax number of the corporation, if
applicable;
(4) The type of business to be engaged in;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(5) The class of license desired, if the type of license
is divided into classes;
(6) The location of the place of business;
(7) A state sales tax number, if applicable;
(8) A state contractor’s number, if applicable;
(9) Proof that the business is state licensed or
registered, if applicable; or ,
(10) A space for the applicant or applicant’s
authorized agent to sign under penalty of law that all
of the information contained therein is true.
History: 01/99
15-1-6 Issuance of a Business License.
(1) An applicant for a business license shall fill out
the application in full and sign it as verification under
penalty of law that all information contained therein
is true.
(2) The application shall be returned to the
Community Development Department along with full
payment of all business license fees.
(3) The Business License Official shall submit copies
to other departments as needed for review and
comment.
(4) Only after receiving signed, written approval from
each of the entities named in this Section, shall the
Business License Official be authorized to prepare a
certificate of license for issuance.
(5) The certificate of license shall be signed by the
License Official and shall contain the following
information:
(a) The person’s name to whom the certificate is
issued;
(b) The business name;
(c) The type of business licensed;
(d) The date the license was issued;
(e) The expiration date of the license;
(f) The address of the place of business licensed; and,
(g) The business license number.
(6) If the business is licensed to conduct more than
one type of business, as defined herein, the certificate
of license shall state each type of business licensed.
History: 01/99, 10/10
15-1-7 Renewals of Business Licenses.
(1) Each year, licensees shall renew their business
licenses by completing an application for a license
renewal signed under penalty of law that all
information contained therein is true and returning it,
along with the proper fees, to the Community
Development Department within the time period set
forth in Section 15-1-9-2 below. Renewal
applications for businesses which require police
checks of the licensees shall be submitted to the
Police Department for their approval to ascertain
whether the licensee still meets the necessary
qualifications.
(2) Upon receipt of the application fees and the
Police Department approval, if applicable, the
Business License Official shall be authorized to
prepare a certificate of license as provided in this
Chapter.
History: 01/99
15-1-8 Enforcement.
(1) Inspections. The License Official or the
Authorized Officer shall make all investigations
reasonably necessary to the enforcement of this
Chapter. Any Authorized Officer is hereby
empowered by the License Official to conduct
investigations unless this Title specifically indicates
who shall conduct an investigation. The City Council
may authorize other City employees to conduct
investigations. Persons inspecting Licensees, their
businesses, or premise as herein authorized, shall
report all violations of this Chapter or of other laws
or City Codes to the License Official and shall submit
any other reports as the License Official shall order.
All individuals authorized hereunder to inspect
Licensees and businesses shall have the authority to
enter, with or without a search warrant and at all
reasonable times, the following premise:
(a) Those for which a license is required;
(b) Those for which a license was issued and which at
the time of inspection are operating under the license;
and,
(c) Those for which the license has been revoked or
suspended.
(2) Provisional Order. When the License Official has
been notified that a Licensee is in violation of this
Title or of any related law or City Code, and the
violation is not an immediate threat to the public's
health, safety, or welfare, or is not otherwise so
egregious as to warrant immediate intervention, the
License Official shall issue to the affected Person a
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
provisional order to comply.
(a) The Provisional Order shall be in writing and shall
apprise the Person affected of the specific violations.
In the absence of the Person affected or their agent or
employee, a copy of the notice shall be affixed to
some structure on the premise. The deposit of the
notice in the United States mail, to the name and
address provided on the business license application,
shall constitute service thereof.
(b) The Provisional Order shall require compliance
within five (5) business days of receipt of the mailing
of the order to the affected Person.
(c) Delivery of a mailing is assumed to be within
three business days.
(d) If before the expiration of the five (5) day period
for compliance the Licensee requests, in writing, a
hearing concerning the Provisional Order, the License
Official shall order and conduct a hearing within five
(5) business days of the request. Notice of the hearing
shall be given in the manner prescribed herein. The
applicant may be represented by counsel at the
hearing and may produce any evidence relevant to the
question. Within four (4) business days of the
conclusion of the hearing, the License Official shall
make findings, enter a final order, and mail the final
order to the affected Person.
(3) Hearing Regarding License Status. At the time
the License Official prepares the provisional order,
the License Official is also to prepare a notice to the
Licensee regarding a hearing to determine what, if
any, action will be taken regarding the Licensee's
business license. Notice shall set forth the specific
violations to be addressed at the hearing and set forth
the date, time, and location of the hearing. The notice
shall either be served with the provisional order or
separately in the same manner as the provisional
order. The hearing shall be set no sooner than five
(5) business days from the date of receipt of the
notice. The applicant may be represented by counsel
at the hearing and may produce any evidence relevant
to the violations. Within four (4) business days of the
conclusion of the hearing, the License Official shall
make findings, enter a final order, and mail the final
order to the Licensee.
(4) Authority of License Official. In accordance with
the provisions of this Chapter, upon written request or
on the Official's own motion, the License Official
shall have the authority to extend the time for
compliance or grant a new hearing date or change,
modify, or rescind any recommendation or order. The
License Official shall also have the authority to
suspend or revoke a license, or place a license on
probation, or similar action, upon making and
declaring a final order in reference thereto.
(5) Final Order. Upon a final order revoking or
suspending a license or determining that a license is
necessary for an entity operating without a license,
the entity shall immediately cease all business at all
places where the entity is operating and found to be in
violation. This is not intended to prohibit reasonable,
immediate and necessary actions to protect the life of
an individual. No refund of any portion of the license
fee shall be made to the Licensee if the license has
been revoked or suspended.
(6) No owner, occupant or any other person having
charge, care or control of any building or premises
shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made as
herein provided to properly permit entry therein by
the authorized officer or his representative(s) for the
purpose of inspection and examination to insure
compliance with this Title.
(7) Liability of Violator. The amount of any unpaid
fee, the payment of which is required hereunder, shall
constitute a debt to the City. The City Attorney, at
the direction of the City Manager, may institute a
civil action in the name of the City to recover any
unpaid fee. No civil judgment or any act by the City
Attorney or any other agent of the City shall be a bar
to prevent a criminal prosecution for each and every
violation of this Chapter. In addition, the City
Attorney may pursue other remedies legally allowable
for enforcement of this Chapter.
History: 01/99; 10/10
15-1-9 Payment Dates of Business License Fees.
(1) Business license fees for new businesses shall be
due and payable upon making application to the
Community Development Department. The
application shall not be processed until the fee is
paid.
(2) Business license fees for renewal businesses shall
be due and payable on or before January 1 of each
year and shall be delinquent after January 1 of each
year. All license fees not paid prior to February 1,
shall have a penalty of 50 percent of the amount of
the fee added to the original amount due. If the fee
plus penalty is still not paid by March 1, a penalty of
75 percent of the amount of the fee shall be added to
the original amount due. If the fee plus penalty is still
not paid by April 1, then the business shall be
considered to be operating without a business license
in violation of this Chapter, subject to criminal
prosecution for every day of operation after January
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
1, if a license is issued thereafter the fee shall be
double.
(3) Any Person aggrieved by the decision of the
License Official’s final order, shall have the right to
appeal to the City Manager by filing a written appeal
with the License Official within ten (10) days
following the effective date of the action or decision
complained of. A time for hearing shall be fixed and
not less than five (5) days notice thereof shall be
given to the appellant. Following the hearing the City
Manager shall make and enter findings of fact and an
order, and that decision shall be final and conclusive.
A copy the findings of fact, order, and decision shall
be mailed to the appellant to the name and address
provided in the written appeal.
(4) Appeals of an order of the City Manager after a
hearing on a summary action, or after a hearing on
appeal from action of the License Official, may be
filed in Davis Count District Court.
History: 01/99, 3/05, 2/07, 10/10
15-1-10 Term of Business Licenses.
(1) All business licenses, except temporary interior
business licenses, shall expire each year at midnight
on the last day of December.
(2) Temporary interior business licenses shall expire
on the 90th day from the date the temporary interior
business license was issued.
History: 01/99
15-1-11 Business License Fees. The total fee
required each year for each type of business consists
of the base fee plus the applicable business category
fees and regulatory fees.
(1) The base fees are categorized in the Consolidated
Fee Schedule by type of business. The definition of
each type of business and the specific regulations
governing them are found in this Title. If a particular
type of business is not listed in the Consolidated Fee
Schedule, then its base fee shall be the general
business license base fee as set forth in the
Consolidated Fee Schedule.
(2) The applicable business category and regulatory
fees for each business, regardless of whether it is
defined in this chapter, are set forth in the
Consolidated Fee Schedule.
History: 3/80, 12/97, 01/99, 10/10
15-1-12 Exemptions to Business License Fees
Requirements.
(1) A business license fee shall not be imposed on
any person engaged in business solely for religious,
charitable, eleemosynary or other types of strictly
nonprofit purpose which is tax exempt in such
activities under the laws of the United States and the
State of Utah, nor shall any business license fee be
imposed on any person engaged in a business
specifically exempted from municipal taxation and
fees by the laws of the United States or the State of
Utah.
(2) Any business exempt from paying the license fee
as provided in this Section shall still comply with all
other requirements of this Title.
History: 03/80, 01/99
15-1-13 Transfer of License Restricted.
(1) Business licenses may be transferred to another
person for the same location upon the new person
making application and being able to qualify for such
license under this Title and paying the business
license transfer fee as set forth in the Consolidated
Fee Schedule.
(2) A business license may not be transferred to a
new location within the City. Each location shall be
applied for and all appropriate fees shall be paid for
each location.
History: 03/80, 12/97, 01/99
15-1-14 Display of Licenses.
(1) Every certificate of license for a business shall be
posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place upon
the wall of the building, room or office of the place of
business so that the same may be easily seen. When
the certificate of license has expired, it shall be
removed and no certificate of license which is not in
force and effect shall be permitted to remain posted
within the place of business. If the licensee’s
business is such that a license cannot be displayed
due to the transient or mobile nature of the business,
then the licensee shall carry the license on his person
ready to be shown on request by an authorized officer
during all such time or times while the licensee is
engaged in or pursuing the business for which a
license is granted.
(2) In the event the license is for a coin-operated
machine or device, the certificate shall be attached or
displayed in the immediate vicinity of the machine for
which it has been issued.
History: 03/80, 01/99
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
15-1-15 Reciprocal Recognition of Business
Licenses.
(1) A business license shall not be required for
operation of any vehicle or equipment in this City
when:
(a) Such vehicle is merely passing through the City;
or
(b) Such vehicle is used exclusively in interstate
commerce.
(2) A business license shall not be required of any
person whose only business activity in this City is the
mere delivery in the City of property sold by him at a
regular place of business maintained by him outside
of the City where:
(a) Such person’s business is at the time of such
delivery licensed by the Utah city or county in which
such place of business is situated;
(b) The authority licensing such business grants to
licensees of this City making deliveries within its
jurisdiction the same privileges upon substantially the
same terms as are granted by this Section;
(c) Neither the property delivered nor any of the
facilities by which it was manufactured, produced or
processed are subject to inspection by authority of
this City for compliance with health or sanitary
standards prescribed by this City; and,
(d) The truck or other conveyance by which such
delivery is made prominently displays at all times a
license plate or symbol issued by the licensing
authority to evidence such business license. Such
plate or symbol shall identify the licensing authority
by which it is issued, shall indicate that it evidences a
license issued thereby, and shall specify the year or
term for which it is effective.
(3) Except as otherwise provided herein, a business
license shall not be required of any person who is
duly licensed in another county or another city in
Utah, has no business location in the City and the
county or other licensing city would also reciprocate
if the same business were located in the City.
(a) Before reciprocity is granted, the person must fill
out a business license application and show proof of a
valid business license in a qualifying city or county.
(b) Reciprocity shall not be granted to solicitors,
mobile food units or any business requiring criminal
background checks or BCI or City issued ID cards.
(4) The City Recorder shall, at the request of any
person upon payment of copying and postage costs,
certify a copy of this section to any city or county of
the State of Utah.
History: 01/99
15-1-16 Constructive Notice of Time Periods.
(1) All businesses, owners, licensees, or applicants
are obligated to be aware of and are deemed to have
constructive notice of all time periods and/or
deadlines and the effect of Non-compliance with said
time periods and/or deadlines as set forth in this Title
relating to the application, issuance, renewal,
expiration, appeal or other action relating to business
licenses, alcohol licenses, or any other licensing
matters set forth in this Title.
(2) Nothing in this title shall be construed as
requiring the City to take any affirmative action to
notify businesses, owners, licensees, or applicants of
any time periods and/or deadlines or the effect of
Non-compliance with said time periods and/or
deadlines set forth in this Title relating to the
application, issuance, renewal, expiration, appeal or
other action relating to business licenses, alcohol
licenses, or any other licensing matters as set forth in
this Title.
History: 01/99
15-1-17 Temporary Interior Business Licenses.
(1) Temporary interior businesses, as defined in this
Title, may receive temporary interior business
licenses. Temporary interior business applicants and
licensees shall be subject to all requirements of this
Title, except that the fee for a temporary interior
business license shall be one-half the regular general
business license base fee.
(2) A temporary interior business licensee may not
apply for a new temporary interior business license
within six months following the expiration of a
previous temporary interior business license.
(3) The following businesses are not eligible for
temporary interior business licenses:
(a) Home occupations;
(b) Any business, whether or not it is temporary,
which is specifically regulated or licensed under any
chapter or section of this Title;
(c) Any business, whether or not it is temporary,
which requires a conditional use permit.
(4) In the event of a conflict between this section and
any specific regulation or fee contained in this Title
or the Consolidated Fee Schedule, the more specific
regulation or fee shall apply. History: 01/99
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 2. Home Based Businesses
15-2-1 Purpose and Intent
15-2-2 Home Business Permit Required
15-2-3 Issuing Authority
15-2-4 Procedure
15-2-5 Prerequisites for all Home Businesses
15-2-6 Home Office
15-2-7 Home Occupation
15-2-8 Non-compliance
15-2-9 Business License Required
15-2-1 Purpose and Intent. The purpose and
intent of this chapter is to encourage the majority of
business activities to be conducted in appropriate
commercial zones. Business activities may be
conducted within a residence on a limited basis if
such activities comply with standards of this section.
All home occupations shall be secondary and
incidental to the residential use. The use should be
conducted so that neighbors, under normal
conditions, would not be aware of its existence.
Home occupations are a temporary privilege which
can be revoked if the permit and license requirements
are not followed, or disruption of the residential
neighborhood occurs.
15-2-2 Home Business Permit Required. To
assure compliance with provisions of this Title and to
protect the character of residential neighborhoods in
the City of Clinton, a Home Business Permit shall be
obtained from the Community Development
Department before a business is established as an
accessory use in a residence.
15-2-3 Issuing Authority. The Business License
Administrator is responsible for the administration of
the provisions of this Ordinance and the issuance of
Home Business Permits and Licenses.
15-2-4 Procedure.
(1) Application for a Home Business shall be made
with the Clinton City Community Development
Department on forms provided by the City and
accompanied with required information and
appropriate fees as set by the City Council annually
and published in the Clinton City Consolidated Fee
Schedule.
(2) All applications shall be accompanied with
current copies of licenses issued by the State, County;
handyman or lawn care agreements; or, any other
information deemed applicable to the type of business
to be operated.
(3) The issuing authority may, upon application, issue
a Home Business Permit which shall state the home
business, either Home Office or Home Occupation
permitted, the requirement for compliance with this
ordinance, and any time limitations imposed thereon.
The permit shall not be issued unless the issuing
authority is satisfied that the applicant will meet all of
the prerequisites and conditions listed below and that
the applicant has agreed in writing to comply with all
said prerequisites and conditions.
(4) Denial of an applicants permit shall be given in
writing and is to outline the reasons for denial.
Letters of Denial shall be sent out within ten (10)
business days of an applicant submitting a complete
application.
(5) Applicants may appeal the Issuing Authorities
actions as outlined in Chapter 4 of this Title.
15-2-5 Prerequisites for all Home Businesses.
The following prerequisites shall be met by all Home
Businesses:
(1) The proposed business is necessary or desirable to
provide a service or facility which will contribute to
the general well-being of the community;
(2) In order to minimize traffic and off-street parking,
and to avoid health and sanitation risks from the
disposal of medical wastes, medical, dental, and other
health professional offices are specifically excluded
as a home business;
(3) The proposed business will not under the
circumstances of the particular case and the
conditions imposed, be detrimental to the health,
safety and general welfare of persons and not
injurious to property and improvements in the
community, but will be compatible with and
complimentary to the existing surrounding uses,
building and structures when considering traffic
generation, parking, building design, location,
landscaping, and signs;
(4) The proposed business will comply with the
regulations and conditions specified in this ordinance
for such use;
(5) Non-owner residents of a residence shall provide
written approval of the property owner for the nonowner
to be able to operate a home business, the
letter shall describe the business and property owner
shall acknowledge that they understand their
possibility of liability for the business being operated
on the premises:
(6) The Home Business shall meet all requirements of
the City, County and State for operation of the
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
business to include but not be limited to:
(a) Division of Occupational and Professional
Licensing;
(b) County Health Department;
(c) Department of Human Services; or,
(d) Utah Department of Agricultural and Food
(7) Regulation of vehicular traffic:
(a) The proposed business shall not generate
vehicular traffic not commonly associated with the
zone in which it is located;
(b) A proposed business shall not be permitted that
requires receipt or delivery of merchandise, goods, or
equipment, by other than a passenger motor vehicle;
or, by parcel or letter carrier mail service using
vehicles typically employed in residential deliveries.
No deliveries by semi-tractor/trailer truck are
permitted; and
(c) Vehicle traffic, customers, deliveries, or other
traffic associated shall not occur between the hours of
10:01 p.m. and 5:59 a.m.
(8) Regulation of structures on the lot:
(a) The proposed business shall not alter the
residential character of the premises;
(b) The Home Business shall not occupy any area
within the garage, unless the garage still functions for
parking, and as long as two parking spaces meeting
the requirements for residential use outlined in Title
28 Chapter 4 are still available;
(c) The proposed business shall not carry on activities
outside of the residence or other enclosed space not
normally associated with residential use, except
outside private swimming pools or tennis courts may
be used for instruction and play areas provided for
daycare/pre-schools. All outside home occupation
activities shall be within fenced yard spaces; and,
(d) Inventory and supplies for the proposed business
shall not occupy more than 50% of the total permitted
area described in this Chapter.
(9) Restrictions upon use:
(a) The proposed business shall not unreasonably
disturb the peace and quiet, including radio and
television reception, of the neighborhood. The
business shall not be associated with chemical or
biological hazards, dust, odors, noise, light, vibration,
drainage, electrostatic discharge or other infringement
upon other properties; and,
(b) The proposed business shall not create a hazard
by using flammable, explosive, or other dangerous
materials or by keeping or raising animals which are
capable of inflicting harm or discomfort or
endangering the health and safety of any person or
property.
(c) Businesses dealing in sales, production of or trade
of a “Tobacco Product” as defined by Utah State
Code Sections 76-10-101, 59-14-102 & 76-10-104.1
shall be excluded from operating in a residential use.
(10) No sign or advertising shall be displayed on the
premises except as permitted by section § 24-4-1(9)
of the Clinton City Code.
(11) No display of any kind shall be visible from the
exterior of the premises.
(12) The Home Business shall not cause a demand for
municipal or utility services or community facilities
in excess of those usually and customarily provided
for residential uses.
(13) All Home Business Permits shall be valid for
one (1) year, and will be considered renewed annually
upon renewal of a Clinton City Business License as
established in this Code provided there have been no
reported violations, complaints, or detrimental
characteristics which may, in the opinion of the
issuing authority, require termination of said home
business.
(14) Handicapped persons can obtain a waiver of one
(1) or more of these conditions and conditions
established in § 15-2-6 and § 15-2-7 below through
the issuing authority to allow such persons to become
self-sufficient.
History 10/13
15-2-6 Home Office.
(1) A Home Business which meets the standards
listed in § 15-2-5 above as well as the following shall
be defined as a Home Office. Permitted Home
Offices include, but are not necessarily limited to, the
following:
(a) artists, authors, architectural services, advertising
(b) consulting services
(c) desktop publishing
(d) data processing, computer programming, and
service
(e) janitorial services
(f) insurance sales or broker, interior design
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(g) mail order
(h) garden produce
(i) real estate sales, broker, or appraiser
(j) sales representative
(k) preparation of products to be sold away from the
home
(l) contractors, provided there is no outside storage of
equipment
(2) The conditions outlined in § 15-2-5 above are
amended or added to as follows for a Home Office.
(a) The Home Office does not require that clients or
the public come into the premises.
(b) No exterior sign or evidence of the business being
operated will be present.
(c) The Home Office shall be conducted wholly
within the structure on the premises and shall not
exceed twenty (20) percent of the total finished floor
area of said structures.
(d) The Home Office shall not carry on activities
outside of the residence not normally associated with
a residential use.
(e) Vehicles associated with a Home Office shall be
the equivalent of those normally associated with a
residence.
15-2-7 Home Occupation.
(1) A Home Business which meets the standards in §
15-2-5 above as well as the following shall be defined
as a Home Occupation. Permitted Home Occupations
include, but are not necessarily limited to, the
following:
(a) Uses outlined in § 15-2-6 above where the clients
are brought into the business;
(b) barber and beauty shops;
(c) consulting services, craft sales;
(d) dance studio, aerobic exercise, music lessons,
tutoring;
(e) direct sales distribution;
(f) family daycare, family group daycare, and
preschools; and,
(g) promotional meetings for the purpose of selling
merchandise, taking orders, or training shall not be
held more than once per month.
(2) In addition to the conditions outlined in § 15-2-5
above the following conditions apply to a Home
Occupation.
(a) The Home Occupation may include the sale of
commodities; However, it is the intent that it be
limited to items produced on the premises, or items
that are incidental to the service provided, i.e. a
beautician who also sells hair care products to her
clientele; Other retail sales of products are not
allowed at the home;
(b) There shall be complete conformity with the
Clinton City Code, fire, building, plumbing,
electrical, and health codes and to all applicable state
and city laws and ordinances;
(c) Hours of operation shall be stated on the
application however business shall not be conducted
between the hours of 10:01 p.m. and 5:59 a.m. The
issuing authority may further limit the hours of
operation if it is determined that the impact of the
business will have an adverse affect on the
neighborhood;
(d) The number of customers coming to a residence
unit may range up to two (2) per hour, provided
sufficient off-street parking is provided;
(e) One (1) larger commercial vehicle may be used,
provided it is parked on hard surface, private
property and adequately screened from view;
(f) Only resident family members of the applicant
shall be regularly engaged in the business on-site. All
other employees of the business may work on-site no
more than a combined total of sixteen (16) man hours
in a one (1) week period provided sufficient, city
approved, on-site hard surface parking is provided;
(g) Clients and other individuals visiting the Home
Occupation shall not be allowed in unfinished
portions of the house;
(h) The Home Occupation shall be conducted wholly
within the structure(s) on the premises and shall not
exceed forty-nine (49) percent of the total floor area
of said structure(s);
(i) Home Occupations that are classified agricultural
by the Business License Administrator and meet the
following minimum criteria are not considered a
violation of § (h) above:
(i) Business does not fall under the exception
contained in §15-1-10(2);
(ii) Business is oriented toward the raising and
marketing of vegetation and/or animals and not the
sale of machinery, equipment or similar items;
(iii) Property shall be located in the A-1 Zone;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(iv) Property shall be a minimum of one acre in size;
(v) All requirements of the Zoning Ordinance
concerning “Special Provisions Relating to the
Keeping of Animals and Fowl” shall apply;
(vi) No more than 20% of the total finished floor area
of the home may be used in conjunction with the
business;
(vii) All accessory buildings associated with the
business shall meet the requirements of the Zoning
Ordinance concerning, “Garage, Accessory Building
– Shed – Single Family Dwelling;” with the
additional requirement that all accessory parking
areas be hard-surfaced and approved by the city. In
addition, driveways leading to accessory garages
associated with the business are hard surfaced from
the street to the structure.
(vii) Animal waste shall be removed, stored, or
otherwise disposed of, in such a manner, so that no
noticeable odor is discernable by the average person
at any point along the property line where the
business is located.
(viii) Agriculture Home Occupations involved in the
sale or resale of animals shall provide a copy of the
Dealer’s License issued by the Utah Department of
Agriculture and Food; and,
(ix) Agriculture Home Occupations involved in the
breeding and sale of animals shall provide a copy of
the Dealer’s License issued by the Utah Department
of Agriculture and Food and a sales tax ID number
issued by the Utah State Tax Commission.
(j) The Clinton City Fire Marshal shall inspect the
structures prior to commencing operation of the
business and as deemed necessary by the Fire
Marshal after the initial inspection; and,
(k) A Clinton City Building Inspector shall conduct
an inspection of the structures, for compliance with
the applicable codes, prior to commencing operation
of the business; if the Inspector identifies any
deficiencies the applicant shall take out a building
permit and correct the deficiencies prior to the start of
business.
(l) Home Occupations are allowed one (1) sign per
residence, as indicated within § 24-4-1 (9).
(3) The following requirements of the State are
applicable to Family Daycare Centers and Family
Group Daycare Centers or as set forth in Utah Admin
Code R430-90, Licensed Family Child Care as
amended by this Title.
(4) Special Requirements for Daycare and Family
Daycare Centers: in addition to § 15-2-7(3) above,
prior to approval of a Home Occupation Permit, the
following conditions shall be met, in addition to the
requirements of section § 15-2-5 and § 15-2-7(2) and
(3) above. Where City requirements are more
restrictive than the State the City requirements shall
be followed.
(a) A copy of the license issued by the Utah State
Department of Health, Bureau of Licensing shall be
provided to the Issuing Authority before the business
license is issued;
(b) A copy of all documentation certifying that all
Utah State Department of Health, Bureau of
Licensing requirements have been met shall be
provided to the Issuing Authority before the business
license is issued;
(c) For Centers caring for up to eight (8) children the
occupant owner shall be the caregiver; For Centers
caring for more than eight (8) children and up to and
including twelve (12) children the occupant owner
shall be the primary caregiver and documentation
shall be provided to indicate who the additional
caregiver will be; Any changes to whom the
caregivers are in the business shall be documented
with the Issuing Authority;
(d) Children/Students shall be supervised by the
individuals outlined in (c) above at all times;
(e) Children shall not be allowed in areas of a house
with unfinished construction;
(f) State requirements shall be met; and,
(g) If exempt from State Licensure, a letter from the
Utah State Department of Health, Bureau of Child
Care Licensing must be submitted prior to obtaining a
business license.
(h) Exterior play areas shall be fenced. The fence
shall be a minimum of four (4) feet in height, have a
self-closing, self-latching gate, openings in the fence
shall not be large enough to allow a four (4) inch
sphere to pass through. Field fence or barbed wire
shall not be allowed.
(i) Daycare Centers, Family that are performing
“Relative Care” as defined by the State are required
to obtain a business license, however the Business
License Administrator shall classify it a special
license and only charge for the required one time
building inspection and fire inspection fee which will
be charged on an annual basis.
(5) In addition to § 15-2-5 and § 15-2-7 (2) above the
following shall apply to the operation of a preschool:
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(a) No more than eight (8) students including the
children of the provider below the age of six (6);
(b) Exterior play areas shall be fenced. If utilized as
part of the preschool, any exterior play area shall
meet the requirements of § 15-2-7 (4) (h); and,
(c) No recitals, shows, displays, or other activity
intended to entertain, educate or otherwise bring in
non-students, other than family members of students,
shall be held at the residence.
(6) In addition to § 15-2-5 and § 15-2-7 (2) above the
following shall apply to the operation of a business in
which instructional services, such as but not limited
to, musical instrument, singing, dance, tutoring,
painting, or similar teachings are given:
(a) No more than eight (8) students including their
children, parents, partners, or otherwise non-students
shall be at the residence at any one time;
(b) Lessons shall be given within the enclosed portion
of the residence;
(c) Lessons shall not include the use of power tools,
flammables, toxics or other noise or odor producing
materials; and,
(d) No recitals, shows, displays, or other activity
intended to entertain, educate or otherwise bring in
non-students shall be held at the residence.
History: 04/12, 05/15
15-2-8 Non-compliance.
(1) Any Home Occupation Permit shall be revoked by
the Business License Administrator upon violation of
any requirements of this Chapter, or where issued as a
conditional use under the previous ordinance upon
failure to comply with any of the conditions or
limitations of the permit, unless such violation is
corrected within three (3) business days of receipt of
written notice thereof. A permit may be revoked for
repeated violations of the requirements of this
Chapter, notwithstanding compliance to the violation
notice.
(2) Home Occupations established as a Conditional
Use under the previous ordinance. Home Businesses
operating under a Conditional Use permit shall
comply with the requirements of this ordinance upon
renewal of their Clinton City Business License
following the enactment of this ordinance.
15-2-9 Business License Required. A Home
Occupation Permit is not a business license, and the
granting of said permit shall not relieve the permitee
of any other license requirement of the City or of any
other public agency.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 3. Alcoholic Beverage Licenses
15-3-1 Definitions
15-3-2 License Required – General
15-3-3 Alcohol License Qualifications
15-3-4 Alcohol License Application and Renewal
Requirements
15-3-5 Investigation by Chief of Police
15-3-6 Investigation by Health Department
(reserved)
15-3-7 Investigation by Fire Chief
15-3-8 Issuance of License – Renewal
15-3-9 Display of License
15-3-10 Transfer of License
15-3-11 Discretion of License Official Licenses
Revocable
15-3-12 Appeal to Decision of License Official
15-3-13 Proximity to Community Locations
15-3-14 Restaurant Alcohol Licenses
15-3-15 Club Alcohol License
15-3-16 Single Event License
15-3-17 Single Event License Qualifications -
Specific
15-3-18 Single Event License Requirements
15-3-19 Beer Retailer License
15-3-20 Beer Retailer License Qualifications -
Specific
15-3-21 Off-Premise Beer License
15-3-22 On-Premise Beer License
15-3-23 State Store / Package Agency
15-3-24 Qualifications of Employees
15-3-25 Duty to Report Change of Ownership
15-3-26 Prohibited to Intoxicated Individual
15-3-27 Selling to Minors
15-3-28 Licensee Permitting Minor on Premises
15-3-29 Minor Serving Alcohol
15-3-30 Parent or Guardian Permitting Minor on
Premises
15-3-31 Minor on Premises
15-3-32 Minor in Possession
15-3-33 Entering Premises Violating State and
City Laws
15-3-34 Days of Sale – Closure
15-3-35 Advertising Requirements
15-3-36 Consumption on Property of an Off-
Premise Beer Retailer
15-3-37 Illumination of Premises
15-3-38 Screening of Private Clubs and On-
Premise Beer Retailers
15-3-39 Nuisances on Licensed Premises
15-3-40 Beer Acquired from Brewer or Wholesaler
15-3-41 On-Premise Employee
15-3-42 Gambling Devices in Licensed Premises
15-3-43 Restriction on Brewer, Jobber, and
Wholesaler
15-3-44 Premises Accessibility to License Official
and Authorized Officers
15-3-45 Warning of Approach of Police or License
Official
15-3-46 Disorderly Conduct On-Premise
15-3-47 Lewd Conduct On-Premise
15-3-48 Solicitation for Immoral Purposes On-
Premise
15-3-49 Begging Drinks On-Premise
15-3-50 Sale During License Revocation or
Suspension
15-3-51 Licensee Responsibility
15-3-52 Search of Licensed Premises
15-3-53 Manufacturing
15-3-54 Penalty for Violation
15-3-1 Definitions. Words found in this Chapter
shall have the meanings found in the Utah Alcoholic
Beverage Control Act and the following meanings.
“Act” means the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of
the state of Utah, Utah Code Annotated title 32A, or
its successor provisions.
"Club" and "Private Club" means any nonprofit
corporation operating as a social club, recreational,
fraternal, or athletic association, or kindred
association organized primarily for the benefit of its
stockholders or members.
“Disorderly Conduct” means any individual who:
(1) Refuses to comply with the lawful order of the
police to move from a public place, or knowingly
creates a hazardous or physically offensive condition,
by any act which serves no legitimate purpose; or,
(2) Intends to cause public inconvenience, annoyance,
or alarm, or recklessly creates a risk thereof, he:
(a) Engages in fighting or in violent, tumultuous, or
threatening behavior;
(b) Makes unreasonable noises in a public place;
makes unreasonable noises in a private place which
can be heard in a public place; or,
(c) Obstructs vehicular or pedestrian traffic.
“Licensed Premises” means any room, enclosure,
building, structure or place occupied by a Person
licensed to sell and/or permit the consumption of
alcoholic beverages on premises under this Title.
"Local Authority" means the Clinton City
legislative body.
“Nuisance” means any room, house, building,
vehicle, structure or place where:
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(1) Alcoholic beverages are manufactured, kept,
stored, sold, bartered, given away or offered or
exposed for sale in violation of the Act or any City
Code or where individuals resort for drinking
alcoholic beverages contrary to the Act or any City
Codes;
(2) Intoxicated individuals are permitted to loiter
about in a way as to annoy, injure or endanger the
comfort, repose, health or safety of another individual
or individuals, or which loitering in any way renders
another individual or individuals insecure in life or
use of property;
(3) Disorderly conduct is permitted and carried on;
(4) Individuals under twenty-one (21) years of age are
permitted to purchase or drink any alcoholic beverage
or are employed in violation of this chapter; or
(5) Laws or City Codes are violated by the Licensee
or the Licensee's agents or patrons with the consent or
knowledge of the Licensee upon premises which tend
to affect the public health, peace or morals.
“Offense” means:
(1) A felony under a federal law or state law;
(2) A violation of a federal law, state law, or City
Code concerning the sale, offer for sale, warehousing,
manufacture, distribution, transportation, or
adulteration of an alcoholic product;
(3) A crime involving moral turpitude; or,
(4) On two (2) or more occasions within the five (5)
years before the day on which a City Alcohol License
is issued, driving under the influence of alcohol,
drugs, or the combined influence of alcohol and
drugs.
"Person" means any individual, partnership, firm,
corporation, association, business trust, or other form
of business enterprise, including a receiver or trustee,
and the plural as well as the singular member, unless
the intent to give a more limited meaning is disclosed
by the context.
“Private Club” means any social club, recreational
association, fraternal association, athletic association,
or kindred association organized primarily for the
benefit of its members, regulated and operated as a
"club" or "private club" in accordance with the
provisions of Chapter 5 of the Act, as amended, and
shall be deemed to be a "private club" or "club" for
the provisions of this chapter and shall be subject to
the regulations and licensing provisions contained
herein. A private club is subject to business licensing
under § 15-1-2 of this title.
"Public Entrances and Exits" as used in this
Chapter, shall mean access points that are required to
remain unlocked during business hours that are to be
used by the general public, and does not include
emergency or other exits or access points.
"Public Place" means any place to which the public
or a substantial group of the public has access and
includes but is not limited to streets, highways, and
the common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment
houses, office buildings, transport facilities, and
shops.
"Retailer" means any Person engaged in the sale or
distribution of alcoholic beverages to the consumer.
“Significant Individual” if the Person is a
partnership, corporation, limited liability company, or
other held in common means:
(1) A partner;
(2) A managing agent;
(3) A manager;
(4) An officer;
(5) A director;
(6) A stockholder who holds at least 20% of the total
issued and outstanding stock of the corporation; or,
(7) A member who owns at least 20% of the limited
liability company.
"Transaction" as used in the Chapter, means the
particular portion of the exchange of legal tender for
alcoholic beverages wherein the age of the purchaser
is determined and the amount of the purchase is
entered manually or mechanically on the Licensee's
standard record keeping device. Acts incidental to
the transaction shall not be considered part of the
transaction or beer sales transaction.
"Wholesaler" means any Person, other than a
licensed manufacturer, engaged in the importation for
sale, or in the sale of beer, malt liquor, or malted
beverages, in wholesale or quantities to retailers.
15-3-2 License Required – General. In addition
to the requirements of § 15-1-2 every business
seeking an Alcohol License in the City shall comply
with following:
(1) Before a Person may store, sell, offer for sale,
furnish or allow the consumption of an alcoholic
product on its premises, within the corporate limits of
the City, the Person shall:
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(a) Obtain an appropriate package agency, license, or
permit from the Commission in accordance with the
Act.
(b) Obtain an appropriate Clinton City Alcohol
License as provided in this Chapter:
(i) Restaurant Alcohol License, full service as defined
by the Act;
(ii) Restaurant Alcohol License, limited service as
defined by the Act;
(iii) Club Alcohol License;
(iv) On-Premise Beer License;
(v) Off-Premise Beer License; or,
(vi) Package Agency License.
(2) Obtain a Business License for any business
operating within the City, obtaining an Alcohol
License does not exempt a business from needing to
have a Business License.
(3) Obtain a separate Alcohol License for each place
of sale or consumption. All Licensees shall comply
with the Act and the regulations of the Commission
and with the City Codes and every Alcohol License
shall recite that it is granted subject to revocation as
provided in this Chapter.
15-3-3 Alcohol License Qualifications.
(1) The License Official may issue an Alcohol
License to Persons meeting the requirements of this
Chapter.
(2) The License Official may only grant an Alcohol
License to Persons who qualify under the
requirements of the Act.
(3) The License Official may immediately suspend or
revoke an Alcohol License if a Person or Significant
Individual associated with the Person:
(a) After the day on which the Licensee is found to
have been convicted of an Offense before the Alcohol
License is issued; or,
(b) On or after the day on which the Alcohol License
is issued:
(i) Is convicted of an Offense; or,
(ii) Is convicted of driving under the influence of
alcohol, drugs, or the combined influence of alcohol
and drugs; and,
(iii) Was convicted of driving under the influence of
alcohol, drugs, or the combined influence of alcohol
and drugs within five (5) years before the day on
which the Person or Significant Individual is
convicted of the crime in § (ii) above.
(4) The License Official may take emergency action
by immediately suspending the alcohol operation of a
Licensee for the period during which a criminal
matter is being adjudicated if a Person or Significant
Individual:
(a) Is arrested on a charge for an Offense; or,
(b) Is arrested on a charge for the offense of driving
under the influence of alcohol, drugs or the combined
influence of alcohol and drugs; and,
(c) Was convicted of driving under the influence of
alcohol, drugs, or the combined influence of alcohol
and drugs within five (5) years before the day on
which the Person or Significant Individual is
convicted of the crime in § (b) above.
(5) The License Official may not issue an Alcohol
License to a Person who has had an Alcohol License
revoked within the last three (3) years or who has a
Significant Individual that was:
(a) A partner or managing agent of a partnership that
had an Alcohol License revoked in the last three (3)
years; or,
(b) A Significant Individual of any Person that had an
Alcohol License revoked within the last three (3)
years.
(6) All alcohol will be acquired, sold and stored in
accordance with the Act.
(7) If any Person or entity to which a license has been
issued under this Chapter no longer possesses the
qualifications required by this Chapter for obtaining
that license, the City may suspend or revoke that
license.
(8) A minor may not be issued an Alcohol License.
(9) Holders of a Clinton City Alcohol License shall
adhere to the following hours of operation unless the
Act outlines more restrictive hours.
(a) In restaurants with full service liquor licenses,
liquor, wine, flavored malt beverages, and heavy beer
may be served from 11:30 a.m. to midnight.
(b) In restaurants with limited service liquor licenses,
wine, flavored malt beverages, and heavy beer may
be served from 11:30 a.m. to midnight.
(c) In restaurants with full or limited service liquor
licenses or restaurants with a beer only license, beer
may be served from 11:30 a.m. to 1:00 a.m.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(d) Beer, for off premise consumption, may not be
sold, offered for sale or otherwise furnished on any
day between the hours of after 1:00 a.m. and 7:00
a.m.
(e) Beer establishments including, taverns, lounges,
cabarets, nightclubs, cafes, bowling alleys, golf
courses, etc., the hours for beer sales in these
establishments are 10:00 a.m. to 1:00 a.m. Beer may
be purchased without ordering food, and is sold on
draft and in bottles and cans.
History 06/12
15-3-4 Alcohol License Application and Renewal
Requirements.
(1) A Person seeking a license under this Chapter
shall file a written application, on a form provided by
the City, with the City in the name of an officer or
director of a Person on a form prescribed by the
licensing department and with all documentation
required by the Licensing Official to include, but not
be limited to the following:
(a) Non-refundable fees;
(b) A copy of the Person’s current business license;
(c) Evidence of proximity to any community
locations, as established in § 15-3-13;
(d) A floor plan, and boundary map where applicable,
of the premises of the retail license, including any;
(i) Consumption area; and,
(ii) Area where the Person proposes to store, sell,
offer for sale, or furnish an alcoholic beverage;
(e) Evidence that the Licensee has met the insurance
requirements in an amount established by the
Commission;
(f) A signed consent form stating that the Licensee
will permit any Authorized Officer to have
unrestricted rights to enter the premises of the
Licensee; and,
(g) If the Person is an entity, proper verification
evidencing that the individual who signs the
application is an officer or director and that they are
authorized to represent and sign on behalf of the
Person.
(2) Licensing fees are as set forth in the Consolidated
Fee Schedule and are due upon application and are
non-refundable.
(3) An alcohol license expires each year at 12:00
midnight on June 30, or earlier if a license issued by
the State expires on an earlier date.
(4) To renew a Person’s alcohol license, a Licensee
shall, by no later than the date specified in § (3)
above submit:
(a) A completed renewal application to and on a form
prescribed by the Licensing Official;
(b) A non-refundable renewal fee;
(c) A copy of the current Business License; and,
(d) A copy of the State issued license.
(5) Failure to meet the renewal requirements results
in an automatic forfeiture of the Alcohol License
effective on the date the existing Alcohol License
expires.
(6) A quarterly investigation of the business
establishment will be conducted by a Police Officer,
to insure compliance, and a copy of finding will be
furnished to the License Official and the Chief of
Police.
15-3-5 Investigation by Chief of Police. Every
applicant for restaurant alcohol license or an onpremise
beer license, together with information as
required to be attached thereto, shall be referred to
the Chief of Police for inspection and report. The
Chief of Police shall, within ten (10) days after
receiving application, report in writing to the License
Official the general reputation of the applicant, the
character of the premises, and of the individuals who
habitually frequent the same; the nature and kind of
business conducted at the premises; whether
intoxicating liquors are or have been served or
permitted to be drunk in the premises; whether the
premises is or has been conducted in a lawful, quiet,
and orderly manner; the nature and kind of
entertainment, if any, at the premises; whether
gambling is or has been permitted, or gambling
devices are or have been displayed upon the
premises, or by the applicant at any other location;
whether there is any ground to believe any statement
made in the application is untrue. The Chief of Police
shall add further information as he believes to be
pertinent. The Chief of Police shall add thereto in
writing his recommendation as to the granting or
denying application.
15-3-6 Investigation by Health Department.
Reserved
15-3-7 Investigation by Fire Chief. The
application shall also be referred immediately to the
Fire Chief for inspection and report. Within ten (10)
days, he shall report in writing to the License Official
whether the proposed licensed premises complies
with all applicable laws, City Codes, and regulations
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
relating to safety in the event of fire or panic, and
whether it is reasonably safe for use as a licensed
premises of the type of license applied for.
15-3-8 Issuance of License - Renewal. Upon
receipt of the reports from the Chief of Police, the
Fire Chief, and, if referral is made, the Health
Department, and upon review of those reports and a
determination by the License Official that the
applicant has complied with all applicable laws, City
Codes and regulations, the License Official may issue
a license to the applicant for the retail sale of beer
and/or liquor upon the licensed premises. In the
instance of a renewal application, the License
Official, upon receiving the aforementioned reports
and determining that the applicant has complied with
all applicable requirements, may issue a renewal
license to the applicant. Under this Section, a
renewal application will only be reviewed if it is for
the same applicant and location as the previous
license and for the year immediately following a
licensed year. Otherwise, an initial application is
required.
15-3-9 Display of License. Every license issued
hereunder shall be displayed in accordance with § 15-
1-4.
15-3-10 Transfer of License. Alcohol Licenses
issued under this Chapter shall not be transferable.
15-3-11 Discretion of License Official Licenses
Revocable.
(1) The License Official, may, at his discretion, when
in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare,
refuse to grant any application for a license. No
license shall be issued if the applicant does not
possess all the qualifications required by state law.
Licenses are revocable pursuant to § 5-1-8.
(2) Every Authorized Officer is authorized and
empowered to inspect all licensed premises for
compliance with state law and the City Code,
reporting any violations to the License Official.
15-3-12 Appeal to Decision of License Official.
Any Person aggrieved by the decision of the License
Official may appeal the decision to the City Manager
as established in § 15-1-9 (3) of this Title.
15-3-13 Proximity to Community Locations.
(1) Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter the
premises of a state store, package agency, or
Licensee (an outlet) may not be located:
(a) Within six hundred (600) feet of any public or
private school, church, public library, public
playground, or park as measured from the nearest
entrance of the “outlet” by following the shortest
route of either ordinary pedestrian travel to the
property boundary of the public or private school,
church, public library, public playground, school
playground, or park.
(b) Within two hundred feet (200') of any public or
private school, church, public library, public
playground, or park, measured in a straight line from
the nearest entrance of the proposed “outlet” to the
nearest property boundary of the above named.
(2) With respect to the location of an “outlet,” other
than a state store, the Council may authorize a
variance to reduce the proximity requirement of § (1)
above if:
(a) An application for a variance has been presented
to the State Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission;
(b) The variance reduces the proximity requirement
of § (1)(b) above and the location at issue is:
(i) A public library; or,
(ii) A public park.
(c) A public hearing is held during the Council
meeting where the variance is being presented,
proposed, and decided.
(d) The Council finds, after a full investigation by the
City Planner and License Official that compliance
with distance requirements would result in peculiar
and exceptional practical difficulties or exceptional
and undue hardships in the granting of a license.
(e) The Council finds, a variance from the distance
requirements to relieve the difficulties or hardships
may be accomplished without substantial detriment to
the public good.
(3) Nothing in this section prevents the Council from
considering the proximity of an educational,
religious, and recreational facility, or any other
relevant factor in reaching a decision on a proposed
location of an “outlet.”
(4) If a variance is recommended to the State
Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission the Council
may recommend additional restrictions are imposed
upon a Licensee.
15-3-14 Restaurant Alcohol Licenses.
(1) Any Person applying to the City for a Restaurant
Alcohol License shall meet all applicable
requirements of the Act prior to application.
(2) Before any full service restaurant may sell or
allow the consumption of beer or liquor on its
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
premises, it shall first obtain a Restaurant Alcohol
License, full service, from the City.
(3) Before any limited service restaurant may sell or
allow the consumption of alcohol, as allowed by Utah
State Code, on its premises, it shall first obtain a
Restaurant Alcohol License, limited service, from the
City.
(4) If after obtaining a limited service Restaurant
Alcohol License, a restaurant desires to change to a
full service restaurant it shall reapply through the
process outlined in this Title.
(5) The City may issue either Restaurant Liquor
License at places and in numbers it considers proper
for the storage, sale, and consumption of alcohol on
premises operated as public restaurants.
15-3-15 Club Alcohol License.
(1) Any Person applying to the City for a Club
Alcohol License shall meet all applicable
requirements of the Act prior to application.
(2) A Club Alcohol License issued by the City only
allows the Person who holds the License to operate
under the provisions of the License issued by the
State.
(3) If after obtaining a Club Alcohol License for a
specific type of Club as outlined in the Act the Person
holding a City License desires to change the type of
Club the Person shall reapply through the process
outlined in this Title.
(4) The City may issue a Club Alcohol License at
places and in numbers it considers proper for the
storage, sale, and consumption of alcohol on premises
operated as a club.
(5) No Licensee holding a private club license shall
be located closer than six hundred feet (600') to an
existing private club or Licensee holding an onpremise
beer license. The six hundred feet (600')
shall be measured in a straight line between the
nearest property lines of the subject properties.
(6) A Licensee holding a club alcohol license shall
meet the requirements of § 15-3-3.
15-3-16 Single Event License.
(1) The License Official may issue a single event
permit to a Person as established in the Act.
(2) Persons qualifying for the following permits from
the Commission may qualify for a Single Event
Permit.
(a) Event Permit; or
(b) Special Use Permits.
(3) The permit period shall not exceed seventy-two
(72) hours.
(4) The six hundred feet (600') and two hundred feet
(200') proximity limitations to educational, religious,
and recreational facilities do not apply to single event
permits. Nothing in this Section, however, prevents
the License Official from considering the proximity
of any educational, religious, or recreational facility,
or any other relevant factor in deciding whether to
grant a single event permit.
(5) The City may not issue more than two (2) single
event permits in any one (1) calendar year to the same
applicant as outlined in § (1) above.
(6) A Single Event Permit shall only be issued for the
specific period specified in the application and not to
exceed the limit established in § (3) above.
15-3-17 Single Event License Qualifications -
Specific.
(1) In addition to the requirements established in §
15-3-3, the following qualifications apply to a Single
Event License.
(2) In order to qualify for a single event permit, the
applicant:
(a) May not be the holder of or be affiliated with the
holder of any other type of package agency, Licensee
or permit holder issued under this Chapter; and,
(b) Shall have been in existence as a Person for at
least one (1) year prior to the date of application.
(3) Beer, Wine, Heavy Beer and flavored Malt
Beverages are the only alcoholic beverages that may
be served at a Single Event.
(4) Beer, Heavy Beer, and flavored Malt Beverages
shall only be served in the original containers.
(5) Wine shall be served as established in the Act.
(6) Hours of operation of the event shall be specified
in the application. Hours of serving alcohol shall be
as established in the Act.
15-3-18 Single Event License Requirements.
(1) A Person seeking a single event permit, under this
Chapter, shall file a written application with the City,
in a form prescribed by the licensing department.
(2) Single Events must also comply with the
requirements of Titles 5, 10, 19 and other applicable
sections of this City Code.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(3) Hours of operation for the event shall be specified
in the application. Hours of serving alcohol shall be
as established in the Act.
15-3-19 Beer Retailer License.
(1) Clinton City License Official may issue the
following Beer Retailer Licenses:
(a) Off-Premise Beer License;
(b) On-Premise Beer License; and,
(c) An on-premise beer license qualifying as a
seasonal on-premise beer retailer license for a tavern
in accordance with the Act.
(2) A seasonal on-premise beer license shall only be
issued for the specific period specified in the
application.
(3) All beer licenses shall be issued subject to the
requirements of the Act.
15-3-20 Beer Retailer License Qualifications -
Specific.
(1) In addition to the requirements established in §
15-3-3, the following qualifications apply to a Single
Event License.
(2) Except as outlined in this Title, on-premise beer
retailers may sell beer in open containers, in any size
not exceeding two (2) liters, and on draft.
(3) Liquor may not be stored or sold on the premises
except as allowed by the Act.
15-3-21 Off-Premise Beer License. An off-premise
beer license may be issued to allow the Licensee to
sell beer on the licensed premises in original
containers for consumption off the premises only, in
accordance with the Act and City Codes.
(1) Beer may not be sold, provided, or possessed for
off-premise consumption in containers larger than
two (2) liters.
(2) All employees involved in the transaction of offpremise
retail beer sales will be required to possess
and display a "Beer Handler's Permit" while on duty.
(3) Those businesses possessing this license that are
open twenty-four (24) hours a day shall have all
public entrances and exits and the transaction or
cashier area monitored by video camera and recorder
from the hours of 11:00 p.m. to 5:00 a.m. Cameras
shall be programmed in a manner that the date and
time shall appear on the video tape or film when
being viewed through a monitor. The recorded tapes
will be maintained by the business for a period of not
less than thirty (30) days from the day the recording
ends. Tapes will be made available to the City for
review and auditing purposes upon twenty-four (24)
hours notice, absent exigent circumstances.
(4) Any Licensee may submit plans or proposals to
the Chief of Police or designee to verify compliance
with the intent of this Section. The objective of the
review is to verify that people may be reasonably
identifiable through the camera based on location,
direction, and distance between the camera and
monitored area. Any approval obtained through a
review is neither a guarantee nor warranty of the
effectiveness of the plan or approval but is only to
determine whether the Licensee’s plan or proposal
satisfies the intent hereof. The Chief of Police may
require that cameras be relocated upon inspection of
an established system and the efficiency of that
system.
15-3-22 On-Premise Beer License. A beer retailer
on-premise beer license may be issued to qualifying
businesses.
(1) An on-premise beer license may be issued to an
applicant engaged in good faith in the business of
dispensing and selling beer at retail, in the original
containers or in draft, for consumption on the
premises, over a bar in these establishments:
(a) A tavern;
(b) Bar;
(c) Cabaret;
(d) Pub;
(e) Cocktail lounge; or,
(f) Similar establishments.
(2) Bowling Alley. May be issued a license for the
entire portion of the bowling alley used in the sport of
bowling and recreation.
(3) Golf Course. May be issued a license for the area
of the golf course used in the sport of golfing,
including the clubhouse, fairways, and greens.
(a) Alcohol to be consumed on the golf course shall
be purchased at the golf course.
(b) An individual may not have an open container of
alcoholic beverage within the golf course parking lot.
(c) An individual may not operate a golf cart on or
across a public way with an open container of
alcoholic beverage in the golf cart.
(4) The location of these Licensees shall be limited.
No new Licensee holding an on-premise beer license
shall be located closer than three hundred feet (300')
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
to an existing Licensee holding an on-premise beer
license or club alcohol license. The three hundred feet
(300') shall be measured in a straight line between the
nearest property lines of the subject properties.
15-3-23 State Store / Package Agency. State Stores
and Package Agencies shall only be allowed within
the City, in compliance with the Act, and in
compliance with the Clinton City Zoning Ordinance.
These stores will comply with the distance
requirements set forth in § 15-3-3. In the event a
variance is required, the process outlined in § 15-3-13
will be adhered to.
15-3-24 Qualification of Employees.
(1) Other than as provided in § 15-3-29, any
individual employed by any Licensee under this
Chapter for work involving the transaction, sale,
serving, or dispensing of alcoholic beverages on or
about the licensed premises, whether as manager,
agent, or servant shall be twenty-one (21) years of age
or older, and shall be legally able to work in the
United States.
(2) No one shall be employed who has been
convicted of a felony within five (5) years prior to
employment or who has not secured a judicial pardon
and expungement of the record of any felony
conviction entered prior to the five (5) year period, or
who has within three (3) years prior been convicted of
any violation of any law or City Code involving
moral turpitude, controlled substances, or relating to
alcoholic beverages, driving charges involving
alcohol or drugs, or of keeping a gambling or
disorderly house, or who has pleaded guilty to or has
forfeited bail on any of these charges.
15-3-25 Duty to Report Change of Ownership.
(1) If, during the term of the license year, after the
license has been issued, there shall be any change in
the individuals within any licensed Person or of the
officers or directors of any licensed corporation, the
Licensee shall report the changes in personnel to the
License Official.
(2) If the change involves the individual who is the
officer or director that signed the license application
for the Person holding the License the Person must
file an amended application with the information and
signature of the officer or director representing the
Person along with the document required in § 15-3-
4(1)(g).
(3) Failure to report a change or submit an amended
application to the License Official within thirty (30)
days of the change may make all Alcohol Licenses
issued to the Person by the City subject to being
revoked and notice sent to the State.
15-3-26 Prohibited to Intoxicated Individual. It is
unlawful to sell any alcoholic beverage to any
individual intoxicated or under the influence of any
alcoholic beverage.
15-3-27 Selling to Minors. It is unlawful to sell any
alcoholic beverage to any individual under the age of
twenty-one (21) years and anyone doing so is strictly
liable therefore, and guilty of a class "B"
misdemeanor.
15-3-28 Licensee Permitting Minor on Premises.
It is unlawful for any Licensee, agent, or employee of
an on-premise beer license to permit any individual
under the age of twenty-one (21) years to be in, to
loiter about, or to frequent the licensed premises,
except with regards to bowling alleys and golf
courses where a minor is legitimately involved in
recreational activities. If a minor is legitimately on
the premises of a bowling alley or golf course the
Licensee, agent, or employee shall not allow the
minor to possess or consume any alcoholic beverages.
15-3-29 Minor Serving Alcohol.
(1) It is unlawful for any Licensee under this Chapter
to employ or to permit any individual under the age
of twenty-one (21) years to transact the sale of, serve,
dispense, or handle alcoholic beverages.
(2) Exceptions.
(a) A Licensee holding a restaurant license may
employ individuals eighteen (18) years of age through
twenty (20) years of age to serve alcoholic beverages
provided they are under the supervision of an
individual at least twenty-one (21) years of age and
who is on the premises;
(b) A Licensee holding an off-premise beer license
may employ individuals eighteen (18) years of age
through twenty (20) years of age to transact the sale
of or handle beer in its sealed original containers
provided they are under the supervision of an
individual at least twenty-one (21) years of age and
who is on the premises; or,
(c) The Licensee may also employ individuals sixteen
(16) years of age through seventeen (17) years of age
for the handling of beer, exclusive of transactions, in
its sealed original containers provided they are under
the supervision of an individual at least twenty-one
(21) years of age and who is on the premises. The
activity is limited to the locating, relocating, or
transporting beer upon the premises.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
15-3-30 Parent or Guardian Permitting Minor on
Premises. Except as provided for in § 5-3-29 and 5-
3-30, it is unlawful for any individual having charge
or custody of any minor, to take the minor into, or to
suffer the minor to enter, be in, loiter about, or to
frequent any beer tavern or any premises for which an
on-premise beer license has been issued.
15-3-31 Minor on Premises. It is unlawful for any
individual under the age of twenty-one (21) years to
enter, to be in, to loiter about, or frequent a beer
tavern, or any premises for which an on-premise beer
license has been issued. Minors will be allowed in the
bowling alley and on golf courses for the purpose of
recreation.
15-3-32 Minor in Possession. It is unlawful for any
minor to possess, consume, or possess by
consumption, an alcoholic beverage. A violation of
this Section is a class "B" misdemeanor.
15-3-33 Entering Premises Violating State and
City Laws. It is unlawful for any individual to visit,
to loiter about, to frequent, or to resort to any house,
building, room, or premises where any alcoholic
beverages are kept, stored, sold, bartered, offered, or
exposed for sale in violation of state law or City
Code.
15-3-34 Days of Sale - Closure. The below listed
are the dates of sale by license classification:
(1) Restaurant Alcohol License - From Sunday
through Saturday.
(2) Club Alcohol License - From Sunday through
Saturday.
(3) Off-Premise Beer License - From Sunday through
Saturday.
(4) On-Premise Beer License - From Sunday through
Saturday.
(5) Single Event - From Monday through to 1:00 a.m.
on Sunday.
15-3-35 Advertising Requirements. It is unlawful
for any Person to advertise the sale of beer not in
accordance with state law.
15-3-36 Consumption on Property of an Off-
Premise Beer Retailer. It is unlawful for any
Licensee holding an off-premise beer license to suffer
or allow any individual to consume any alcoholic
beverage upon the premises or upon the lot or parcel
of property on which the licensed premises is located.
15-3-37 Illumination of Premises. It is unlawful for
any Licensee to fail to keep all parts of the licensed
premises to which customers have any access
illuminated with a minimum illumination of three foot
(3') candles at all times it is occupied or open for
business.
15-3-38 Screening of Private Clubs and On-
Premise Beer Retailers. It is unlawful for any
Licensee holding a club alcohol license or on-premise
beer license to keep the licensed premises, or arrange
any booth, stall, furniture, fixture, screens, or curtains
thereon so as to impede a full view of the premises
and all of the occupants therein from the main floor
entrance thereof.
15-3-39 Nuisances on Licensed Premises. It is
unlawful for any Person to commit, keep, or maintain
a nuisance upon any licensed premises. It is unlawful
for any Person to suffer a nuisance to be maintained
upon licensed premises, owned, occupied, operated,
or controlled by him/her or which may be in his
charge.
15-3-40 Beer Acquired from Brewer or
Wholesaler. It is unlawful for any Licensee to
purchase or acquire or to have or possess, or to suffer
to be kept upon the licensed premises, any beer
except that lawfully acquired from a brewer or
wholesaler licensed under the provisions of state law.
15-3-41 On-Premise Employee. It is unlawful for
any Licensee holding an on-premise beer license to
employ or to suffer to work for him upon the licensed
premises, any individual who does not meet the
requirements of employment.
15-3-42 Gambling Devices in Licensed Premises.
It is unlawful for any Licensee hereunder to possess,
store, or display upon the licensed premises any
gambling device or tickets to be bought, kept,
possessed, stored, or displayed upon the premises for
any purpose whatsoever.
15-3-43 Restrictions on Brewer, Jobber, and
Wholesaler. No brewer, jobber, or beer wholesaler
shall directly or indirectly supply, give, or pay for any
furniture, furnishings, or fixtures of a retailer of beer,
nor shall any brewer, beer dealer, or beer wholesaler
advance, furnish money, or pay for any license fee for
a retailer or be financially interested, whether directly
or indirectly, in the conduct or operation of the
business of any retailer, or lend money or grant more
than forty (40) days credit to any retailer.
15-3-44 Premises Accessibility to License Official
and Authorized Officer. It is unlawful for any door
or other means of ingress to or egress from any
licensed premises to be locked or barred or
barricaded in any way so as to interfere with the free
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
entrance to the licensed premises by the License
Official or any Authorized Officer at any time while
the premises are occupied or open to the public, but
all doors or other means of entrance thereto, during
the time the premises are occupied or open to the
public, shall be left unlocked or unfastened so that the
License Official or any Authorized Officer may enter
the same without any hindrance or delay; provided,
however, that there may be maintained upon the
premises a locked storeroom for the keeping of goods
and supplies used in the business. Storerooms shall,
at all times, be subject to search and inspection by the
License Official or any Authorized Officer upon
compliance with procedural requirements. It is
unlawful for any Licensee to deny the License
Official or any Authorized Officer immediate access
to the storeroom for search or inspection upon
demand made for access. It is unlawful for any
Licensee to suffer any individual, except a bona fide
employee of the Licensee the License Official or any
Authorized Officer to enter or remain in the
storeroom.
15-3-45 Warning of Approach of Police or License
Official. It is unlawful for any individual commonly
known as a "lookout" to be stationed or maintained to
give warning of the approach of any Authorized
Officer to the premises. It is unlawful to maintain or
operate any electrical or other device, which is used
or capable of being used to give warning to
individuals within any licensed premises of the
approach of any Authorized Officer.
15-3-46 Disorderly Conduct On-Premise. It is
unlawful for any Licensee to suffer or allow any
disorderly conduct to be committed, or to suffer or
allow any, disorderly individual to be or remain upon
any licensed premises.
15-3-47 Lewd Conduct On-Premise. Licensees
under this Chapter, whose license permits the
consumption of alcoholic beverages on premises,
shall not allow any conduct, by any individual, on the
premises, that is proscribed by state law. Further, the
Licensee shall not allow the fondling of human
genitals, pubic region, buttocks, or female breasts,
nor allow the ultimate sex act, normal or perverted,
actual or simulated, including, but not limited to,
intercourse, oral copulation, sodomy, masturbation,
excretory functions, nor allow any showing of any
visual reproductions showing the same. Further, the
Licensee shall not allow any individual to expose, or
be dressed in a manner so as to expose to the view of
others, the human genitals, pubic regions, buttocks,
the female breasts, at the point immediately above the
top of the areola to the bottom of the breast, the
human male genitals in a discernable turgid state,
even if completely and opaquely covered, nor allow
any visual reproductions showing the same.
15-3-48 Solicitation for Immoral Purposes On-
Premise. It is unlawful for any individual to solicit
any other individual upon any licensed premises for
illicit sexual intercourse or other immoral purpose, or
to be upon premises for the purpose of solicitation. It
is unlawful for any Licensee to suffer or allow any
violation of the immediately preceding prohibition
upon the licensed premises.
15-3-49 Begging Drinks On-Premise. It is unlawful
for any individual upon any public street or upon any
licensed premises to beg or solicit a gift of any
alcoholic beverage.
15-3-50 Sale during License Revocation or
Suspension. It is unlawful for any Person to sell
alcoholic beverage after the revocation of any license
issued to him/her, or during a period of suspension of
license.
15-3-51 Licensee Responsibility. It is unlawful for
any Licensee hereunder, to fail to maintain full
control of the conduct of the business upon the
licensed premises, or to fail to inform himself/herself
of the manner in which the business is conducted and
of the activities of his agents, servants, and employees
in and about the licensed premises, and by accepting
a license hereunder, the Licensee unconditionally
guarantees to the City that neither he nor his agents,
servants, or employees will violate the terms of this
Chapter upon the licensed premises, and for breach of
guarantee the license may be revoked.
15-3-52 Search of Licensed Premises. Every
Licensee, by accepting a license issued under the
provisions of this Chapter, thereby irrevocably
consents that any Authorized Officer, upon
compliance with procedural requirements, may at any
time during the effective period of the license freely
enter and inspect and search the licensed premises for
any alcoholic beverage or for any other goods or
chattels illegally possessed or kept thereon, or for
evidence of any alleged crime under investigation by
an Authorized Officer, and further consents to the
seizure of any alcoholic beverage, goods, chattels, or
evidence, the property of the Licensee, which may be
found therein upon a search.
15-3-53 Manufacturing. Facilities manufacturing
wine, beer, heavy beer, flavored malt beverages or
distilling shall operate as outlined in the Act and only
in areas permitted as established in the Clinton City
Zoning Ordinance.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
15-3-54 Penalty for Violation.
(1) General Provision. A violation of this Chapter
shall be a class "B" misdemeanor, unless otherwise
established by state law.
(2) Enhancement for Licensees. This Subsection
applies to any conviction of class "B" misdemeanors,
or more serious classification of offenses, under this
Chapter or similar state or county laws.
(a) It is specifically provided, that in case of a
Licensee's second conviction, within a twenty-four
(24) month period, the minimum penalty prescribed
shall be not less than Three Hundred Dollars
($300.00), and in case of a Licensee's third or
subsequent conviction under this Chapter within a
twenty-four (24) month period, the minimum penalty
shall be not less than Six Hundred Dollars ($600.00).
For the purposes of this Chapter, the forfeiture of bail
on a charge is deemed a prior conviction. This does
not preclude the enforcement of any civil or
administrative penalties applicable to the violations.
(b) A Licensee can reduce the time periods from
twenty-four (24) months to twelve (12) months used
to calculate second or subsequent convictions by
implementing and conducting regular training for
those employees involved in the transactions of
alcoholic beverages. The training must be in the
proper sales and handling of alcoholic beverages and
must be in addition to the training set forth in this
Section. The Licensee must maintain a record of the
subject matter of the training, the length thereof, and
those in attendance. To qualify for the time period
reduction, training sessions must occur once each six
(6) months, with ninety percent (90%) attendance,
and no employee missing two (2) consecutive
sessions. Training sessions should last a minimum of
fifty (50) minutes each.
(3) Civil Penalties for Permittees. Violations of this
Chapter by a holder of a Beer Handler's Permit shall
result in the following administrative sanctions in
addition to any criminal penalties assessed:
(a) First violation, fourteen (14) day suspension of
permit;
(b) Second violation within a twenty-four (24) month
period, six (6) month suspension of permit;
(c) Third violation within a forty-eight (48) month
period, one (1) year suspension of permit; and,
(d) Fourth violation within a forty-eight (48) month
period, permanent revocation of permit.
(4) Any time period during which a permit is
suspended shall be excluded when calculating the
time period in determining the applicable enhancing
civil penalty.
(5) For purposes of this Chapter, a violation can be
found either as the result of a criminal conviction or
as the result of an administrative hearing under the
licensing provisions of this City Code.
History 11/10; 02/12
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 4. Denial, Suspension or
Revocation of a License
15-4-1 Denial of a Business License or Alcoholic
Beverage License
15-4-2 Reasons for Suspension or Revocation
15-4-3 Enforcement
15-4-4 Procedure for Suspension or Revocation
15-4-5 Appeal to a Decision of the License
Official
15-4-6 Repealed
15-4-7 Repealed
15-4-8 Repealed
15-4-9 Repealed
15-4-10 Licensing After Revocation
15-4-11 Validity of Business License or Alcoholic
Beverage License During Appeal
15-4-12 Business Owner Responsible for
Concessionaire
15-4-1 Denial of a Business License or Alcoholic
Beverage License. Application for a business
license or alcoholic beverage license may be denied
for any of the following reasons:
(1) The applicant does not meet the qualifications for
a licensee as provided under this Title;
(2) For a new application, nonpayment of a returned
check for the required license fees. For a business
license renewal application, nonpayment of the
required license fees plus any applicable penalty. For
an alcoholic beverage license, nonpayment of the
required license fees plus any applicable penalty;
(3) One of the reviewing departments or divisions of
the City provided for in this Title has disapproved the
application pursuant to any applicable provision of
the City Code;
(4) False or incomplete information given on the
application;
(5) Non-compliance with any requirement or
condition set by the Planning Commission or
Community Development Department, if applicable,
under a conditional use permit or by the Board of
Adjustment or Community Development Department
if applicable, granting a variance;
(6) Non-compliance with any city, state or federal
statutes or any Health Department regulations
governing the applicant’s proposed business or,
(7) Any other reason expressly provided for in this
Title.
History: 3/80, 01/99
15-4-2 Reasons for Suspension or Revocation.
An existing business license or alcoholic beverage
license may be suspended or revoked for any of the
following reasons:
(1) The licensee does not now meet the qualifications
for a licensee as provided under this Title;
(2) False or incomplete information given on an
application;
(3) The licensee has violated or is violating any
provision of this Title or provision of the City Code,
state or federal statutes or regulations governing the
licensee’s business;
(4) The licensee has obtained or aided another person
to obtain a license by fraud or deceit;
(5) The licensee has failed to pay property taxes, the
utility tax or sales tax;
(6) The licensee has refused to allow authorized
representatives of the City to make an inspection or
has interfered with such representative while in the
performance of his duty in making such inspection;
(7) The licensee is not complying with a requirement
or condition set by the Planning Commission or
Community Development Department, if applicable,
under a conditional use permit; by the Board of
Adjustment or Community Development Department
if applicable, granting a variance; by the City
Council; or by agreement;
(8) Violation of this Title or of any other laws
committed by any person while acting as an agent or
employee of the licensee; or,
(9) Any other reason expressly provided for in this
Title.
History: 03/80, 01/99
15-4-3 Enforcement.
(1) The Business License Official shall have the
authority, without a hearing, to deny a license for the
reasons provided for in this Chapter.
(2) The Business License Official shall have the
authority to suspend or revoke a license without a
hearing, for reasons provided for in this Chapter.
However, the suspension or revocation shall not take
effect until the time period for appealing the decision
as set forth in this Chapter below has passed.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(3) The Business License Official may, on his or her
own initiative or in response to complaints from the
general public or any City department or division,
investigate and gather evidence of violation of this
Title or other circumstances which may give rise to a
denial, suspension or revocation.
History: 01/99
15-4-4 Procedure for Suspension or Revocation.
The Business License Official shall cause written
notice to be given by personal service or registered
mail to the licensee of his or her decision to suspend
or revoke a license, the reason for such decision, that
operation of a business after the effective date of the
suspension or revocation is a Class “B” misdemeanor,
the licensee’s right to appeal the Business License
Official’s decision and have a hearing, and the appeal
procedure.
History: 01/99
15-4-5 Appeal to a Decision of the License
Official. If the License Official denies the issuance
of a license or permit, suspends or revokes a license
or permit, or orders the cessation of any part of the
business operation conducted under the license or
permit, the aggrieved party may appeal the License
Official’s decision to the City Manager in accordance
with § 15-1-9 (3) of the City Code.
History: 01/99, 10/10
15-4-6 Repealed.
15-4-7 Repealed.
15-4-8 Repealed.
15-4-9 Repealed.
15-4-10 Licensing After Revocation. A person
whose license has been revoked may not be issued a
license for a period of twelve (12) months after the
revocation.
History: 01/99
15-4-11 Validity of Business License or Alcoholic
Beverage License During Appeal. Throughout the
appeal process as outlined above, a licensee holding a
suspended or revoked business or alcoholic beverage
license may continue to operate his or her business in
accordance with federal, state and local laws pending
final decision on the appeal, or until the time for
appeal has passed, whichever occurs first.
History: 01/99
15-4-12 Business Owner Responsible for
Concessionaire. For purposes of business or
premises owners who contract out the sale of
alcoholic beverages on the business premises to an
independent concessionaire, violation by said
concessionaire of any provision of this Title shall
constitute grounds for suspension and/or revocation
of the license of said business or premises owner.
History: 01/99
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 5. Base Fees and Bonding
15-5-1 Definitions
15-5-2 Bonds Required for Certain Businesses
15-5-1 Definitions. Definitions are to be
established to describe businesses which will required
bonding at the time the City Council determines that a
bond for a business is required.
History: 01/99
15-5-2 Bonds Required for Certain Businesses.
(1) The City reserves the right to require businesses
to post a bond with a corporate surety authorized to
do business in the State of Utah, conditioned to
indemnify the City or any individual for any loss,
damage or expense occasioned by any act or failure
to act of the licensee, or by any failure of the licensee
to comply with the laws of the City, the Health
Department or the State.
(2) The City may, by resolution passed by the City
Council, establish types of businesses and bond
amounts required under this section.
History: 01/99
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 6. Employees for Alcohol
Establishments
15-6-1 Definitions
15-6-2 Police I.D. Card Required
15-6-3 Procedure for Obtaining Employee Police
I.D. Card
15-6-4 Cards Required
15-6-5 Duty to Display Card on Request
15-6-6 Business License Required
15-6-7 Place of Performance for Tavern Dancers
15-6-8 Grounds for Denial, Suspension or
Revocation of an Employee’s Police I.D.
Card or a Business License
15-6-9 Prohibited Acts by Employees of Alcohol
Establishments
15-6-10 Enforcement
15-6-11 Procedure for Denial, Suspension or
Revocation
15-6-12 Hearing and Appeal Procedure
15-6-13 Booking Agent Liable for Acts of a
Tavern Dancer
15-6-14 Penalty
15-6-1 Definitions.
“Alcohol Establishment” means a Class ‘B’ or Class
‘C’ beer licensed premises, nonprofit clubs and
nonsales alcoholic beverage licensed premises as
defined in Chapter 3 of this Title.
“Band” means any paid or unpaid musical group
which entertains patrons of alcohol establishments.
“Booking Agent” is any person furnishing booking
or employment services for a tavern dancer, band or
other entertainers.
“Employees of Alcohol Establishments” means all
paid and unpaid persons performing or providing
services as waitresses, barmaids, doormen,
bartenders, parking attendants, persons checking I.D.,
tavern dancers, bands or other entertainers, or any
other service or function in an alcohol establishment.
For Class ‘B’ and Class ‘C’ beer licensed premises,
the term “employee(s)” shall include only those
persons who work in the portion of the premises
primarily intended for the sale and/or consumption of
alcoholic beverages. For non-sales alcoholic beverage
licensed premises, the term “employee(s)” shall
include only those paid employees of the licensee
directly involved in the distribution, serving or
handling of alcoholic beverages.
“Entertainer” means any band or any paid or unpaid
person who conducts any type of performance before
the patrons of an alcohol establishment. For purposes
of this Chapter “entertainer” does not include a tavern
dancer.
“Mingling” means the circulating, mixing or contact
or close, face-to-face conversation between tavern
dancers and patrons of the Class ‘B’ or Class ‘C’
licensed premises or nonprofit club.
“Police Chief” means the Police Chief, as appointed
by the Clinton City Council, of the Clinton City
Police Department.
“Tavern Dancer” means any person, paid or unpaid
who entertains or performs before patrons of alcohol
establishments through use of movement of their
body, including but not limited to dancers, strippers,
mud wrestlers and participants in a wet t-shirt or wet
underwear contest.
History: 01/99
15-6-2 Police I.D. Card Required. It shall be
unlawful for any person to be an employee of an
alcohol establishment without first acquiring a police
I.D. card therefore pursuant to the requirements of
this Chapter. Each day of Non-compliance shall
constitute a separate violation.
History: 01/99
15-6-3 Procedure for Obtaining Employee
Police I.D. Card.
(1) Prior to performing or providing services as an
employee for an alcohol establishment, the applicant
shall submit a signed police I.D. card application to
the Police Department along with the police I.D. fee.
(2) All applicants shall furnish satisfactory proof of
his or her age.
History: 01/99, 10/10
15-6-4 Cards Required. All employees of alcohol
establishments shall have in their possession a valid
police I.D. card, which card is not transferable and
shall not commence work in any alcohol
establishment prior to receiving said card based on
the application required in this Chapter. A receipt for
payment of the police I.D. fee required by this
chapter shall not constitute a valid police I.D. card.
History: 01/99
15-6-5 Duty to Display Card on Request. Should
a police I.D. card be granted, the grantee shall carry
the card in his or her possession, and any authorized
official shall have the right to inspect the police I.D.
card. The police I.D. card shall contain the name,
photo, address and date of birth of the employee, the
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
expiration date of the card and the name of the
booking agent, if applicable.
History: 01/99
15-6-6 Business License Required.
(1) Each booking agent shall obtain a business license
and pay the license fee.
(2) Each tavern dancer shall obtain a business license
and pay the license fee in addition to obtaining a
police I.D. card as provided in this chapter. This
includes all tavern dancers regardless of whether they
are independent, represented by a booking agent, or
an employee of the alcohol establishment.
History: 01/99, 10/10
15-6-7 Place of Performance for Tavern
Dancers. Tavern dancers shall perform only on a
stage, platform or dance floor that has a barrier
between the tavern dancer and patrons where no
tavern dancer is closer than arm’s length from a
naturally positioned patron.
History: 01/99
15-6-8 Grounds for Denial, Suspension or
Revocation of an Employee’s Police I.D. Card or a
Business License. In addition to the reasons set forth
in Chapter 4 of this Title, the City may deny, suspend
or revoke a police I.D. card and license, if applicable,
if the applicant or licensee:
(1) Has violated any provision of this Title;
(2) Has been convicted of any felony or has
completed serving a sentence for any felony
conviction (whichever is most recent) within three (3)
years, or a misdemeanor within the last two (2) years
involving controlled substances, alcohol, sex crimes,
contributing to the delinquency of a minor, or any
criminal act which might relate to the employment of
the applicant;
(3) Has procured, attempted to procure, or agreed to
procure, for any person:
(a) A controlled substance, as defined in U.C.A. 58-
37-1, et seq., 1953 as amended; or,
(b) Another person for the purpose of sexual
intercourse or any other immoral act.
(4) If an employee has attempted to solicit or has
solicited a patron to consume alcoholic beverages; or,
(5) Has utilized his or her license for the purpose of
obtaining credit or as identification for cashing
checks.
15-6-9 Prohibited Acts by Employees of Alcohol
Establishments. The following acts committed by an
employee of an alcohol establishment shall be
unlawful and shall be grounds for the suspension or
revocation of the employee’s police I.D. card and
license, if applicable:
(1) The performance or simulation of sexual
intercourse, masturbation, oral copulation, anal
copulation, bestiality, flagellation, or any sexual acts
prohibited by law;
(2) The simulation or actual touching, caressing or
fondling by the employee of the employee’s own
breasts buttocks, anus or genitalia or the breasts,
buttocks, anus or genitalia or another employee or of
a patron of the alcohol establishment;
(3) Permitting a patron of the alcohol establishment
or another employee to touch, caress or fondle the
employee’s breasts, buttocks, anus or genitalia, or
simulate any such action;
(4) The display or simulation of the display of pubic
hair, buttocks, genitalia, or female breast below a
point immediately above the top of the areola;
(5) Mingling, as defined in this Chapter, unless the
dancer is fully clothed or fully opaquely robed from
the top of the breast to a point mid-thigh; or,
(6) The use of any controlled substance or the
consumption of any alcoholic beverage or being
under the influence of any controlled substance or
alcoholic beverage while performing or providing
services as an employee for any alcohol
establishment.
History: 01/99
15-6-10 Enforcement.
(1) The Police Chief shall have the authority, without
a hearing, to deny a police I.D. card for the reasons
provided in this Chapter. In the case of denial for
submission of false or incomplete information on an
I.D. card application, the Police Chief may impose a
reapplication-waiting period of up to ninety (90) days
in lieu of denial if the incomplete or false information
causing the denial is not related to an alcohol offense.
The imposition of a reapplication-waiting period may
be appealed to the License Hearing Board pursuant to
Section 15-4-6.
(2) The Police Chief shall have the authority, without
a hearing, to suspend or revoke a police I.D. card for
the reasons provided in this Chapter. However, the
suspension or revocation shall not take effect until the
time period for appealing the decision as set forth in
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
this Chapter has passed, or until all appeals properly
initiated have been resolved, whichever occurs first.
(3) The Police Chief may, on his or her own initiative
or in response to complaints from the general public
or any City department or division, investigate and
gather evidence of violations of this Title or other
circumstances which may give rise to a denial,
suspension or revocation.
History: 01/99
15-6-11 Procedure for Denial, Suspension or
Revocation. The Police Chief shall cause written
notice to be given by personal service or registered
mail to the police I.D. cardholder of the following:
his or her decision to deny, suspend or revoke a
police I.D. card: the reason for such decision; that
performing or providing services after the effective
date of the suspension or revocation constitutes a
Class ‘B’ misdemeanor, or if, in the case of a denial,
performing or providing services without a valid
police I.D. card constitutes a Class ‘B’ misdemeanor;
the police I.D. card applicant’s right to appeal the
Police Chief’s decision; the appeal procedure.
History: 01/99
15-6-12 Hearing and Appeal Procedure. The
procedure for hearing an appeal of the Police Chief’s
decision shall be made in accordance with Sections
15-4-5 through 15-4-10 of this Title.
History: 01/99
15-6-13 Booking Agent Liable for Acts of a
Tavern Dancer. The suspension or revocation of the
police I.D. card and/or business license of two (2) or
more tavern dancers, working under the same
booking agent within any twelve (12) month period
shall result in the revocation of the business license of
said booking agent.
History: 01/99
15-6-14 Penalty. Violation of any of the provisions
of this Chapter shall be a Class B misdemeanor.
History: 07/99
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 7. Restaurants
15-7-1 Definitions
15-7-2 Unlawful to Employ Help Under Eighteen
(18) Years of Age After One (1) A.M.
15-7-3 Minors Prohibited on Premises After
Eleven (11) P.M.
15-7-4 Certain Persons Not Allowed in
Restaurants
15-7-1 Definitions.
“Restaurant” means any place where food and
beverages are prepared, served and sold for human
consumption on or off the premises.
History: 01/99
15-7-2 Unlawful to Employ Help Under Eighteen
(18) Years of Age After One (1) A.M. It shall be
unlawful for any restaurant to employ any person
under the age of eighteen (18) years after the hour of
1:00 a.m. and before 6:00 a.m. of any day.
History: 01/99
15-7-3 Minors Prohibited on Premises After
Eleven (11) P.M. It shall be unlawful for any person
holding a restaurant license to allow any person under
the age of sixteen (16) to visit or remain on the
licensed premises after the hour of 11:00 p.m. of any
day unless such minor is accompanied by his parent
or guardian.
History: 01/99
15-7-4 Certain Persons Not Allowed in
Restaurants. It shall be unlawful for any person
licensed under the provisions of this Chapter to
permit to loiter, loaf or idle in his place of business
any known prostitute, gambler, pimp or procurer, or
permit in any such place of business any vulgar,
obscene, gross, indecent or immoral act, conduct, or
disorder. The word “known” shall mean known to
the licensee, or any of his employees, or to the police
or other public authorities having supervision over
such place of business or one who has such a
reputation.
History: 01/99
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 8. Service Stations
15-8-1 Definitions
15-8-2 Non-business Filling Stations
15-8-3 Coin-operated Stations
15-8-4 Food and Beverages
15-8-1 Definitions.
“Service Station” means a place means a place of
business where gasoline or any highly volatile fuels
for motor vehicles or internal combustion engines, are
sold or offered for sale at retail, and dispensed into
the fuel tanks of such motor vehicles. A “service
station” shall also include a private storage tank and
dispensing of such products for the same purposes as
those served by a service station, whether the storage
is maintained for the use or benefit of the owner,
lessees, agents or employees of either, or of any
others.
History: 01/99
15-8-2 Non-business Filling Stations. Any person
maintaining or operating any storage tank for gasoline
for the use of automobiles of the owner, lessee,
employees or agents of such person shall comply with
all the provisions of applicable ordinances except the
payment of a business license fee.
History: 01/99
15-8-3 Coin-operated Stations. It shall be
unlawful for any person to maintain any coinoperated
station without the services of an attendant
on duty at all times.
History: 01/99
15-8-4 Food and Beverages. Food or beverages
shall not be served, sold, or allowed to be consumed
on the premises of a service station without the
licensee first acquiring the necessary food handling
permits and a convenience store business license as
required by this Title.
History: 01/99
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 9. Reserved (Burglar and Robbery
Alarm Systems)
Chapter 10. Christmas Tree Business
15-10-1 Definitions
15-10-2 Business Requirements
15-10-3 Unlawful to Possess or Sell Untagged
Trees
15-10-4 Application for License
15-10-5 Zoning Requirements
15-10-6 Clean-up Deposit
15-10-7 Building Permit Required
15-10-1 Definitions.
“Christmas Tree” means a cut tree, usually fir or
evergreen, but including any tree sold to be decorated
and used as part of the Christmas celebration and
commemoration.
“Christmas Tree Business” means to sell, offer to
sell or display for sale Christmas trees, to the public,
for profit. Each location at which Christmas trees are
sold, offered or displayed for sale shall be considered
a separate business.
History: 01/99
15-10-2 Business Requirements. It shall be
unlawful for any person or entity to operate a
Christmas tree business without meeting the
requirements of this Chapter and obtaining a business
license as required by this Title.
History: 01/99
15-10-3 Unlawful to Possess or Sell Untagged
Trees. It shall be unlawful for any person to have in
his possession for sale, or to sell or offer for sale in
this City trees from within the public domain of the
United States, or of the State of Utah, or from any
private lands, within or without the State of Utah,
without written authority having been first obtained
from the United States, said State of Utah, or from the
owner of such private lands, as the case may be, to
cut and remove such trees. The trees shall have been
officially tagged with a tag furnished or approved
either by the United States Forest Service or the
Department of Forestry of the State of Utah.
History: 01/99
15-10-4 Application for License. In addition to the
information required by Section 15-1-12, an
application to sell and dispose of Christmas trees
within the City shall specifically state and set forth
the source of the title to the trees to be sold and
whether the trees were cut or procured within any
public domain of the United States, or of the State of
Utah, or from any private lands, either within or
without the State of Utah. Applicants shall be
required in connection with such application to
furnish the license official with evidence of
ownership of such trees and/or authority to cut and
procure the same from the public domain or from
private lands.
History: 01/99
15-10-5 Zoning Requirements. A license to operate
a Christmas tree business shall not be issued to any
applicant who does not meet the requirements of the
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance or such other zoning
requirements as may be applicable. The application
shall be reviewed and approved by the Community
Development Director or his designee prior to
issuance of a license.
History: 01/99, 10/10
15-10-6 Clean-up Deposit. A clean-up deposit shall
be required of the licensee to assure the removal of
unsold trees and related debris remaining on the
premises at the conclusion of the license period. The
deposit shall be refunded to the licensee, provided the
premises are left clean and free of the unsold trees
and related debris as determined by inspection.
History: 01/99, 10/10
15-10-7 Building Permit Required. Nothing in this
ordinance is intended to relieve a licensee of the
requirement to obtain a building permit as set forward
in the adopted construction codes. Permits may be
needed for such items as permanent power, festoon
lighting, and temporary water, etc.
History: 01/99
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 11. Solicitors, Peddlers, Vendors, and
Temporary Businesses
PART 1 – SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
15-11-1 Purpose
15-11-2 No Other City License or Approval
Required
15-11-3 Definitions
15-11-4 Exemptions from Chapter
15-11-5 Solicitation Prohibited
15-11-6 Registration of Solicitors
15-11-7 Application Form
15-11-8 Written Disclosures
15-11-9 When Registration Begins
15-11-10 Issuance of Certificates
15-11-11 Form of Certificate and Identification Badge
15-11-12 Maintenance of Registry
15-11-13 Non-Transferability of Certificates
15-11-14 Denial, Suspension or Revocation of a
Certificate of Registration
15-11-15 Appeal
15-11-16 Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited
15-11-17 “No Soliciting” Notice
15-11-18 Duties of Solicitors
15-11-19 Time of Day Restrictions
15-11-20 Buyer’s Right to Cancel
15-11-21 Penalties
15-11-22 Reserved to 15-11-30
PART 2 – VENDORS
15-11-31 Purpose and Intent
15-11-32 License Required
15-11-33 Application for License
15-11-34 Health Inspection Certificate
15-11-35 Health Inspection Mobile Food Service
Decal
15-11-36 Issuance of License
15-11-37 Repealed
15-11-38 Display of Work Cards and Other Permits
15-11-39 Notification of Name or Address Change
15-11-40 Exemptions
15-11-41 Claims of Exemption
15-11-42 Hours of Operation
15-11-43 Littering and Trash Removal
15-11-44 Vending Restrictions
15-11-45 Prohibited Conduct
15-11-46 Use of Public Streets
15-11-47 Suspension and Revocation of License
15-11-48 Appeals
15-11-49 Renewals
15-11-50 Construction
15-11-51 Reserved to 15-11-60
PART 3 – TEMPORARY BUSINESS
15-11-61 License Required
15-11-62 Repealed
15-11-63 Participant License Required
15-11-64 Temporary Business Sponsor License
Required
15-11-65 Repealed
15-11-66 Information Required for Participation
in Sales Events
15-11-67 Determination of Status – Appeals
15-11-68 Each Sale Without a License – Separate
Offense
15-11-69 Bond
15-11-70 Reserved to 15-11-80
PART 1 – SOLICITORS AND PEDDLERS
15-11-1 Purpose.
(1) Residents of the City have an inalienable
interest in their personal safety, well-being, and
privacy in their residences, as well as their ability to
provide or receive information regarding matters of
personal belief, political or charitable activities, and
goods and services lawfully in commerce. The City
has a substantial interest in protecting the wellbeing,
tranquility, personal safety, and privacy of its
citizens, which includes the ability to protect
citizens from unwanted intrusions upon residential
property. The City also has a substantial interest in
protecting citizens from fraud or otherwise unfair
consumer sales practices as well as criminal
activity.
(2) There must be a balance between these
substantial interests of the City and its citizens, and
the effect of the regulations in this Chapter on the
rights of those who are regulated. Based on the
collective experiences of City officials derived from
regulating business activity, protecting persons and
property from criminal conduct, responding to the
inquiries of citizens regarding Door-to-Door
Solicitation, the experience of its law enforcement
officers and those affected by Door-to-Door
canvassing and solicitation, as well as judicial
decisions outlining the boundaries of constitutional
protections afforded and denied persons seeking to
engage in Door-to-Door Solicitation, the City
adopts this Chapter to promote the City’s
substantial interests in:
(a) Respecting citizen(s) decisions regarding
privacy in their residences;
(b) Protecting persons from criminal conduct;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(c) Providing equal opportunity to Advocate for and
against Religious Belief, Political Position, or
Charitable Activities; and,
(d) Permitting truthful and non-misleading Door-to-
Door Solicitation regarding lawful Goods or Services
in intrastate or interstate commerce.
(3) The City finds that the procedures, rules and
regulations set forth in this Chapter are narrowly
tailored to preserve and protect the City interests
referred to herein while at the same time balancing the
rights of those regulated.
15-11-2 No Other City License or Approval
Required.
(1) Registered Solicitors and persons exempt from
Registration need not apply for, nor obtain, any other
license, permit, or registration from the City to engage
in Door-to-Door Solicitation.
(2) Any Business licensed by the City under another
City Ordinance that uses employees, independent
contractors, or agents for Door-to-Door Solicitation in
an effort to provide any tangible or intangible benefit to
the Business, shall be required to have such Solicitors
obtain a Certificate, unless otherwise exempt from
Registration.
(3) Those Responsible Persons or Entities associated
with Registered Solicitors need not apply for, nor
obtain, any other license, permit, or registration from
the City, provided they do not establish a temporary or
fixed place of business in the City.
(4) Nothing herein is intended to interfere with or
supplant any other requirement of federal, state, or
other local government law regarding any license,
permit, or certificate that a Registered Solicitor is
otherwise required to have or maintain.
15-11-3 Definitions. For the purposes of this Chapter,
the following definitions shall apply:
“Advocating” means speech or conduct intended to
inform, promote, or support Religious Belief, Political
Position, or Charitable Activities.
“Appellant” means the person or entity appealing the
denial or suspension of a Certificate, either personally
as an Applicant or registered Solicitor, or on behalf of
the Applicant or Registered Solicitor.
“Applicant” means an individual who is at least
sixteen (16) years of age and not a corporation,
partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful
entity who applies for a Certificate permitting Door-to-
Door Solicitation.
“Application Form” means a standardized form
provided by the City to an Applicant to be
completed and submitted as part of Registration.
“B.C.I.” means an original of the applicants
criminal background check, dated no older than 180
days prior to the date of Application, of either: (1) a
Utah Department of Public Safety Bureau of
Criminal Identification verified criminal history
report personal to the Applicant and equivalent
report prepared by the corresponding public safety
agency of the applicant’s home state if the applicant
is not a Utah resident; or (2) verification by the
Utah Department of Public Safety Bureau of
Criminal Identification that no criminal history
rising to the level of a Disqualifying Status exists
for the Applicant and equivalent report prepared by
the corresponding public safety agency of the
applicant’s home state if the applicant is not a Utah
resident.
“Business License Official” means the City
employee(s) or agent(s) responsible for receiving
from an Applicant or Registered Solicitor the
Completed Application and either granting,
suspending, or denying the Applicant(s) Certificate.
“Certificate” means a temporary, annual, or
renewal Certificate permitting Door-to-Door
Solicitation in the City applied for or issued
pursuant to the terms of this Chapter.
“Charitable Activities” means Advocating by
persons or Entities that either are, or support, a
Charitable Organization.
“Charitable Organization” includes any person,
joint venture, partnership, limited liability company,
corporation, association, group, or other Entity:
(1) That is:
(a) A benevolent, educational, voluntary health,
philanthropic, humane, patriotic, religious or
eleemosynary, social welfare or advocacy, public
health, environmental or conservation, or civic
organization;
(b) For the benefit of a public safety, law
enforcement, or firefighter fraternal association; or,
(c) Established for any charitable purpose; and,
(2) That is tax exempt under applicable provisions
of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended,
and qualified to solicit and receive tax deductible
contributions from the public for charitable
purposes; and,
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(3) Charitable Organization includes a chapter, branch,
area, or office, or similar affiliate or any person
soliciting contributions within the state for a Charitable
Organization that has its principal place of business
outside the City or State of Utah.
“Competent Individual” means a person claiming or
appearing to be at least eighteen (18) years of age and
of sufficiently sound mind and body to be able to
engage in rational thought, conversation, and conduct.
“Completed Application” means a fully completed
Application Form, a B.C.I, two copies of the original
identification relied on by the Applicant to establish
Proof of Identity, and the tendering of Fees.
“Criminally Convicted” means the final entry of a
conviction, whether by a plea of no contest, guilty,
entry of a judicial or jury finding of guilt, which has not
been set aside on appeal or pursuant to a writ of habeas
corpus. The criminal conviction is that offense of which
the Applicant or Registered Solicitor was convicted,
without regard to the reduced status of the charge after
completion of conditions of probation or parole, and
charges dismissed under a plea in abeyance or
diversion agreement.
“Disqualifying Status” means anything specifically
defined in this Chapter as requiring the denial or
suspension of a Certificate, and any of the following:
(1) The Applicant or Registered Solicitor has been
Criminally Convicted of:
(a) Felony homicide;
(b) Physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting
a minor;
(c) The sale or distribution of controlled substances; or,
(d) Sexual assault of any kind.
(2) Criminal charges currently pending against the
Applicant or Registered Solicitor for:
(a) Felony homicide;
(b) Physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting
a minor;
(c) The sale or distribution of controlled substances; or,
(d) Sexual assault of any kind.
(3) The Applicant or Registered Solicitor has been
Criminally Convicted of a felony within the last ten
(10) years;
(4) The Applicant or Registered Solicitor has been
incarcerated in a federal or state prison within the past
five (5) years;
(5) The Applicant or Registered Solicitor has been
Criminally Convicted of a misdemeanor within the
past five (5) years involving a crime of:
(a) Moral turpitude; or,
(b) Violent or aggravated conduct involving
persons or property.
(6) A Final Civil Judgment been entered against the
Applicant or Registered Solicitor within the last five
(5) years indicating that:
(a) The Applicant or Registered Solicitor had either
engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation;
(b) That a debt of the Applicant or Registered
Solicitor was non-dischargeable in bankruptcy
pursuant to 11 U.S.C. ' 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or
(a)(19); or,
(c) The Applicant or Registered Solicitor currently
on parole or probation to any court, penal
institution, or governmental entity, including being
under house arrest or subject to a tracking device.
(7) The Applicant or Registered Solicitor has an
outstanding arrest warrant from any jurisdiction; or,
(8) The Applicant or Registered Solicitor is
currently subject to a protective order based on
physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of
competent jurisdiction.
“Door to Door Solicitation” means the practice of
engaging in or attempting to engage in conversation
with any person at a Residence, whether or not that
person is a Competent Individual, while making or
seeking to make or facilitate a Home Solicitation
Sale, or attempting to further the sale of Goods and
or Services.
“Entity” includes a corporation, partnership,
limited liability company, or other lawful entity,
organization, society or association.
“Fees” means the cost charged to the Applicant or
Registered Solicitor for the issuance of a Certificate
and/or Identification Badge, which shall not exceed
the reasonable costs of processing the application
and issuing the Certificate and/or Identification
Badge.
“Final Civil Judgment” means a civil judgment
that would be recognized under state law as a
judgment to which collateral estoppels would apply.
“Goods” means one or more tangible items, wares,
objects of merchandise, perishables of any kind,
subscriptions, or manufactured products offered,
provided, or sold.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
“Hearing Board” means the City Council or designee
of the City responsible for receiving the information
from the City and Appellant regarding the denial or
suspension of a Certificate and issuing a decision as
required by this Chapter.
“Home Solicitation Sale” means to make or attempt to
make a Sale of Goods or Services by a Solicitor at a
Residence by means of Door-to-Door Solicitation,
regardless of:
(1) The means of payment or consideration used for the
purchase;
(2) The time of delivery of the Goods or Services; or,
(3) The previous or present classification of the
Solicitor as a solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant
merchant, or similar designation.
“No Solicitation Sign” means a reasonably visible and
legible sign that states No Soliciting, No Solicitors, No
Salespersons, No Trespassing, or words of similar
import.
“Political Position” means any actually held belief, or
information for, against, or in conjunction with any
political, social, environmental, or humanitarian belief
or practice.
“Registered Solicitor” means any person who has
been issued a current Certificate by the City.
“Registration” means the process used by the City
Business License Official to accept a Completed
Application and determine whether or not a Certificate
will be denied, granted, or suspended.
“Religious Belief” means any sincerely held belief, or
information for, against, or in conjunction with, any
theistic, agnostic, or atheistic assumption, presumption
or position, or religious doctrine, dogma, or practice
regardless of whether or not the belief or information is
endorsed by any other person or public or private
entity.
“Residence” means any living unit contained within
any building or structure that is occupied by any person
as a dwelling consistent with the zoning laws of the
City, together with the lot or other real property on
which the living unit is located. This does not include
the sidewalk, public street or public rights of way.
“Responsible Person or Entity” means that person or
Entity responsible to provide the following to an
Applicant, Registered Solicitor, and the Competent
Individual in a Residence to whom a Sale of Goods or
Services is made or attempted to be made by means of
a Home Solicitation Sale:
(1) Maintaining a state sales tax number, a special
events sales tax number, computing the sales taxes
owing from any Sale of Goods or Services, paying
the sales taxes, and filing any required returns or
reports;
(2) Facilitating and responding to requests from
consumers who desire to cancel the sale pursuant to
applicable contractual rights or law; and,
(3) Refunding any monies paid or reversing credit
card charges to those persons who timely rescind
any sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or
law.
“Sale of Goods or Services” means the conduct
and agreement of a Solicitor and the Competent
Individual in a Residence regarding a particular
Good(s) or Service(s) that entitles the consumer to
rescind the same within three days under any
applicable federal, state, or local law.
“Services” means those intangible goods or
personal benefits offered, provided, or sold to a
Competent Individual of a Residence.
“Soliciting” or “Solicit” or “Solicitation” means
any of the following activities:
(1) Seeking to obtain Sales or orders for the
exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or
perishables of any kind, for any kind of
remuneration or consideration, regardless of
whether advance payment is sought;
(2) Seeking to obtain prospective customers to
apply for or to purchase insurance, subscriptions to
publications, or publications;
(3) Seeking to obtain contributions of money or any
other thing of value for the benefit of any person or
Entity;
(4) Seeking to obtain orders or prospective
customers for Goods or services;
(5) Seeking to engage an individual in conversation
at a Residence for the purpose of promoting or
facilitating the receipt of information regarding
Religious Belief, Political Position, Charitable
Conduct, or a Home Solicitation Sale; or,
(6) Other activities falling within the commonly
accepted definition of Soliciting, such as hawking
or peddling.
“Solicitor or Solicitors” means a person(s)
engaged in Door-to-Door Solicitation.
“Submitted in Writing” means the information for
an appeal of a denial or suspension of a Certificate,
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
submitted in any type of written statement to the City
offices by certified, registered, priority, overnight or
delivery confirmation mail, facsimile, or hand delivery.
“Substantiated Report” means an oral, written, or
electronic report that is submitted to and documented
by the City:
(1) By any of the following:
(a) A Competent Individual who is willing to provide
law enforcement or other City employees with publicly
available identification of their name, address, and any
other reliable means of contact;
(b) City law enforcement or Business License Official;
or,
(c) Any other regularly established law enforcement
agency at any level of government.
(2) That provides any of the following information
regarding a Registered Solicitor:
(a) Documented verification of a previously
undisclosed Disqualifying Status of a Registered
Solicitor;
(b) Probable cause that the Registered Solicitor has
committed a Disqualifying Status which has not yet
been determined to be a Disqualifying Status;
(c) Documented, eye-witness accounts that the
Registered Solicitor has engaged in repeated patterns of
behavior that demonstrates failure by the Registered
Solicitor to adhere to the requirements of this Chapter;
or,
(d) Probable cause that continued licensing of the
Registered Solicitor creates exigent circumstances that
threaten the health, safety, or welfare of any individuals
or entities within the City.
“Waiver” means the written form provided to
Applicant by the City wherein Applicant agrees that the
City may obtain a name/date of birth BCI background
check on the Applicant for licensing purposes under
this Chapter, and which contains Applicant(s) notarized
signature.
History: 04/12
15-11-4 Exemptions from Chapter. The following
are exempt from Registration under this Chapter:
(1) Persons specifically invited to a Residence by a
Competent Individual prior to the time of the person(s)
arrival at the Residence;
(a) Persons whose license, permit, certificate or
registration with the State of Utah permits them to
engage in Door to Door Solicitation to offer Goods
or Services to an occupant of the Residence;
(b) Persons delivering Goods to a Residence
pursuant to a previously made order, or persons
providing Services at a Residence pursuant to a
previously made request by a Competent Individual;
(c) Persons advocating or disseminating
information for, against, or in conjunction with, any
Religious Belief, or Political Position regardless of
whether Goods, Services, or any other consideration
is offered or given, with or without any form of
commitment, contribution, donation, pledge, or
purchase; and,
(d) Persons representing a Charitable Organization.
The charitable exemption shall apply to students
Soliciting contributions to finance extracurricular
social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural
programs, provided that the Solicitation has been
approved in writing by the school administration,
and that such student Solicitors carry current picture
student identification from the educational
institution for which they are soliciting.
(2) Those Persons exempt from Registration are not
exempt from the duties and prohibitions outlined in
Sections 15-11-17, 15-11-18, and 15-11-19 while
Advocating or Soliciting.
15-11-5 Solicitation Prohibited. Unless otherwise
authorized, permitted, or exempted pursuant to the
terms and provisions of this Chapter, the practice of
being in and upon a private Residence within the
City by Solicitors, for the purpose of Home
Solicitation Sales or to provide Goods or Services,
is prohibited and is punishable as set forth in this
Chapter.
15-11-6 Registration of Solicitors. Unless
otherwise exempt under this Chapter, all persons
desiring to engage in Door-to-Door Solicitation
within the City, prior to doing so, shall submit a
Completed Application to the Business License
Official and obtain a Certificate.
15-11-7 Application Form. The Business License
Official shall provide a standard Application Form
for use for the Registration of Solicitors. Upon
request to the Business License Official, or as
otherwise provided, any person or Entity may
obtain in person, by mail, or facsimile, a copy of
this Application Form. Each Application Form
shall require disclosure and reporting by the
Applicant of the following information,
documentation, and fee:
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(1) Review of Written Disclosures. An affirmation that
the Applicant has received and reviewed the disclosure
information required by this Chapter;
(2) Contact Information:
(a) Applicant(s) true, correct and legal name, including
any former names or aliases used during the last ten
(10) years;
(b) Applicant(s) telephone number, home address and
mailing address, if different;
(c) If different from the Applicant, the name, address,
and telephone number of the Responsible Person or
Entity; and,
(d) The address by which all notices to the Applicant
required under this Chapter are to be sent.
(3) Proof of Identity.
(a) An in-person verification by the Business License
Official of the Applicant(s) true identity by use of any
of the following which bear a photograph of said
Applicant:
(i) A valid driver’s license issued by any State;
(ii) A valid passport issued by the United States;
(iii) A valid identification card issued by any State; or,
(iv) A valid identification issued by a branch of the
United States military.
(b) Upon verification of identity, the original
identification submitted to establish Proof of Identity
shall be returned to the Applicant.
(4) Proof of Registration with Department of
Commerce. The Applicant shall provide proof that
either the Applicant, or the Responsible Person or
Entity, has registered with the Utah State Department
of Commerce.
(5) Special Events Sales Tax Number. When Soliciting
in Clinton City the Applicant shall provide a special
event sales tax number for either the Applicant, or for
the Responsible Person or Entity for which the
Applicant will be soliciting.
(6) Marketing Information.
(a) The Goods or Services offered by the Applicant,
including any commonly known, registered or
trademarked names; and,
(b) Whether the Applicant holds any other licenses,
permits, registrations, or other qualifications required
by federal or state law to promote, provide, or render
advice regarding the offered Goods or Services.
(7) BCI Background Check. The Applicant shall
provide:
(a) An original BCI background check as defined in
15-11-3; and,
(b) A signed copy of a Waiver whereby Applicant
agrees to allow the City to obtain a name/date of
birth BCI background check on Applicant for
purposes of enforcement of this Chapter.
(8) Responses to Questions Regarding a
Disqualifying Status. The Applicant shall be
required to affirm or deny each of the following
statements on the Application Form:
(a) Has the Applicant been Criminally Convicted
of:
(i) Felony homicide;
(ii) Physically abusing, sexually abusing, or
exploiting a minor;
(iii) The sale or distribution of controlled
substances, or,
(iv) Sexual assault of any kind.
(b) Are any criminal charges currently pending
against the Applicant for:
(i) Felony homicide;
(ii) Physically abusing, sexually abusing, or
exploiting a minor;
(iii) The sale or distribution of controlled
substances, or,
(iv) Sexual assault of any kind.
(c) Has the Applicant been Criminally Convicted of
a felony within the last ten (10) years;
(d) Has the Applicant been incarcerated in a federal
or state prison within the past five (5) years;
(e) Has the Applicant been Criminally Convicted of
a misdemeanor within the past five (5) years
involving a crime of:
(i) Moral turpitude; or,
(ii) Violent or aggravated conduct involving
persons or property.
(f) Has a Final Civil Judgment been entered against
the Applicant within the last five (5) years
indicating that:
(i) The Applicant had either engaged in fraud, or,
(ii) Intentional misrepresentation, or, (ii) that a debt
of the Applicant was non-dischargeable in
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
bankruptcy pursuant to 11 U.S.C. ' 523(a)(2), (a)(4),
(a)(6), or (a)(19).
(g) Is the Applicant currently on parole or probation to
any court, penal institution, or governmental entity,
including being under house arrest or subject to a
tracking device;
(h) Does the Applicant have an outstanding arrest
warrant from any jurisdiction; or,
(i) Is the Applicant currently subject to a protective
order based on physical or sexual abuse issued by a
court of competent jurisdiction.
(9) Fee. The Applicant shall pay such fees as
determined applicable by the City, which shall not
exceed the reasonable cost of processing the
application and issuing the Certificate and/or
Identification Badge.
(10) Execution of Application. The Applicant shall
execute the Application Form, stating upon oath or
affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that based on the
present knowledge and belief of the Applicant, the
information provided is complete, truthful and accurate.
15-11-8 Written Disclosures. The Application Form
shall be accompanied by written disclosures notifying
the Applicant of the following:
(1) The Applicant(s) submission of the Application
authorizes the City to verify information submitted with
the Completed Application including:
(a) The Applicant(s) address;
(b) The Applicant(s) and/or Responsible Person or
Entity(s) state tax identification and special use tax
numbers, if any; and,
(c) The validity of the Applicant(s) Proof of Identity.
(2) The City may consult any publicly available sources
for information on the Applicant, including but not
limited to, databases for any outstanding warrants,
protective orders, or civil judgments;
(3) Establishing Proof of Identity is required before
Registration is allowed;
(4) Identification of the fee amount that must be
submitted by Applicant with a Completed Application;
(5) The Applicant must submit a BCI background
check with a Completed Application;
(6) To the extent permitted by State and/or federal law,
the Applicant(s) BCI background check shall remain a
confidential, protected, private record not available for
public inspection;
(7) The City will maintain copies of the
Applicant(s) Application Form, Proof of Identity,
and Identification Badge. These copies will
become public records available for inspection on
demand at the City offices whether or not a
Certificate is denied, granted, or renewed;
(8) The criteria for Disqualifying Status, denial, or
suspension of a Certificate under the provisions of
this Chapter; and,
(9) That a request for a temporary Certificate,
turned in by 3:00 p.m., will be granted or denied the
same business day that a Completed Application is
submitted.
15-11-9 When Registration Begins. The Business
License Officer shall not begin the Registration
process unless the Applicant has submitted a
Completed Application. The original identification
submitted to establish Proof of Identity shall be
returned after the Business License Officer verifies
the Applicant(s) identity. A copy of the
identification may be retained by the Business
License Officer. If an original B.C.I. background
check is submitted by the Applicant, the Business
License Officer shall make a copy of the B.C.I. and
return the original to the Applicant.
15-11-10 Issuance of Certificates. The Business
License Officer shall review the Completed
Application submitted by the Applicant and issue a
Certificate in accordance with the following:
(1) Temporary Certificate.
(a) A temporary Certificate shall be issued by the
Business License Official or an authorized officer
allowing the Applicant to immediately begin Doorto-
Door Solicitation upon the following conditions:
(i) Applicant(s) submission of a Completed
Application;
(ii) Applicant(s) submission of the required fee;
(iii) Applicant establishes Proof of Identity;
(iv) The Applicant(s) representations on the
Application Form do not affirmatively show a
Disqualifying Status;
(v) The B.C.I. does not affirmatively show a
Disqualifying Status; and,
(vi) The Applicant has not previously been denied a
Certificate by the City, or had a Certificate revoked
for grounds that still constitute a Disqualifying
Status under this Chapter.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(b) A temporary Certificate will automatically expire
after twenty-five (25) calendar days from issuance, or
upon grant or denial of an annual Certificate, whichever
period is shorter; or,
(2) Annual Certificate. Within twenty-five (25)
calendar days of the issuance of a temporary Certificate
the City shall:
(a) Take any and all actions it deems appropriate to
verify the truthfulness and completeness of the
information submitted by the Applicant, including, but
not limited to those disclosed with the Application
Form;
(b) Issue written notice to the Applicant and the
Responsible Person or Entity, if any, that the Applicant
either:
(i) Will be issued an annual Certificate, eligible for
renewal one year from the date of issuance of the
temporary Certificate; or,
(ii) Will not be issued an Annual Certificate for reasons
cited in Section 15-11-14 of this Chapter; or,
(3) Renewal Certificate. An annual Certificate shall be
valid for one year from the date of issuance of the
temporary Certificate and shall expire at midnight on
the anniversary date of issuance. Any annual
Certificate that is not suspended, revoked, or expired
may be renewed upon the request of the Registered
Solicitor and the submission of a new Completed
Application and payment of the Fee, unless any of the
conditions for the denial, suspension or revocation of a
Certificate are present as set forth in section 15-11-14,
or a Disqualifying Status is present.
15-11-11 Form of Certificate and Identification
Badge.
(1) Certificate Form. Should the Business License
Official determine that the Applicant is entitled to a
Certificate, the Business License Official shall issue a
Certificate to the Applicant. The Certificate shall list
the name of the Registered Solicitor and the
Responsible Person or Entity, if any, and the date on
which the Certificate expires. The Certificate shall be
dated and signed by the Business License Official. The
Certificate shall be carried by the Registered Solicitor
at all times while soliciting in the City.
(2) Identification Badge. With both the temporary and
annual Certificates, the City shall issue each Registered
Solicitor an Identification Badge that shall be worn
prominently on his or her person while soliciting in the
City. The Identification Badge shall bear the name of
the City and shall contain: (a) the name of the
Registered Solicitor; (b) address and phone number of
the Registered Solicitor, or the name, address, and
phone number of the Responsible Person or Entity
is provided; (c) a recent photograph of the
Registered Solicitor; and (d) the date on which the
Certificate expires.
15-11-12 Maintenance of Registry. The Business
License Official shall maintain and make available
for public inspection a copy or record of every
Completed Application received and the Certificate
or written denial issued by the City. The
Applicant(s) BCI background check shall remain a
confidential, protected, private record not available
for public inspection. The Business License
Official may furnish to the head of the City(s) law
enforcement agency a listing of all Applicants,
those denied, and those issued a Certificate.
15-11-13 Non-Transferability of Certificates.
Certificates shall be issued only in the name of the
Applicant and shall list the Responsible Party or
Entity, if any. The Certificate shall be nontransferable.
A Registered Solicitor desiring to
facilitate or attempt to facilitate Home Solicitation
Sales with different: (a) Goods or Services; or (b)
Responsible Person or Entity, from those
designated in the originally submitted Completed
Application, shall submit a written change request
to the Business License Official. A new Certificate
based on the amended information shall issue for
the balance of time remaining on the Solicitor(s)
previous Certificate before the amendment was
filed. Before the new Certificate is given to the
Registered Solicitor, the Registered Solicitor shall
obtain a revised Identification Badge from the City,
after payment of the Fee for the Identification
Badge.
15-11-14 Denial, Suspension or Revocation of a
Certificate of Registration.
(1) Denial. Upon review, the Business License
Official shall refuse to issue a Certificate to an
Applicant for any of the following reasons:
(a) Denial of Temporary Certificate:
(i) The Application Form is not complete;
(ii) the Applicant fails to:
(A) Establish Proof of Identity;
(B) Provide a B.C.I.; or,
(C) Pay the Fees.
(iii) The Completed Application or B.C.I. indicates
that the Applicant has a Disqualifying Status; or,
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(iv) The Applicant has previously been denied a
Certificate by the City, or has had a Certificate revoked
for grounds that still constitute a Disqualifying Status
under this chapter.
(b) Denial of Annual Certificate.
(i) The information submitted by the Applicant at the
time of the granting of the temporary Certificate is
found to be incomplete or incorrect;
(ii) Since the submission of the Completed Application,
the Applicant is subject to a previously undisclosed or
unknown Disqualifying Status;
(iii) Failure to complete payment of the Fees;
(iv) Since the submission of the Application, the City
has received a Substantiated Report regarding the past
or present conduct of the Applicant;
(v) Since the submission of the Application, the City or
other governmental entity has either Criminally
Convicted or obtained a civil injunction against the
Applicant for violating this Chapter or similar Federal,
State, or municipal laws in a manner rising to the level
of a Disqualifying Status; or,
(vi) Since the submission of the Application, a Final
Civil Judgment has been entered against the Applicant
indicating that: (i) the Applicant had either engaged in
fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or (ii) that a
debt of the applicant was non-dischargeable in
bankruptcy pursuant to 11 U.S.C. ' 523(a)(2), (a)(4),
(a)(6), or (a)(19).
(c) Denial of Annual Certificate Renewal.
(i) The information submitted by the Applicant when
seeking renewal of a Certificate is found to be
incomplete or incorrect;
(ii) Since the submission of the renewal Application,
the Applicant is subject to a previously undisclosed or
unknown Disqualifying Status;
(iii) Failure to complete payment of the Fees;
(iv) Since the submission of the Application or granting
of a Certificate, the City has received a Substantiated
Report regarding the past or present conduct of the
Solicitor;
(v) The City or other governmental entity has either
Criminally Convicted or obtained a civil injunction
against the Applicant for violating this Chapter or
similar Federal, State, or municipal laws in a manner
rising to the level of a Disqualifying Status; or,
(vi) Since the submission of the Application, a Final
Civil Judgment has been entered against the Applicant
indicating that: (i) the Applicant had either engaged
in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or (ii) that
a debt of the applicant was non-dischargeable in
bankruptcy pursuant to 11 U.S.C. ' 523(a)(2),
(a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
(2) Suspension or Revocation. The City shall either
suspend or revoke a Certificate when any of the
reasons warranting the denial of a Certificate
occurs. At the time of suspension the Solicitor must
surrender the issued I.D. badge and certificate.
(3) Notice of Denial or Suspension. Upon
determination of the Business License Official to
deny an Applicant(s) Completed Application or to
suspend a Registered Solicitor(s) Certificate, the
City shall cause written notice to be sent to the
Applicant or Registered Solicitor by the method
indicated in the Completed Application. The
Notice shall specify the grounds for the denial or
suspension, the documentation or information the
City relied on to make the decision, the availability
of the documentation for review by Applicant upon
one (1) business day notice to the City, and the date
upon which the denial or suspension of the
Certificate shall take effect. It shall further state
that the Applicant or Registered Solicitor shall have
ten (10) business days from the receipt of the notice
of denial or suspension to appeal the same. The
denial or suspension of the Certificate shall be
effective no sooner than two (2) calendar days from
the date the notice is sent, unless that suspension is
because of exigent circumstances outlined in
Section 15-11-3(“Substantiated Report”)(2)(d), in
which case, the suspension is effective immediately.
The denial or suspension shall remain effective
unless and until the order is rescinded, overturned
on appeal, or determined by a court to be contrary
to equity or law. Failure to appeal the suspension
of a Certificate automatically results in its
revocation.
15-11-15 Appeal. An Applicant or Registered
Solicitor whose Certificate has been denied or
suspended shall have the right to appeal to the City
Council or its designee. Any appeal must be
submitted by the Applicant, the Responsible Person
or Entity, or legal counsel for either whom: (a)
documents the relationship with the Applicant or
Responsible Person or Entity; or (b) is licensed or
authorized by the State of Utah to do so, and makes
the assertion of an agency relationship. The
following procedures and requirements shall apply:
(1) Any appeal must be submitted in Writing to the
City Recorder with a copy to the Business License
Official within ten (10) business days of the
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
decision from which the appeal is taken. Such appeal
shall describe in detail the nature of the appeal, the
action complained of and the grounds for appeal;
(2) Upon request of the Applicant or Registered
Solicitor, within one business day, the City will make
available any information upon which it relied in
making the determination to either deny or suspend the
Certificate;
(3) The Hearing Board shall review, de novo, all
written information submitted by the Applicant or
Registered Solicitor to the Business License Official,
any additional information relied upon by the Business
License Official as the basis for denial, suspension or
revocation, and any additional information supplied by
the City, Applicant or Registered Solicitor. Any
additional information submitted by any party to the
appeal to the Hearing Board shall be simultaneously
submitted to the opposing party. If desired, any party
shall have three (3) business days to submit rebuttal
documentation to the Hearing Board regarding the
additional information submitted by the opposing party;
(4) The Hearing Board will render a decision no later
than fifteen (15) calendar days from the date the appeal
was taken, unless an extension of time is agreed upon
by the parties. In the event that any party to the appeal
submits rebuttal information as allowed in Section 15-
11-15 (3), the fifteen (15) calendar days shall be
extended to include the additional three (3) days for
rebuttal:
(a) The denial or suspension of the Certificate shall be
reversed by the Hearing Board if upon review of the
written appeal and information submitted, the Hearing
Board finds that the Business License Official made a
material mistake of law or fact in denying or
suspending the Applicant or Registered Solicitor(s)
Certificate;
(b) If the written appeal and information submitted
indicates that the Business License Official properly
denied or suspended the certificate of the Applicant or
Registered Solicitor, the denial or suspension of the
Certificate shall be affirmed and constitute a
determination that the suspended Certificate is revoked;
or,
(c) The decision of the Hearing Board shall be
delivered to the Applicant or Registered Solicitor by
the means designated in the completed Application, or
as otherwise agreed upon when the Appeal was filed.
(5) After the ruling of the Hearing Board, the Applicant
or Solicitor is deemed to have exhausted all
administrative remedies with the City; and,
(6) Nothing herein shall impede or interfere with
the Applicant(s), Solicitor(s), or City(s) right to
seek relief in a court of competent jurisdiction.
15-11-16 Deceptive Soliciting Practices
Prohibited.
(1) No Solicitor shall intentionally make any
materially false or fraudulent statement in the
course of Soliciting.
(2) A Solicitor shall immediately disclose to the
consumer during face-to-face Solicitation; (i) the
name of the Solicitor; (ii) the name and address of
the entity with whom the Solicitor is associated; and
(iii) the purpose of the Solicitor's contact with the
person and/or Competent Individual. This
requirement may be satisfied through the use of the
Badge and an informational flyer.
(3) No Solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias,
or any name other than his or her true and correct
name.
(4) No Solicitor shall represent directly or by
implication that the granting of a Certificate of
Registration implies any endorsement by the City of
the Solicitor's Goods or Services or of the
individual Solicitor.
15-11-17 "No Solicitation" Notice.
(1) Any occupant of a Residence may give notice of
a desire to refuse Solicitors by displaying a No
Solicitation sign which shall be posted on or near
the main entrance door or on or near the property
line adjacent to the sidewalk leading to the
Residence.
(2) The display of such sign or placard shall be
deemed to constitute notice to any Solicitor that the
inhabitant of the Residence does not desire to
receive and/or does not invite Solicitors.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the Solicitor to
check each Residence for the presence of any such
Notice.
(4) The provisions of this Section shall apply also
to Solicitors who are exempt from Registration
pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
15-11-18 Duties of Solicitors.
(1) Every person Soliciting or Advocating shall
check each Residence for any "No Soliciting" sign
or placard or any other notice or sign notifying a
solicitor not to solicit on the premises, such as, but
not limited to, "No Solicitation" signs. If such sign
or placard is posted such Solicitor shall desist from
any efforts to solicit at the Residence or dwelling
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
and shall immediately depart from such property.
Possession of a Certificate of Registration does not in
any way relieve any solicitor of this duty.
(2) It is a violation of this Chapter for any person
Soliciting or Advocating to knock on the door, ring the
doorbell, or in any other manner attempt to attract the
attention of an occupant of a Residence that bears a No
Solicitation sign or similar sign or placard for the
purpose of engaging in or attempting to engage in
Advocating, a Home Solicitation Sale, Door-to-Door
Soliciting, or Soliciting.
(3) It is a violation of this Chapter for any Solicitor
through ruse, deception, or fraudulent concealment of a
purpose to Solicit, to take action calculated to secure an
audience with an occupant at a Residence.
(4) Any Solicitor who is at any time asked by an
occupant of a Residence or dwelling to leave shall
immediately and peacefully depart.
(5) The Solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly
make any physical contact with, or touch another
person without the person(s) consent.
(6) The Solicitor shall not follow a person into a
Residence without their explicit consent.
(7) The Solicitor shall not continue repeated Soliciting
after a person and/or Competent Individual has
communicated clearly and unequivocally their lack of
interest in the subject, Goods or Services of the
Solicitor.
(8) The Solicitor shall not use obscene language or
gestures.
(9) The Solicitor shall have both a valid certificate and
badge with them at all times.
(10) The Solicitor shall not pursue a sale at a residence
without an adult or someone of at least 18 years of age
being present.
15-11-19 Time of Day Restrictions. It shall be
unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to
solicit at a Residence before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00
p.m. Mountain Time, unless the Solicitor has express
prior permission from the resident to do so.
15-11-20 Buyer's Right to Cancel. In any Home
Solicitation Sale, unless the buyer requests the Solicitor
to provide Goods or Services without delay in an
emergency, the seller or Solicitor shall present to the
buyer and obtain buyer's signature to a written
statement which informs the buyer of the right to cancel
within the third business day after signing an agreement
to purchase. Such notice of "Buyer's right to cancel"
shall be in the form required by ' 70C-5-103, Utah
Code Annotated, 1953, or a current version thereof
or any State or Federal law modifying or amending
such provision.
15-11-21 Penalties. Any person who violates any
term or provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a
Class C Misdemeanor and shall be punished by a
fine of not to exceed $750.00 and/or a jail sentence
of not to exceed three (3) months.
15-11-22 Reserved to 15-11-30.
History 01/07 (Rewritten); 04/12
PART 2 – VENDORS
15-11-31 Purpose and Intent. It is the intent of
this Chapter to:
(1) Serve and protect the health, safety, and welfare
of the general public;
(2) Establish a uniform set of rules and regulations
that are fair and equitable; and,
(3) Enhance the overall safety, appearance, and
environment along public streets, pedestrian ways,
and other public properties.
History: 01/99
15-11-32 License Required. It shall be unlawful
for any person to engage in the business of vending
unless he/she has first obtained a license from the
Business License Official. All licenses shall be
issued according to regulations established by the
Community Development Department.
History: 01/99
15-11-33 Application for License. The
application for a vending license shall contain all
information relevant and necessary to determine
whether a particular license may be issued,
including, but not limited to:
(1) The applicant’s full name, current address,
telephone number, and proof of identity;
(2) A brief description of the nature, character, and
quality of goods, wares, or merchandise to be
offered for sale;
(3) The specific location, if any in which the vendor
intends to conduct business;
(4) If the applicant is employed by another, the
name and address of the person, firm, association,
organization, company, or corporation;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(5) If one or more motor vehicles, or other conveyance
is to be used, a description of the vehicle(s), together
with the motor vehicle(s) registration number and
license number; and,
(6) If a motor vehicle, or other conveyance is to be
used, a copy of the Davis County Health Department
documentation verifying that the vehicle(s) have passed
the required inspections.
(7) BCI Background Check. The Applicant shall
provide:
(a) An original or a copy of a BCI background check as
defined in 15-11-3; and,
(b) A signed copy of a Waiver whereby Applicant
agrees to allow the City to obtain a name/date of birth
BCI background check on Applicant for purposes of
enforcement of this Chapter.
History: 01/99, 10/10
15-11-34 Health Inspection Certificate. Any
application for a vending license to engage in the sale
of food or beverages shall require a health permit from
Davis County in addition to the regular vending license.
The applicant’s equipment shall be subject to
inspection by the County Health Department at the time
of application and at periodic intervals thereafter.
History: 01/99
15-11-35 Health Inspection Mobile Food Service
Decal. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, offer
to sell, or display for sale food or beverages from a
vehicle which does not properly display current Davis
County Health Department Mobile Food Service
Decals.
History: 01/99
15-11-36 Issuance of License.
(1) The Official shall notify the applicant in writing of
the City’s decision to issue or deny the vending license
not later than thirty 30 days after the applicant has filed
a complete application with the Official. Any applicant
for a license to sell food and beverages, whose
application receives the approval of the County Health
Department, shall be issued a vending license with a
copy of the county health permit attached.
(2) Each license shall show the name and address of the
licensee, the type of license issued, the kind of goods to
be sold, the amount of the license fee, the date of
issuance, the license number, an identifying description
of any vehicle or conveyance used by the licensee plus,
where applicable, the motor vehicle registration
number. Each license shall also show the expiration
date of the license and the vendor’s vehicle license
plate number.
(3) In addition to the vending license and any other
permit required by this Chapter, the applicant shall
obtain a work card from the Community
Development Department. The applicant shall pay
the fee for the work card, in addition to any
application fees for the permit.
(4) All licenses, permits, and work cards issued
pursuant to this Part are valid for one year, unless
suspended or revoked, and shall be both nonassignable
and non-transferable.
History: 01/99, 10/10
15-11-37 Repealed.
History: 01/99; 10/10
15-11-38 Display of Work Cards and Other
Permits.
(1) Any license or permit issued by the Division
shall be carried with the licensee whenever he/she is
engaged in vending. Work cards and health permits
shall also be properly and conspicuously displayed
at all times during the operation of the vending
business.
(2) A work card shall be deemed to be properly
displayed when it is attached to the outer garment of
the vendor and clearly visible to the public and law
enforcement officials. A health permit shall be
deemed to be properly displayed when attached to
the vending pushcart, vehicle, stand, or other
conveyance and clearly visible to the public and law
enforcement officials.
History: 01/99
15-11-39 Notification of Name or Address
Change. All vendors shall assure that a current and
correct name, residence address, and mailing
address are on file with the Business License
Division. Whenever the name or address provided
by a licensed vendor on his/her application or
vending license changes, the licensee shall notify
the Official in writing within 14 days of such
change and provide the same with the name change
or address change.
History: 01/99
15-11-40 Exemptions. The provisions of this Part
do not apply to:
(1) Goods, wares, or merchandise temporarily
deposited on the sidewalk in the ordinary course of
delivery, shipment, or transfer;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(2) The placing and maintenance of unattended stands
or sales devices for the sale, display, or offering for sale
of newspapers, magazines, periodicals, and paperbound
books;
(3) The distribution of free samples of goods, wares,
and merchandise by any individual from his/her person;
or,
(4) Participation in City sponsored fairs, carnivals, or
festivals where the city charges a fee for rental of a
booth and where sales will only be accomplished
during the fair, carnival, or festival. However, all
requirements related to Health Department inspections
and certificates shall apply.
History: 01/99
15-11-41 Claims of Exemption. Any person claiming
to be legally exempt from the regulations set forth in
this Part or from the payment of a license fee shall cite
to the Official the statute or other legal authority under
which exemption is claimed and shall present to the
Official proof of qualification for such exemption.
History: 01/99
15-11-42 Hours of Operation. Vendors shall be
allowed to engage in the business of vending only
between the hours of 8 a.m. and sundown. License
Official may establish more restrictive hours for
stationary vendors depending on location.
History: 01/99, 10/10
15-11-43 Littering and Trash Removal.
(1) Vendors shall keep the sidewalks, roadways, and
other spaces adjacent to their vending sites or locations
clean and free of paper, peelings, and refuse of any
kind generated from the operation of their business.
All trash or debris accumulating within 25 feet of any
vending stand shall be collected by the vendor and
deposited in a trash container.
(2) Persons engaged in food vending shall affix to their
vending station, vehicle, pushcart, or other conveyance
a receptacle for litter that shall be maintained and
emptied regularly and marked as being for litter.
History: 01/99
15-11-44 Vending Restrictions. No vendor shall be
permitted to operate in the following areas of public
space:
(1) Within 150 feet of any street intersection or
pedestrian crosswalk;
(2) Within 50 feet of any driveway, loading zone, or
bus stop;
(3) Within 50 feet of another vending location
assigned to another vendor on a public sidewalk;
(4) Within a minimum of 25 feet of unobstructed
pedestrian space;
(5) In any area within 300 feet of a building
entrance or exit;
(6) Against display windows of fixed location
businesses;
(7) Any area within two blocks of an elementary
school, middle school, or high school;
(8) Within 50 feet of any fire hydrant or fire escape.
No vending is allowed in a designated fire zone;
(9) Within 25 feet of any parking space or access
ramp designated for persons with disabilities; or,
(10) Within any parking area, unless a portion of
the parking area is blocked off by the property
owner expressly for the use of vending, and the
vending location otherwise complies with the
distance limitations imposed by this Section.
History: 01/99
15-11-45 Prohibited Conduct. No person
authorized to engage in the business of vending
under this Chapter shall do any of the following:
(1) Unduly obstruct pedestrian or motor vehicle
traffic flow;
(2) Obstruct traffic signals or regulatory signs;
(3) Stop, stand, or park any vehicle, pushcart, or
any other conveyance upon any street for the
purpose of selling during the hours when stopping,
standing, and parking have been prohibited by signs
or curb markings;
(4) Leave any conveyance unattended at any time or
store, park, or leave such conveyance in a public
space overnight;
(5) Use a handcart or pushcart whose dimensions
exceed four feet in width, six feet in length, and
seven feet in height;
(6) Use any stand or other fixed-location
conveyance whose dimensions exceed five feet in
width, eight feet in length, and seven feet in height;
(7) Use any conveyance that, when fully loaded
with merchandise, cannot be easily moved and
maintained under control by the licensee, the
licensee’s employee, or an attendant;
(8) Sell any goods, wares, or merchandise within
the right-of-way of public streets in a commercial or
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
manufacturing zone; or within 200 feet of the boundary
of a commercial or manufacturing zone; or in the rightof-
way of arterial streets that have been, or shall be
hereafter, so designated by the City;
(9) Sound any device that produces a loud and raucous
noise, or operate any loudspeaker, public address
system, radio, sound amplifier, or similar device to
attract public attention, or otherwise violate Title 22 of
the Clinton City Code;
(10) Conduct his/her business in such a way as would
restrict or interfere with the ingress or egress of the
abutting property owner or tenant; create a nuisance;
increase traffic congestion or delay; constitute a hazard
to traffic, life, or property; or obstruct adequate access
to emergency and sanitation vehicles;
(11) Conduct business on private residential property;
(12) Conduct business on private commercial property,
without the express written consent of the property
owner;
(a) The written consent shall state the areas of the
private property where business may be conducted;
(b) Written consent is required to obtain a license under
Section §15-11-36; or,
(c) A person conducting business on private property
must comply with this Part, in addition to any
restrictions imposed by the private property owner.
History: 01/99
15-11-46 Use of Public Streets.
(1) It shall be unlawful to sell, offer to sell, or display
for sale retail merchandise from or on motorized
vehicles on public streets without a valid business
license and except as authorized by this Title.
(2) Each person or business selling, offering to sell, or
displaying for sale retail merchandise from or on
motorized vehicles on public streets shall abide by the
following conditions and requirements. Failure to
comply may result in the suspension or revocation of a
business license or Community Development work
card, and is a class “C” misdemeanor:
(a) The motorized vehicle shall have a current Utah
State Vehicle Registration, proof of a current emissions
and safety inspection and proof of insurance;
(b) The motorized vehicle shall have a clearly audible
backup warning device that activates whenever the
vehicle is shifted into reverse gear;
(c) The motorized vehicle shall have a convex mirror
mounted on the front of the vehicle so that the driver, in
a normal driving position, can see the area in front
of the vehicle that is obscured by the hood;
(d) The motorized vehicle shall have a flashing
yellow beacon on the roof of the vehicle that is
visible from all sides of the vehicle. This beacon
shall be activated whenever merchandise is being
sold, offered for sale, or displayed for sale;
(e) The motorized vehicle shall be prohibited from
pulling any type of trailer;
(f) If the merchandise being sold, offered for sale,
or displayed for sale includes any item intended for
human consumption, the vehicle shall be inspected
and approved by the Davis County Health
Department on a yearly basis;
(g) Retail merchandise may be sold, offered for
sale, or displayed for sale from or on motorized
vehicles on public streets only between the hours of
one hour after sunrise and one hour before sunset.
Sunrise and sunset shall be determined on any
particular day by the times listed that day in any
major newspaper published in Davis or Weber
County;
(h) Retail merchandise may not be sold, offered for
sale, or displayed for sale from or on motorized
vehicles on public streets where the speed limit
exceeds 25 miles per hour;
(i) The operator of the motorized vehicle shall not
sell to any person standing in the roadway;
(j) The operator of the motorized vehicle shall sell,
offer to sell, or display for sale retail merchandize
only when the vehicle is completely stopped and
lawfully parked, and shall sell only from the rear or
side of the vehicle nearest to the curb or edge of the
roadway;
(k) The motorized vehicle shall have a sign on the
rear of the vehicle stating, “THIS VEHICLE
MAKES FREQUENT STOPS”. Lettering shall be
three (3) inches high, of reflective material and
clearly visible from behind the vehicle;
(l) The motorized vehicle shall not be moved
backwards in order to sell, offer to sell, or display
for sale retail merchandise;
(m) Each applicant for a license or renewal under
this Section shall submit, with its application,
evidence of general liability insurance in an amount
not less than $500,000. The applicant must submit
to the City a certificate of insurance that provides
that the policy cannot be canceled prior to giving
the City at least 10 days written notice of
cancellation; and,
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(n) The motorized vehicle and operator must comply
with all other requirements of this Chapter and any
other requirements of ordinance or statute that may be
applicable.
(3) Each person selling, offering to sell, or displaying
for sale retail merchandise from or on motorized
vehicles on public streets shall obtain a Clinton City
work card prior to beginning operation. The City may
deny, suspend, or revoke a work card and license, if
applicable, if the applicant or licensee has received a
moving traffic violation within the last 12 months.
(4) Each vehicle operating under this section or
otherwise being used or intending to be used for retail
sales shall have an inspection performed by the Clinton
City Police Department. Every vehicle inspected shall
display proof of inspection provided by the Clinton
City Police Department. This provision will apply to
any business license issued or renewed after the date of
this ordinance.
(5) The prohibitions of this Section shall not be
construed to prohibit vehicles from carrying business
markings or advertising not otherwise prohibited by
law, nor shall they prohibit delivery of merchandise
which was not sold or purchased on public streets.
History: 01/99, 9/04
15-11-47 Suspension and Revocation of License.
(1) In addition to any penalties that may be imposed,
any license issued under this Chapter may be suspended
or revoked for any of the following reasons:
(a) Fraud, misrepresentation, or knowingly false
statement contained in the application for the license;
(b) Fraud, misrepresentation, or knowingly false
statement in the course of carrying on the business of
vending;
(c) Conducting the business of vending in any manner
contrary to the conditions of the license;
(d) Conducting the business of vending in such a
manner as to create a public nuisance; cause a breach of
the peace; constitute a danger to the public health,
safety, welfare, or morals; or interfere with the rights of
abutting property owners; or,
(e) Cancellation of Health Department authorization for
a food or beverage vending unit due to uncorrected
health or sanitation violations.
(2) The Official shall provide written notice of the
suspension or revocation in a brief statement setting
forth the complaint, the grounds for suspension or
revocation, and notifying the licensee or permittee of
the appeal procedure. Such notice shall be mailed
to the address shown on the license holder’s
application by certified mail, return receipt
requested.
(3) If the City revokes a vending license or permit,
the fee already paid for the license or permit shall
be forfeited. A person whose license or permit has
been revoked under this Section may not apply for a
new license for a period of one year from the date
that the revocation took effect.
History: 01/99
15-11-48 Appeals.
(1) If the License Official denies the issuance of a
license or permit, suspends or revokes a license or
permit, or orders the cessation of any part of the
business operation conducted under the license or
permit, the aggrieved party may appeal the License
Official’s decision to the City Manager in
accordance with § 15-1-16(3) of the City Code.
(2) The filing of an appeal stays the action of the
License Official in suspending or revoking a license
or permit or any part of the business operation
being conducted under license or permit until the
City Manager makes a final decision, unless the
License Official determines that continued
operation of the vending business constitutes an
imminent and serious threat to the public health or
safety, in which case the License Official shall take
or cause to be taken action as is necessary to
immediately enforce the suspension, revocation, or
order.
History: 01/99, 10/10
15-11-49 Renewals. A vending license may be
renewed, provided an application for renewal and
license fees are received by the City no later than
the expiration date of the current license. Any
application received after that date shall be
processed as a new application. The Official shall
review each application for renewal and, upon
determining that the applicant is in full compliance
with the provisions of this Chapter, shall issue a
new license.
History: 01/99
15-11-50 Construction. No part of this Chapter or
the Chapter itself shall be construed to be an
amplification or derogation of the rights or
responsibilities of abutting property owners. Any
remedies, rights, or obligations provided to such
property owners or their successors in interest under
the law of real property or the laws of the State of
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Utah shall be in addition to the remedies, rights,
obligations, or penalties provided hereunder.
History: 01/99
15-11-51 Reserved to 15-11-60.
PART 3 – TEMPORARY BUSINESS.
15-11-61 License Required. It is unlawful for any
person to engage in, carry on, or conduct a temporary
business in the City without first obtaining a license.
Temporary businesses shall be subject to the
regulations of this Title.
History: 01/99
15-11-62 Repealed.
History: 01/99; 10/10
15-11-63 Participant License Required. A
participant shall not be required to obtain the license
required by § 15-11-61, but it is unlawful for a
participant to transact any business at a sales event
without obtaining a license therefore and without acting
under a licensed temporary business sponsor.
Participants shall be subject to the regulations of this
Title.
History: 01/99
15-11-64 Temporary Business Sponsor License
Required. It is unlawful for any person to act in the
capacity of a temporary business sponsor in the City
without first obtaining a license. Temporary business
sponsors shall be subject to the regulations of this Title.
History: 01/99
15-11-65 Repealed.
History: 01/99; 10/10
15-11-66 Information Required for Participation in
Sales Events.
(1) A temporary business sponsor or a licensed
temporary business must submit to the Business
License Official, at least 15 days prior to a sales
event, the following information:
(a) A list of all participants, including their names
and addresses;
(b) The location of the sales event; and,
(c) The dates of commencement and termination of
the sales event.
(2) In the event the temporary business sponsor
shall desire to add additional participants after the
above information has been submitted, the sponsor
must notify the Official and update the list of
participants. Updates submitted less than 15 days
prior to a sales event shall be charged a late fee.
History: 01/99, 10/10
15-11-67 Determination of Status – Appeals.
(1) In case an applicant shall claim to be a
permanent merchant and is required to take out a
license upon the ground that the applicant is a
temporary merchant, the Official shall notify the
applicant in writing.
(2) The applicant may appeal the License Official’s
decision to the City Manager, pursuant to Chapter
15-1-16(3) of this Title.
History: 01/99, 10/10
15-11-68 Each Sale Without a License –
Separate Offense. The sale of each article by a
temporary merchant, a temporary merchant sponsor,
or a participant without a license therefore shall be
a separate offense under, and a separate violation
of, this Chapter.
History: 01/99
15-11-69 Bond. All temporary business sponsors
shall furnish to the Division a bond or letter of
credit in the amount of $5,000.
History: 01/99
15-11-70 Reserved to 15-11-80.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 12. Sale of Fireworks
15-12-1 Sale, Discharge and Possession of
Fireworks Restricted
15-12-2 Definitions
15-12-3 Application to Sell Fireworks
15-12-4 Posting of License
15-12-5 Regulations Governing all Fireworks Retail
Sales Locations
15-12-6 Seizure of Fireworks – Suspension or
Revocation of License
15-12-7 Days When Fireworks May be Sold
15-12-8 Days When Fireworks May be Discharged
15-12-9 Businesses Exempt from This Chapter
15-12-1 Sale, Discharge and Possession of
Fireworks Restricted. It is a Class “B” misdemeanor
for any person, firm, partnership or corporation to offer
for sale, expose for sale, sell, or possess, or use, or
explode any fireworks in violation of the State
Fireworks Act of l983 (ll-3-l et seq. Utah Code
Annotated) and all rules and regulations related as
established by the State of Utah. The sale of Class “C”
fireworks permitted by the Act and regulations shall
only be made in compliance with the restrictions
established by the State, this Chapter and after
acquiring a business license, as required in Title 15 of
the Clinton City Code of Ordinances, with the
exception of those persons only selling toy pistols, toy
canes, toy guns, or sparklers. A violation of this
Chapter or of the State Fireworks Act and its
accompanying regulations shall be deemed to be a
violation of the Ordinances of Clinton City subject to
the penalties set forth by the State and in Title 10 of the
Clinton City Code of Ordinances.
History: 06/99; 09/11
15-12-2 Definitions. Refer to Title 10 for definitions.
History: 06/99; 09/11
15-12-3 Application to Sell Fireworks.
(1) In addition to the information required in Section
15-12-5., all applicants for a license to sell fireworks
shall:
(a) Obtain a permit from the Clinton City Fire
Department as set forward in Title 10 and provide a
copy of the approved Fire Department permit
application and copies of all required additional
documents with the Business License Application;
(b) Be accompanied by a copy of the applicant’s Utah
Sales Tax License.
(2) Applications shall be made a minimum of
fourteen (14) working days prior to the time when
the applicant wishes to begin selling fireworks
within the time constraints set forth in this Chapter.
(3) Schedule and pass an inspection of a Temporary
Stand by the Building Official or designated
representative.
History: 06/99; 09/11
15-12-4 Posting of License.
(1) Licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be
posted in a conspicuous place in a temporary stand
and in a conspicuous place in the vicinity of the
fireworks in a permanent structure.
(2) The License shall be available for presentation
upon request to duly authorized officials.
History: 06/99
15-12-5 Regulations Governing all Fireworks
Retail Sales Locations. Refer to Title 10 for
regulations related to permanent structures,
temporary structures, and tents.
History: 06/99; 09/11
15-12-6 Seizure of Fireworks – Suspension or
Revocation of License.
(1) Fireworks sold or offered for sale in violation of
this Chapter may be seized and destroyed and the
License of the person selling or offering fireworks
for sale may be suspended.
(2) Other violations of this Chapter may be grounds
for seizure of the fireworks and suspension or
revocation of the License.
History: 06/99
15-12-7 Days When Fireworks May be Sold.
Fireworks may be sold on dates established within
the Rules set by the State.
History: 06/99, 09/11
15-12-8 Days When Fireworks May be
Discharged. Fireworks may be discharged on dates
established within the Rules set by the State.
History: 06/99, 09/11
15-12-9 Businesses Exempt from This Chapter.
(1) This Chapter does not apply to the product
inventories of fireworks manufacturers, importers,
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
distributors or wholesalers designed for shipment
directly out of the State.
(2) Firework displays sponsored by the City.
(a) Applicants for a public display of fireworks where
no charge for attendance is assessed or the theatrical
use of fireworks with a valid permit issued by the
Clinton City Fire Department as established in Title 10.
History: 06/99; 09/11
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 13. Towing Services
15-13-1 Definitions
15-13-2 License
15-13-3 Duty to Display License
15-13-4 Rotation
15-13-5 City Impounds
15-13-1 Definitions.
“Rotation List” means a list of tow trucks or tow truck
services maintained by Clinton City that have valid
licenses and who request in writing of Clinton City the
privilege of being called in sequence down the list to
provide tow truck services to motorists when a motorist
requests the City’s assistance in obtaining a tow truck
or tow truck service.
“Tow Truck” means a motor vehicle which has been
altered or designed, equipped and used for the purpose
of towing vehicles by means of a crane, hoist, tow bar,
tow line, chain or dolly.
“Tow Truck Service” means the transportation upon
the public streets, public places and highways of the
City of damaged, disabled, or abandoned vehicles,
together with personal effects and/or cargo, by towing
only wrecker service, tow car service and garage tow
truck service are synonymous and shall be termed “tow
truck service”.
History: 01/99
15-13-2 License. A license shall be issued to tow
trucks or tow truck services with a principal place of
business within the corporate limits of the City upon
proof being presented to the City by the applicant and
that each of the following requirements have been and
will continue to be met by the applicant:
(1) Complete compliance with the current Utah
Department of Transportation rules and regulations for
tow truck operators;
(2) Issuance of a Department of Transportation
certificate for each tow during the policy term of the
license;
(3) Competent evidence of valid towing property
damage liability insurance, not less than $25,000,
issued with applicant named as insured, including the
policy number and insurance company name for the
business and the tow truck;
(4) Permanent readable signs on the doors of the tow
truck listing the name of the applicant, address and
telephone number;
(5) Competent evidence of surety bond of $1,000
from good and sufficient sureties to ensure
continued compliance with these ordinances;
(6) Competent evidence that the tow truck service
or tow truck tows and stores motor vehicles in a
secured fenced or enclosed yard or building for the
storage of motor vehicles, unless otherwise required
by the State of Utah;
(7) All tow trucks must be operated by competent
personnel carrying a certification card issued by the
Utah Department of Transportation and a proper
and valid Utah drivers license which allows for
operation of a tow truck;
(8) Competent evidence that all business operations
are conducted in a fair, equitable and lawful
manner; and,
(9) Competent evidence that suggested tow and
storage fees are those established by the Utah
Towing Association.
History: 01/99
15-13-3 Duty to Display License. Every tow truck
operator shall carry upon his person:
(1) A proper and valid Utah driver’s license which
allows for operation of a tow truck;
(2) Evidence of a proper and valid license issued by
the City;
(3) Evidence of a personal certification card issued
by the Utah Department of Transportation; and,
(4) All other identification required by law.
History: 01/99
15-13-4 Rotation.
(1) To qualify for rotation, a tow truck service shall
comply with all of the requirements of this Chapter
and other ordinances of the City.
(2) The Police Department has the authority to
promulgate all rules and regulations governing a
rotation system.
(3) The rotation system shall be followed unless a
valid contract has been issued by the City.
History: 01/99
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
15-13-5 City Impounds. The City may enter into
contracts with tow trucks, tow services, and tow lot
companies to ensure safe and economical storage and
transportation of motor vehicles impounded by the
City.
History: 01/99
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 14. Tobacco Specialty Business
15-14-1 Tobacco Specialty Business License
15-14-2 Definitions
15-14-3 Location
15-14-4 Business Established on the Date of this
Statute
15-14-1 Tobacco Specialty Business License.
(1) Any Tobacco Specialty Business, as defined in
this section, shall be licensed by the City as a retail
tobacco specialty business.
(2) All applicants for a Tobacco Specialty Business
License shall submit a copy of the license issued by
the Utah State Tax Commission before the City
license is issued.
15-14-2 Definitions.
"Community Location" means:
(1) A public or private kindergarten, elementary,
middle, junior high, or high school;
(2) A licensed child-care facility or preschool;
(3) A trade or technical school;
(4) A church;
(5) A public library;
(6) A public playground;
(7) A public park;
(8) A youth center or other space used primarily for
youth oriented activities;
(9) A public recreational facility; or
(10) A public arcade.
"Retail Tobacco Specialty Business" means a
commercial establishment in which:
(1) The sale of tobacco products accounts for more
than 35% of the total annual gross receipts for the
establishment;
(2) Food and beverage products, excluding gasoline
sales, is less than 45% of the total annual gross
receipts for the establishment; and
(3) The establishment is not licensed as a pharmacy
under Title 58, Chapter 17b, Pharmacy Practice Act.
"Tobacco Product" means:
(1) Any cigar, cigarette, or electronic cigarette as
defined in Utah State Code Section 76-10-101 ;
(a) A tobacco product as defined in Section 59-14-
102 , including:
(i) Chewing tobacco; or
(ii) Any substitute for a tobacco product, including
flavoring or additives to tobacco; and
(b) Tobacco paraphernalia as defined in Utah State
Code Section 76-10-104.1.
15-14-3 Location.
(1) A retail tobacco specialty business shall not be
located within:
(a) 1,000 feet of a community location;
(b) 600 feet of another retail tobacco specialty
business; or
(c) 600 feet from property used or zoned for:
(i) Agriculture use; or
(ii) Residential use.
(2) For purposes of § (1) above, the proximity
requirements shall be measured in a straight line from
the nearest entrance of the retail tobacco specialty
business to the nearest property boundary of the
community location, or agricultural or residential use,
without regard to intervening structures or zoning
districts.
(3) The City may revoke a business license issued
under this section:
(a) If a licensee engages in a pattern of unlawful
activity under Utah State Code Title 76, Chapter 10,
Part 16, Pattern of Unlawful Activity Act;
(b) If a licensee violates the regulations restricting the
sale and distribution of cigarettes and smokeless
tobacco to protect children and adolescents issued by
the United States Food and Drug Administration, 21
C.F.R. Part 1140; or
(c) Under other provisions of state law or this Code.
15-14-4 Business Established on the Date of this
Statute. In accordance with the following, a retail
tobacco specialty business that has a business license
and is operating lawfully within Clinton on or before
May 8, 2012, is exempt from § 15-14-3.
(1) The business license is renewed continuously
without relapse or permanent revocation;
(2) The retail tobacco specialty business is not closed
for business or otherwise suspends the sale of tobacco
products for more than 60 consecutive days;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(3) The retail tobacco specialty business does not
substantially change the business premises or its
business operation; and
(4) The retail tobacco specialty business maintains
the right to operate under the terms of other
applicable laws, including zoning ordinances,
building codes, and the business license issued prior
to May 8, 2012.
History: 04/12
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 15. Repealed
Rental Dwelling Units Moved to Title 15-19
History: 11/10
Chapter 16. Film/Filming Requirements
and Restrictions
15-16-1 Permit Required
15-16-2 Repealed
15-16-3 Application Prerequisites
15-16-4 Permit Process
15-16-5 Film/Filming Requirements and
Restrictions
15-16-1 Permit Required.
(1) Producers of motion picture, videotape or still
photograph productions (herein after referred to as
“film/filming” which take place within Clinton City
must obtain a City film permit prior to the start of any
filming.
(2) Bona fide news coverage and
filming/videotaping/still photography done for private
family use is exempt from this requirement.
(3) Applications for a film permit should be
submitted at least ten (10) working days before
filming is to begin.
(4) Productions that will interfere with traffic, that
involves construction of sets or potential safety
hazards, and/or are to be filmed within the central
business district must have their applications
submitted at least fifteen (15) working days in
advance. Additional time may be needed when
personnel from the City, police, fire, public works,
etc. are requested.
15-16-2 Repealed.
History: 10/10
15-16-3 Application Prerequisites. No permit
application is considered submitted until all of the
applicable items below, and any additional
information that has been requested, has been
provided.
(1) Property Owner’s Permission: For productions
that take place on property not owned or controlled
by the City, applicants must obtain written permission
from the property owner(s) and tenant(s) and/or enter
into a lease agreement for the use of the property.
Copies of the permission or agreement must be
provided to the City prior to the issuance of a film
permit.
(2) Neighboring Property Notification:
(a) Applicants must provide written notification to all
property owners and tenants within 300 feet of the
film/filming location at least ten (10) days prior to the
filming date. For productions taking place in the
central business district, as described in the Zoning
Ordinance, all property owners and tenants within the
area must receive written notification at least fifteen
(15) days prior to the shooting date.
(b) Notification must state that property owners
should file any concerns, in writing, with the City at
least five (5) days prior to the filming date.
(c) Notification must include the date(s), times, and
location of proposed filming; a description of all
planned activities, and; proposed parking
arrangements. The notification must indicate that the
producer has applied for a film permit from Clinton
City; there is no presumption that a film permit will
be granted just because an application has been filed.
(d) While there is no requirement that 100% of the
neighboring properties or businesses must agree to
the issuance of a filming permit, the City will
seriously consider the property owner’s concerns and
make sure they are adequately addressed. Therefore,
applicants are encouraged to work closely with all
affected property owners and businesses to ensure
their concerns are addressed. Doing so can help
avoid delays or denial of a film permit application.
(3) Parking Plan:
(4) A parking plan for all vehicles associated with the
production, including equipment vans, trailers,
dressing rooms, catering trucks, craft services, and
personal transportation for cast and crew, must be
submitted with the permit application.
(5) Parking in “no parking” areas will only be
allowed with prior clearance from the Clinton City
Police Department.
15-16-4 Permit Process. Permit requests will be
processed through the Community Development
Department. The Department will process requests
through the appropriate departments within the City
for comment and direction. The applicant may be
contacted directly by individual departments with
requests for clarification or additional information.
(1) Applications will be filed on a form provided by
the Community Development Department with
information and drawings attached as necessary. As a
minimum construction, traffic flow, and site drawings
will be provided in triplicate. Additional drawings
may be needed related to pyrotechnic and burn
requests, these will also be provided in triplicate.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(2) Information for permit applications shall include
but not be limited to a set of construction and
electrical plans.
(3) Construction of set pieces may require the
approval of the City’s Building Official. Three (3)
copies of blueprints and engineering, if any, of any
proposed sets must be submitted with the permit
application.
(4) Site plans showing structure locations, proposed
cable runs, parking areas, and appropriate
protection/safety measures. Permission to string
cables across public streets and sidewalks, or from
generators to service points will be evaluated as part
of the permitting process.
(5) Proof of Insurance. With the permit application
applicants shall provide the City with Certificate of
Insurance evidencing:
(a) $2,000,000 worth of Public Liability Insurance,
with Clinton City Corporation its officers, officials
and employees named as additional insured: and,
(b) Compliance with all applicable requirements for
Workers Compensation.
(6) Hold Harmless Agreement. Applicants shall
execute a Hold Harmless Agreement (as provided by
the City) and submit it with the application.
(7) Fire Permit. Permit applications will be
processed through the Clinton City Fire Department.
Permits will not be issued without Fire Department
approval.
(8) Police Services: Required or requested police
services can be provided by the Clinton City Police
Department and will be processed through the Clinton
City Police Chief. Application is to provide adequate
information so that any need for police services is
clearly explained, to include dates, times, specific
reason (traffic control, security, etc.), and number of
officers.
(a) Once the permit has been approved the applicant
may make arrangements with off duty police officers
for scheduling.
(b) Certified officers from other jurisdictions may be
utilized when Clinton officers are not available.
(c) Use of any officers, Clinton City or otherwise, is
to be approved by the Clinton City Chief of Police.
(d) Cancellation of police services will be as
established with the individual officers; however
applicant is to inform the Clinton City Chief of Police
of any changes in the schedule.
(9) Fire and Ambulance Services. Required or
requested fire and ambulance services can be
provided by the Clinton City Fire Department and
will be processed through the Clinton City Fire Chief.
Application is to provide adequate information so
that any need for these services is clearly explained,
to include dates, times, specific reason (fire standby,
ambulance standby, hazmat, extinguish burn, etc.)
and number and type of vehicles required.
(a) All activities related to the filming must meet the
existing fire Code adopted by the State of Utah
(International Fire Code).
(b) An inspection of the site will be required.
(c) Obtain appropriate permits; pyrotechnics, flame
effects (NFPA 160).
(d) Fees for fire services will be established by the
Clinton City Council, from time to time, adopted by
resolution and published in the Clinton City
Consolidated Fee Schedule.
(10) Request for filming at City Facilities. Certain
City parks, buildings, and other facilities are available
for rental as movie/still photography locations. A
separate application and fee is required to obtain use
of these facilities. For information, scheduling and to
obtain an application, contact the City Recreation
Department. The City Manager is the final approving
authority for use of City facilities.
15-16-5 Film/Filming Requirements and
Restrictions. Permitees shall conduct all operations
in an orderly fashion with continuous attention to the
safe storage of equipment not in use and the cleanup
of trash and debris upon completion of shooting. To
ensure proper cleanup and restoration of the site, the
City may require an applicant to post a “faithful
performance” bond.
(1) Hours of Operation: All activity, including
filming, set-up, or dismantling, is typically limited to
between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m.
Activity outside of these hours will be considered
provided there is no unreasonable disruption and all
possible attempts to mitigate impact to neighboring
properties are balanced under §15-16-3(2)(b).
(2) Traffic Flow:
(a) For film/filming that will impede traffic flow, the
applicant must consult with the Clinton City Police
Department prior to the issuance of a permit.
(b) Street or sidewalk closures are rarely allowed,
intermittent traffic control is preferred.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(c) Permittees must follow all police directives and
take all appropriate safety precautions, including the
installation of advance warning signs and any other
traffic control devices in conformance with the
Manual of Traffic Controls.
(d) Noise: Noise shall be maintained at a reasonable
level, especially noise from electrical generators. No
gunfire, explosions, sirens, public address systems, or
other noise-creating devices shall be used without
specific permit from the City.
History: 4/09
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 17. Sexually-Oriented Businesses
History: Added 1/10
Section A. General Provisions, Purposes
15-17A-1 Title of Citation
15-17A-2 Purpose of Provisions
15-17A-3 Application of Provisions
15-17A-4 Obscenity and Lewdness - Statutory
Provisions
15-17A-5 Definitions
15-17A-1 Title of Citation. The provisions codified in
this Chapter shall be known and may be referred to as
the “Sexually-Oriented Business and Employee
Licensing Ordinance.”
15-17A-2 Purpose of Provisions. It is the purpose
and object of this Chapter that the City establishes
reasonable and uniform regulations governing the time,
place and manner of operation of sexually-oriented
businesses and their employees in the City. This
Chapter shall be construed to protect the governmental
interest recognized by this Chapter in a manner
consistent with constitutional protection provided by
the United States and Utah Constitutions.
15-17A-3 Application of Provisions. This Chapter
imposes regulatory standards and license requirements
on certain business activities which are characterized as
sexually-oriented businesses, and certain employees of
those businesses characterized as sexually-oriented
business employees. Except where the context or
specific provisions require, this Chapter does not
supersede or nullify any other related ordinance.
15-17B-1 Obscenity and Lewdness - Statutory
Provisions.
(1) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter,
nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to permit or
allow the showing or display of any matter which is
contrary to the provisions of the City of Clinton
Municipal Code or other applicable federal or State
statutes prohibiting obscenity.
(2) Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter,
nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to permit or
allow conduct or the showing or display of any matter
which is contrary to the provisions of Utah State Code
§ 76-9-702, 76-9-702.5 & 10-8-41. Provided,
however, that for the purpose of sexually-oriented
businesses the definition of “private parts” shall be
construed to mean “nudity” as defined in this Chapter.
(3) Nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to permit
or allow conduct or the showing or display of any
matter which is contrary to provisions of Utah State
Code § 76-10-1201, 76-10-1206, 76-10-1227, and
76-10-1228, more specifically.
15-17A-4 Definitions. For the purpose of this
Chapter, the following words shall have the
following meanings:
“Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store or Adult
Video Store” means a commercial establishment
which has as a significant or substantial portion of
its stock-in-trade, or derives a significant or
substantial portion of its revenues, or devotes a
significant or substantial portion of its interior
business or advertising, or maintains a significant or
substantial section of its sales or display space for
the sale or rental, for any form of consideration, of
any one or more of the following:
(1) Minors are excluded from a significant or
substantial portion of the retail floor or shelf space
of the premises;
(2) Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed
matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures,
video cassettes, compact discs, slides, or other
visual representations which are characterized by
their emphasis upon the exhibition or description of
specified sexual activities or specified anatomical
areas; or,
(3) Instruments, devices, or paraphernalia that are
designed for use or marketed primarily for
stimulation of human genital organs or for
sadomasochistic use or abuse of themselves or
others.
“Adult Business” means an adult motion picture
theater, adult theater, adult bookstore, adult novelty
store or adult video store.
“Adult Motion Picture Theater” means a
commercial establishment which:
(1) Excludes minors from the showing of any
exhibition; or,
(2) As its principal business, shows, for any form of
consideration, films, motion pictures, video
cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions which are primarily characterized by
the depiction or description of specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas.
“Adult Theater” means a theater, concert hall,
auditorium or similar commercial establishment
which:
(1) Holds itself out as such a business;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(2) Excludes minors from the showing of any
exhibition; or,
(3) As its principal business, features persons who
appear in live performances in a state of semi-nudity.
“Business License Authority” means the City’s
Business License Administrator or designee.
“Controlling Interest” means the power, directly or
indirectly, to direct the operation, management or
policies of a business or entity, or to vote twenty (20)
percent or more of any class of voting securities of a
business. The ownership, control, or power to vote
twenty (20) percent or more of any class of voting
securities of a business shall be presumed, subject to
rebuttal, to be the power to direct the management,
operation or policies of the business.
“Distinguished or Characterized by an Emphasis
on” means the dominant or principal theme of the
object described by such a phrase. For instance, when
the phrase refers to films which are distinguished or
characterized by an emphasis upon the exhibition or
description of specified sexual activities or specified
anatomical areas. The films so described are those
whose dominant or principal character and theme are
the exhibition or description of specified anatomical
areas or specified sexual activities.
“Employ,” “Employee” and “Employment” means
any person who performs any service on the premises
of a sexually-oriented business, on a full time, part
time, or contract basis, whether or not the person is
designated an employee, independent contractor, agent,
or otherwise. Employee does not include a person
exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance
of the premises or for the delivery of goods to the
premises or similar type of function.
“Nudity” or “State of nudity” means a state of dress
in which the areola of the female breast, or male or
female genitals, pubic region, anus or anal cleft are
covered by less than the covering required in the
definition of semi-nude.
“Opaque” means an impervious material or covering,
having capacity to block out or obstruct the visual
image of an object.
“Operate,” “Operator” or “Cause to Operate”
means to cause to function or to put or keep in a state
of doing business. Operator means any person on the
premises of a sexually-oriented business who is
authorized to exercise overall operational control of the
business or who causes to function or who puts or
keeps in operation the business. A person may be
found to be operating or causing to be operated a
sexually-oriented business whether or not that
person is an owner, part owner, or licensee of the
business.
“Park” means public land which has been
designated for park or recreational activities,
including but not limited to, a park, playground,
nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic
field, basketball or tennis courts, pedestrian/bicycle
paths, open space, wilderness areas, or similar
public land within the City which is under the
control, operation, or management of the City park
and recreation authorities, including but not limited
to the following existing parks and facilities:
Clinton City Park, Clinton Pond Park, Heritage
Park, Veterans Park, Meadows Park, Pioneer Park,
Power-line Park, Kestrel Park, and West Clinton
Park, as well as any future parks as outlined within
the Clinton City Parks Master Plan.
"Patron" means any person who contracts with or
employs any escort services or escort or the
customer of any business licensed pursuant to this
Chapter.
"Pecuniary Compensation" means any
commission, fee, salary, tip, gratuity, hire, profit,
reward, or any other form of consideration.
“Person" means any applicant, individual,
proprietorship, association, corporation, partnership
or other legal entity.
“Protected Uses” means churches, public libraries,
public parks or parkways, public recreation centers,
public and private schools, and any residence or
residential district.
“Semi-Nude” means a state of dress in which
opaque clothing covers no less than the areola of
the female breast; and the male or female genitals,
pubic region, anus, anal cleft and vulva shall be
fully covered by an opaque covering no narrower
than four inches wide in the front and five inches
wide in the back, which shall not taper to less than
one inch wide at the narrowest point.
“Semi-Nude Dancing Agency” means any person
agency, firm, or corporation, partnership, or any
other entity or individual which furnishes, books, or
otherwise engages or offers to furnish, book or
otherwise engage the service of a professional
dancer licensed pursuant to this Chapter or
performance or appearance at a business licensed
for adult theaters.
“Semi-Nude Entertainment Business” means a
business, including adult theater, where employees
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
perform or appear in a state of semi-nudity. A business
shall also be presumed to be a semi-nude entertainment
business if the business holds itself out as such a
business.
"Sexually-Oriented Business" means semi-nude
entertainment business, adult businesses, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult theater, adult
motion picture theater, semi-nude entertainment
business and semi-nude dancing agencies, as defined by
this Chapter.
"Sexually-Oriented Business Employees" means
those employees who work on the premises of a
sexually-oriented business in activities related to the
sexually-oriented portion of the business. This includes
all managing employees, dancers, and other similar
employees, whether or not hired as employees, agents
or as independent contractors. Employees shall not
include individuals whose work is unrelated to the
sexually-oriented portion of the business, such as
janitors, bookkeepers and similar employees.
"Specified Anatomical Areas" means:
(1) Human male genitals whether or not in a state of
sexual arousal; or,
(2) Less than completely and opaquely covered
buttocks, anus, anal cleft, male or female genitals, or a
female breast below a point immediately above the top
of the areola.
"Specified Sexual Activities" means:
(1) Acts of:
(a) Masturbation;
(b) Human sexual intercourse;
(c) Sexual copulation between a person and a beast;
(d) Fellatio;
(e) Cunnilingus;
(f) Bestiality;
(g) Pederasty;
(h) Buggery;
(i) Sodomy;
(j) Any copulation between a human male and another
human male, human female, or beast; or,
(k) Excretory functions as part of or in connection with
any of the activities set forth in (a) through (j) above.
(2) Manipulating, stimulating, caressing or fondling by
any person:
(a) The genitals of a human;
(b) The pubic area of a human; or,
(c) The breast or breasts of a human female.
(3) Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad
in undergarments, a mask or costume, or the
condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise
physically restrained on the part of the one so
clothed.
“Transfer of Ownership or Control of a
Sexually-Oriented Business” means any of the
following:
(1) The sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(2) The transfer of securities which constitutes a
controlling interest in the business, whether by sale,
exchange, or similar means; or
(3) The establishment of a trust, gift or other similar
legal device which transfers the ownership or
control of the business, except for transfer by
bequest or other operation of law upon the death of
the person possessing the ownership or control.
“Viewing Room” means the room, booth, or area
where a patron of a sexually-oriented business
would ordinarily be positioned while watching a
film, video cassette or other video production.
Section B. Location Regulations
15-17B-1 Location and Zoning Restrictions
15-17B-2 Sexually-Oriented Business- Additional
Location Requirements
15-17B-3 Method of Measurement
15-17B-4 Single Location and Name
15-17B-5 Moving of Business Location
15-17B-1 Location and Zoning Restrictions. It is
unlawful for any sexually-oriented business to do
business at any location within the City not zoned
for such business. Sexually-oriented businesses
licensed as adult businesses or semi-nude
entertainment businesses pursuant to this Chapter
shall only be allowed in areas zoned for their use
pursuant to Title 28 of the Code of Revised
Ordinances of Clinton City. Businesses regulated
by this chapter shall not be located closer than five
hundred and fifty (550) feet from a collector street
and shall not be closer than two hundred and fifty
(250) feet to each other, from protected uses and no
closer than two hundred (200) feet from the MP-1
zoning boundary.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
15-17B-2 Sexually-Oriented Business- Additional
Location Requirements. It is unlawful for any
business licensed as a sexually-oriented business to be
located within six hundred (600) feet of a business
licensed for the consumption of alcohol or liquor.
15-17B-3 Method of Measurement. The six hundred
(600) foot limitation is measured from the nearest
property line of the business regulated by this chapter
to the nearest property line of the other sexuallyoriented
business or business licensed for the sale or
consumption of alcohol, or area of protected use.
15-17B-4 Single Location and Name.
(1) It is unlawful to conduct business under a license
issued pursuant to this Chapter at any location other
than the licensed premises. Any location to which
telephone calls are automatically forwarded by such
business shall require a separate license.
(2) It is unlawful for any sexually-oriented business to
do business in the City under any name other than the
business name specified in the application.
15-17B-5 Moving of Business Location. It is
unlawful for any sexually-oriented business, as
regulated herein, to relocate or otherwise move its
location or area of operation. A sexually-oriented
business wanting to relocate must submit the
appropriate application for a license as required under
this chapter. Such application shall be reviewed under
the terms and conditions of this chapter and applicable
City ordinances.
Section C. Licensing Provisions
15-17C-1 Business Categories- Number of Licenses
15-17C-2 Hours of Operation
15-17C-3 Business License Required
15-17C-4 License Application –Disclosures
15-17C-5 License Fees
15-17C-6 License Term
15-17C-7 License Display
15-17C-8 Issuance of Business License
15-17C-9 Transfer of Business License
15-17C-10Notice of Change in Information
15-17C-11 Statement in Advertisement
15-17C-1 Business Categories- Number of Licenses.
It is unlawful for any business premises to operate or
be licensed for more than one category of sexuallyoriented
business. The categories of sexually-oriented
businesses are:
(1) Adult book store, adult novelty store, adult
video store;
(2) Adult business;
(3) Adult motion picture theater;
(4) Adult theater;
(5) Semi-nude dancing agency;
(6) Semi-nude entertainment business.
15-17C-2 Hours of Operation. No sexuallyoriented
business shall operate between the hours of
1:00 a.m. and 10:00 a.m. of any day.
15-17C-3 Business License Required. It is
unlawful:
(1) For any person to operate a sexually-oriented
business as specified herein, without first obtaining
a general business license and a sexually-oriented
business license. The business license shall specify
the type of business for which it is obtained.
(2) For any person operating a sexually-oriented
business to employ a person to work for the
sexually-oriented business who is not licensed as a
sexually-oriented business employee by the City
pursuant to this ordinance.
(3) For any person to obtain employment with a
sexually-oriented business without having secured a
sexually-oriented business work permit pursuant to
this chapter.
15-17C-4 License Application - Disclosures.
Before any applicant may be licensed to operate a
sexually-oriented business or as a sexually-oriented
business employee pursuant to this Chapter, the
applicant shall submit, on a form to be supplied by
Clinton City Business License Administrator, the
following:
(1) The correct legal name of each applicant.
(2) If the applicant is a corporation, partnership,
limited partnership or individual or entity doing
business under an assumed name, the information
required below for individual applicants shall be
submitted for each partner and each principal of an
applicant, and for each officer, director, and any
shareholder (corporate or personal) of more than
ten percent (10%) of the stock of any applicant.
Any holding company or any entity holding more
than 10 percent (10%) of an applicant shall be
considered an applicant for purposes of disclosure
under this Chapter.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(3) All corporations, partnerships, or unincorporated
entities included on the application shall also identify
each individual authorized by the corporation,
partnership, or unincorporated entity to sign the checks
for such corporation, partnership, or unincorporated
entity.
(4) For all applicants or persons, the application must
also state:
(a) Any other names or aliases used by the individual;
(b) The age, date and place of birth;
(c) Height;
(d) Weight;
(e) Color of hair;
(f) Color of eyes;
(g) Present business address and telephone number;
(h) Present residence address and telephone number;
(i) Utah drivers license or identification number; and,
(j) Social security number.
(5) Acceptable written proof that a person is at least
eighteen (18) years of age.
(6) Attached to the form, as provided above, two color
photographs of the applicant clearly showing the
individual's face and the individual's fingerprints on a
form provided by the City police department. For
persons not residing in the City, the photographs and
fingerprints shall be on a form from the law
enforcement jurisdiction where the person resides.
Fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid
by the applicant directly to the issuing agency.
(7) For any individual applicant required to obtain a
sexually-oriented business employee permit as an seminude
entertainer, a certificate from the Davis County
Health Department or a physician licensed by the State
of Utah, stating that the individual has, within thirty
days immediately preceding the date of the original or
renewal application, been examined and found to be
free of any contagious or communicable diseases.
(8) A statement of the business, occupation, or
employment history of the applicant for the three years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application.
(9) A statement detailing the business license and
permit history of the applicant for the five-year period
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the
application, including whether such applicant
previously operated, in this or any other county, city,
state, or territory, has ever had a license, permit, or
authorization to do business denied, revoked, or
suspended, or has had any professional or
vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or
suspended. In the event of any such denial,
revocation or suspension, state the date, the name of
the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and state in full
the reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension.
A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or
suspension shall be attached to the application.
(10) All criminal convictions or pleas of no contest,
except those which have been expunged, and the
disposition of all such arrests for the applicant,
individual, or other entity subject to disclosure
under this Chapter, for five years prior to the date of
application. This disclosure shall include
identification of all ordinance violations, excepting
minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense
designated as a felony shall not be construed as a
minor traffic offense), stating the date, place, nature
of each conviction or plea of no contest and
sentence of each conviction or other disposition;
identifying the convicting jurisdiction and
sentencing court, and providing the court
identifying case numbers or docket numbers.
Application for a sexually-oriented business or
employee permit shall constitute a waiver of
disclosure of any criminal conviction or plea of no
contest for the purposes of any proceeding
involving the business or employee permit.
(11) In the event the applicant is not the owner of
record of the real property upon which the business
or proposed business, is or is to be located, the
application must be accompanied by a notarized
statement from the legal or equitable owner of the
possessory interest in the property specifically
acknowledging the type of business for which the
applicant seeks a license for the property. In
addition to furnishing such notarized statement, the
applicant shall furnish the name, address, and phone
number of the owner of record of the property, as
well as the copy of the lease or rental agreement
pertaining to the premises in which the business is
or will be located.
(12) A description of the services to be provided by
the business, with sufficient detail to allow
reviewing authorities to determine what business
will be transacted on the premises, together with a
schedule of usual fees for services to be charged by
the licensee, and any rules, regulations or
employment guidelines under or by which the
business intends to operate. This description shall
also include:
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
(a) The hours that the business or service will be open
to the public, and the methods of promoting the health
and safety of the employees and patrons and preventing
them from engaging in illegal activity;
(b) The methods of supervision preventing the
employees from engaging in acts of prostitution or
other related criminal activities;
(c) The methods of supervising employees and patrons
to prevent employees and patrons from charging or
receiving fees for services or acts prohibited by this
Chapter or other statutes or ordinances;
(d) The methods of screening employees and customers
in order to promote the health and safety of employees
and customers and prevent the transmission of disease,
and prevent the commission of acts of prostitution or
other criminal activities; and,
(e) It is unlawful to knowingly submit false or
materially misleading information on or with a
sexually-oriented business license application or to fail
to disclose or omit information for the purpose of
obtaining a sexually-oriented business or employee
license.
15-17C-5 License Fees.
(1) Each applicant for a sexually-oriented business or
employee permit shall be required to pay regulatory
license fees as set forth in resolution by the Clinton
City Council. An application is not complete until all
appropriate fees have been paid.
(2) This fee shall be in addition to the other licenses
and fees required to do business within the City, if
applicable.
15-17C-6 License Term. Sexually-oriented business
licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be valid
from the date of issuance through December 31st of
each succeeding year. The license fees as required in
this Chapter shall not be prorated for any portion of a
year, but shall be paid in full for whatever potion of the
year the license is applied for.
15-17C-7 License Display. It is unlawful for any
sexually-oriented business location within the
boundaries of the Chapter to fail to display the license
granted pursuant to this Chapter in a prominent location
within the business premises.
15-17C-8 Issuance of Business License. The City
Business License Administrator shall approve the
issuance of a license to the applicant within thirty (30)
business days after receipt of an application, unless the
official finds one or more of the following:
(1) The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age;
(2) The applicant is overdue in payment to the City
of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against
the applicant or imposed on the applicant in relation
to a sexually-oriented business;
(3) The applicant has falsely answered a material
question or request for information as authorized by
this Chapter;
(4) The applicant has violated a provision of this
Chapter or similar provisions found in statutes or
ordinances from any jurisdiction within two years
immediately preceding the application; a criminal
conviction for a violation of a provision of this
Chapter or similar provisions from any jurisdiction,
whether or not it is being appealed, is conclusive
evidence of a violation, but a conviction is not
necessary to prove a violation;
(5) An applicant for the proposed business is in
violation of or not in compliance with this Chapter
or similar provisions found in statutes or ordinances
from any jurisdiction;
(6) An applicant has been convicted of or pled no
contest to any of the following crimes: Involving
prostitution; exploitation of prostitution; aggravated
promotion of prostitution; aggravated exploitation
of prostitution; solicitation of sex acts; sex acts for
hire; compelling prostitution; aiding prostitution;
sale, distribution or display of material harmful to
minors; sexual performance by minors; possession
of child pornography; lewdness; indecent exposure;
any crime involving sexual abuse or exploitation of
a child; sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault;
rape; forcible sodomy; forcible sexual abuse ;
incest; harboring a runaway child; criminal attempt,
conspiracy, or solicitation to commit any of the
foregoing offenses or offenses involving similar
elements from any jurisdiction, regardless of the
exact title of the offense; for which:
(a) Less than two (2) years have elapsed from the
date of conviction(s), if the conviction is of a
misdemeanor offense, or less than five (5) years, if
the convictions are of two or more misdemeanors
within the five years; or,
(b) Less than five (5) years have elapsed from the
date of conviction, if the offense is a felony.
(7) The fact that a conviction, as outlined in
subsection six (6), is being appealed shall have no
effect on the disqualification pursuant to this
Section;
(8) The premises to be used for the business have
been disapproved by Davis County Health
Department, City Fire Department, City Police
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Department, City Building Official or City Zoning
Official(s) as not being in compliance with the
applicable laws and ordinances of the City. If any of
the foregoing reviewing agencies cannot complete their
review within the thirty (30) day approval or denial
period, the agency or department may obtain from the
City Business License Administrator an extension of
time for their review of no more than fifteen (15) days.
The total time for the City to approve or deny a license
shall not exceed forty-five (45) days from the receipt of
an application. Businesses located outside of the
corporate boundaries of the City, but requiring a license
under this Chapter, may be denied a license pursuant to
this Chapter if the business does not have a valid
business license to conduct business at the business
location from the appropriate jurisdiction for that
location:
(a) Upon receipt of an application all departments
required to review the application shall determine
within seven (7) days whether or not the application is
complete in items needed for processing. Incomplete
applications shall immediately be returned to the
applicant with a specification of the items which are
incomplete;
(b) The time for processing applications specified in
this Section shall begin to run from the receipt of a
complete application;
(c) In the event that a license for a semi-nude
entertainment, semi-nude dancing agency, adult
business, or semi-nude entertainment business has not
been approved within thirty (30) days or the forty-five
(45) days allowed after an extension, the City shall
issue a temporary license pending completion of the
City's review; and,
(d) Any temporary license issued pursuant to
subsection (c) above may be withdrawn by the City, if
the completed review determines that the license should
have been denied.
15-17C-9 Transfer of Business License. Any
sexually-oriented business licenses granted under this
chapter shall not be transferable.
15-17C-10 Notice of Change in Information. Any
change in the information required to be submitted
under this Chapter for either a sexually-oriented
business license or sexually-oriented business employee
work permit shall be given, in writing, to the Business
License Administrator within fourteen (14) days after
such change.
15-17C-11 Statement in Advertisement. It is
unlawful for any advertisement by the sexually-oriented
business or employee to fail to state that the business or
employee is licensed by the City, and shall include
the City license number.
Section D. Additional Building Regulations
15-17D-1 Design of Premises
15-17D-2 Semi-nude Entertainment Business -
Design of Premises
15-17D-1 Design of Premises.
(1) In addition to the general requirements of
disclosure for a sexually-oriented business, any
applicant for a license as an adult business shall
also submit a diagram, drawn to scale, of the
premises of the business. The design and
construction, which must be completed prior to
granting a license or opening for business, shall
conform to the following:
(a) The interior of the premises shall be configured
in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view
from the manager's station of every area of the
premises to which any patron is permitted access for
any purpose, excluding restrooms;
(b) Restrooms may not contain any video
reproduction equipment or any of the business
merchandise. Signs shall be posted requiring only
one person be allowed in the restroom per stall, and
only one person in any stall at a time, and requiring
that patrons shall not be allowed access to
manager's station areas;
(c) For businesses which exclude minors from the
entire premises, all windows, doors and other
apertures to the premises shall be darkened or
otherwise constructed to prevent anyone outside the
premises from seeing the inside of the premises.
Businesses which exclude minors from less than all
of the premises shall be designed and constructed so
that minors may not see into the area from which
they are excluded; and,
(d) The diagram required shall not necessarily be a
professional engineer's or architect's blueprint,
unless required by State Construction Codes;
however, the diagram must show marked internal
dimensions, all overhead lighting fixtures, and
ratings for illumination capacity.
(2) It shall be the duty of the licensee and the
licensee's employees to insure that the views from
the manager's station in subsection one (1) of this
Section remain unobstructed by any doors, walls,
merchandise, display racks or any other materials,
at all times that any patron is present in the
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
premises, and to insure that no patron is permitted
access to any area of the premises which has been
designated as an area in which patrons will not be
permitted.
(3) The premises shall at all times be equipped and
operated with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are
permitted access at an illumination of not less than one
foot-candle, measured at floor level. It shall be the
duty of the licensee and the licensee's employees
present on the premises to insure that the illumination
described above is maintained at all times that any
patron is present in the premises.
15-17D-2 Semi-nude Entertainment Business -
Design of Premises.
(1) It is unlawful for business premises licensed for
semi-nude entertainment to:
(a) Permit a bed, sofa, mattress or similar item in any
room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed
in a reception room open to the public or in any office
to which patrons are not admitted, and except that in an
adult theater such items may be on the stage as part of
the performance;
(b) Allow any door on any room used for the business,
except for the door to an office to which patrons shall
not be admitted, outside doors and restroom doors, to
be lockable from the inside; or,
(c) Provide any room in which the employee or
employees and the patron or patrons are alone together.
(2) Adult theaters shall also require that any
performance area shall be separated from the patrons
by a stage, raised at least two (2) feet from the main
floor level, and shall be separated a minimum of three
(3) feet away, which separation shall be delineated by a
physical barrier at least three (3) feet high.
Section E. Employee Regulations
15-17E-1 Employee Work Permit
15-17E-2 Sexually-Oriented Business
15-17E-3 Employee Work Permit Application –
Disclosure
15-17E-4 Exemption from License Requirements
15-17E-5 Legitimate Artistic Modeling
15-17E-6 Sexually-Oriented Business Employee
Work Permit
15-17E-7 Change of Employee Information
15-17E-8 License Fees
15-17E-9 License Display
15-17E-10 Employee Conduct
15-17E-11 Inspection of Premises
15-17E-12 Alcohol Prohibited
15-17E-13 Performers - Prohibited Activities
15-17E-14 Patrons - Prohibited Activities
15-17E-1 Employee Work Permit. It is
unlawful for any person to act as a sexually-oriented
business employee, without first obtaining a
sexually-oriented business work permit, as specified
below in § 15-17E-3 et. seq.
15-17E-2 Sexually-Oriented Business. It is
unlawful for any sexually-oriented business to
employ, or for any individual to be employed as a
sexually-oriented business employee unless that
employee first obtains a sexually-oriented business
employee work permit.
15-17E-3 Employee Work Permit Application
– Disclosure.
(1) Upon the filing of a completed application for a
sexually-oriented business employee work permit,
the business license administrator shall issue a
temporary license to the applicant, which temporary
license shall expire upon the final decision of the
City to deny or grant the work permit an application
shall be considered complete when it contains the
information required in paragraphs a. thru e. as
follows:
(a) The correct legal name of each applicant;
(b) Current business address and telephone number;
(c) Identification issued by a federal or state
governmental agency with the individual’s date of
birth, colored photograph, signature, and physical
description;
(d) The individual’s fingerprints on a form provided
by a public safety department; and,
(e) Each applicant must provide a statement of
whether they have been convicted of or have pled
guilty or no contest to a specified criminal activity
as defined in this chapter, and if so, the specified
criminal activity involved the date, place, and
jurisdiction of each. The fact that a conviction is
being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification pursuant to this section.
(2) A license or permit required by this Title is in
addition to any other licenses or permits required by
the city, county, or state to engage in the business or
occupation. Persons engaged in the operation of an
adult-oriented business or in employment in an
adult-oriented business shall comply with all other
applicable local, state, and federal laws, ordinances,
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
and statutes, including zoning ordinances, as may be
required.
(3) The information provided by an applicant in
connection with an application for a license under this
chapter shall be maintained by the City on a
confidential basis, except that such information may be
disclosed only to law enforcement agencies in
connection with a law enforcement or public safety
function, or as may be required by governing law or
court order. The information provided by a sexuallyoriented
business license applicant in connection with
the application for a license under this chapter shall be
maintained by the business license official.
15-17E-4 Exemption from License Requirements.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sex
therapist or similar individual licensed by the State of
Utah to provide bona fide sexual therapy or counseling,
a licensed medical practitioner, licensed nurse,
psychiatrist, or psychologist while providing
professional services for which they are licensed.
15-17E-5 Legitimate Artistic Modeling.
(1) The City does not intend to unreasonably or
improperly prohibit legitimate modeling which may
occur in a state of nudity for purposes protected by the
First Amendment or similar State protection. The City
does intend to prohibit prostitution and related offenses
occurring under the guise of nude modeling.
(2) In the event a nude model appearance is requested,
a nude modeling permit must be applied for and
obtained prior to the time the nude modeling is to take
place. However, during such nude modeling
appearance, it is unlawful to:
(a) Appear nude in the presence of persons under the
age of eighteen;
(b) Allow, offer or agree to any touching by/of the
contracting party or other person by the individual
appearing nude or semi-nude;
(c) Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution,
solicitation of prostitution, solicitation of a minor, or
committee activities harmful to a minor;
(d) Allow, offer, commit or agree to any sex act as
validly defined by City ordinances or State statute; or,
(e) Allow, or agree to a person or persons to masturbate
or to be masturbated in the presence of the individual
contracted to appear nude or semi-nude.
15-17E-6 Sexually-Oriented Business Employee
Work Permit.
(1) Within thirty (30) days of the initial filing date of
the receipt of a completed application, the business
license official shall either issue a work permit or
issue a written notice of intent to deny a license to
the applicant. The business license official shall
approve the issuance of a work permit unless one or
more of the following is found by a preponderance
of evidence to be true.
(a) The applicant is less than eighteen (18) years of
age;
(b) The applicant has failed to provide information
as required by Section 4 for issuance of a license or
has falsely answered a question or request for
information on the application form;
(c) The license application fee required by this
section has not been paid; or,
(d) The applicant has been convicted of a specified
criminal activity, as defined in this ordinance, or
has been shown to have committed two or more
violations of § 15-17E-10 of this chapter within the
previous year.
(2) Sexually-oriented business employee work
permits may be obtained at any time throughout the
year. All employee work permits will expire on the
last day of the twelfth month following issuance.
(3) Sexually-oriented business licenses and
sexually-oriented business employee work permits
may be renewed only by making application and
payment of a fee as provided for in this chapter.
Application for renewal should be made at least
ninety (90) days before the expiration date of said
licenses and work permits, and when made less than
ninety (90) days before the expiration date, the
expiration of the license or work permit will not be
affected.
15-17E-7 Change of Employee Information.
Any change in the information required to be
submitted under this chapter for a sexually-oriented
business work permit will be given, in writing, to
the business license official within fourteen (14)
days after such change.
15-17E-8 License Fees. Each applicant for a
sexually-oriented employee work permit shall be
required to pay yearly regulatory license fees.
History: 10/10
15-17E-9 License Display. A sexually-oriented
business employee shall keep the employee’s work
permit on the premises where the licensee is
working and shall, while working on the sexuallyoriented
business premises, produce such work
permit for inspection upon request by a law
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
enforcement officer or other City official performing
functions connected with the enforcement of this
chapter.
15-17E-10 Employee Conduct. It is unlawful for any
sexually-oriented business licensee or sexually-oriented
business employee to knowingly or intentionally:
(1) Allow persons under the age of eighteen years on
the licensed premises;
(2) To allow, offer or agree to allow any alcohol to be
stored, used or consumed on or in the licensed
premises;
(3) Allow the outside door to the premises to be locked
while any patron or customer is in the licensed
premises;
(4) Allow, offer or agree to gambling on the licensed
premises;
(5) Allow, offer or agree to any sexually-oriented
business employee touching or being touched by any
patron or customer; whether clothed or unclothed, is
prohibited;
(6) Appear in a state of nudity before a patron on the
premises of a sexually-oriented business;
(7) Allow, offer or agree to illegal possession, use, sale
or distribution of controlled substances on the licensed
premises;
(8) Allow sexually-oriented business employees to
possess, use, sell, or distribute controlled substances,
while engaged in the activities of the business;
(9) Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution,
solicitation of prostitution, solicitation of a minor, or
committing activities harmful to a minor to occur on the
licensed premises or, in the event of an outcall
employee or business, the outcall employee
committing, offering or agreeing to commit
prostitution, attempting to commit prostitution,
soliciting prostitution, soliciting a minor, or committing
activities harmful to a minor;
(10) Allow, offer, commit or agree to any specified
sexual activity validly defined by City ordinances or
State statute in the presence of any customer or patron;
(11) Allow, offer or agree to allow a patron or customer
to masturbate in the presence of the sexually-oriented
business employee or on the premises of a sexuallyoriented
business;
(12) To engage or allow any employee to engage in
activity for the purpose of soliciting, beckoning,
requesting or suggesting to any person(s) to enter such
premises as a patron;
(13) Allow, offer, or agree to commit a criminal act
and specified sexual activity as defined in this Title;
or,
(14) To allow an employee to act in a capacity of
what is commonly known as a "lookout" to be
stationed or maintained to give warning of the
approach of any police officer to the premises of a
sexually-oriented business or to maintain or operate
any electrical or other device which is used or
capable of being used to give warning to persons
within the premises of sexually-oriented business of
the approach of any police officer.
15-17E-11 Inspection of Premises. A police
officer or other authorized officer may during the
hours that the establishment is open for business,
upon presentation of proper identification, inspect
those portions of any premises in which a sexuallyoriented
business regulated under this Chapter is
conducted that are open to or frequented by patrons
and the records kept on the premises as required by
this Chapter. Such inspection shall be limited in
scope to that necessary to determine compliance
with the regulatory provisions of this Chapter.
15-17E-12 Alcohol Prohibited.
(1) It is unlawful for any business licensed pursuant
to this Chapter to allow the sale, storage, supply, or
consumption of alcoholic beverages on the
premises.
(2) It is unlawful for any person to possess or
consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises of
any sexually-oriented business.
15-17E-13 Performers - Prohibited Activities. It
is unlawful for any professional dancer, or
performer, while performing in any business
licensed pursuant to this Chapter, in addition to
§15-16E-10:
(1) To touch in any manner any other person;
(2) To throw any object or clothing off the stage
area;
(3) Accept any money, drink or any other object
directly from any person;
(4) Allow another person to touch such performer
or place any money or object on the performer or
within the costume or person of the performer; or,
(5) Place anything within the costume or adjust or
move the costume while performing so as to render
the performer in a state of nudity.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
15-17E-14 Patrons - Prohibited Activities. It is
unlawful for any person, or any patron to knowingly or
intentionally to:
(1) Touch in any manner any performer or employee
while on the premises of a sexually-oriented business;
(2) Place any money or object on or within the costume
or person of any performer, or sexually-oriented
business employee;
(3) Cross over any barrier separating the patrons from
the stage during a semi-nude performance;
(4) Bring into the premises any alcoholic beverage for
on-premise consumption or not;
(5) Give or offer to give to any performer any drinks,
money or object while the performer is performing;
except, that money may be placed on the stage and may
be picked up by the performer by hand; or,
(6) Appear in a state of nudity on the premises of a
sexually-oriented business.
Section F. General Applicability, Actions for
Violations, Defenses
15-17F-1 Injunctions
15-17F-2 Suspension or Revocation
15-17F-3 Effect of License Revocation
15-17F-4 Appeal Procedure
15-17F-5 Violation – Penalty – Responsibility
15-17F-6 Severability
15-17F-1 Injunctions. An entity or individual who
operates or causes to be operated a sexually-oriented
business, without a valid license, or who employs or is
employed as an employee of a sexually-oriented
business, or who operates such a business or functions
as such an employee in violation of the provisions of
this Chapter, is subject to a suit for injunction in
addition to the civil and criminal violations provided
herein, and any other remedy available at law or in
equity.
15-17F-2 Suspension or Revocation.
(1) The City may issue a notice suspending or revoking
a sexually-oriented business or employee permit
granted under this Chapter if a licensee, or an employee
of the licensee has:
(a) Violated or is not in compliance with the provisions
of this Chapter;
(b) Has refused to allow any inspection of the premises
of the sexually-oriented business specifically
authorized by this Chapter, or by any other statute
or ordinance;
(c) Failure to pay a citation within the appropriate
time frame;
(d) Given materially false or misleading information
in obtaining the license;
(e) Knowingly operated the sexually-oriented
business or worked under the employee permit
during the period when the business licensee or
employee licensee's license was suspended;
(f) A licensee has committed an offense which
would be grounds for denial of a license for which
the time period required has not elapsed;
(g) On two or more occasions within a twelve (12)
month period, a person or persons committed in or
on, or solicited for in or on the licensed premises, or
committed on or off the premises, an offense which
would be grounds for denial of a license for which a
conviction has been obtained, and the person or
persons were employees, whether or not licensed, of
the sexually-oriented business at the time the
offenses were committed;
(h) A license is delinquent in payment to the City
for ad valorem taxes, or sales taxes related to the
sexually-oriented business;
(i) Knowingly or intentionally allow a patron to
commit any prohibited activity under § 15-16E-14;
or,
(j) Knowingly or intentionally allow an employee to
commit any prohibited activity under § 15-16E-10
or § 15-16E-13.
(2) Suspension or revocation shall take effect within
fifteen (15) days of the issuance of notice, unless an
appeal is filed as provided by this Chapter.
(3) The fact that a conviction is being appealed
shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
15-17F-3 Effect of License Revocation. When a
license issued pursuant to this Chapter is revoked,
the revocation shall continue for one (1) year from
its effective date, and the licensee shall not be
issued a sexually-oriented business or employee
permit for one (1) year from the date of such
revocation.
15-17F-4 Appeal Procedure. The denial,
suspension, or revocation of any license issued
pursuant to this Chapter may be appealed as set
forth in Section 15-4-6(1) & 15-4-6(2) of the Code
of Revised Ordinances of Clinton City.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
15-17F-5 Violation – Penalty – Responsibility.
(1) In addition to revocation or suspension of a license,
as provided in this Chapter, each violation of this
Chapter shall, upon citation by an Authorized City
Representative, require the licensee to pay a civil
penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars. In
addition to the civil fines provided in this Chapter, the
violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be a
class “B” misdemeanor. Each day of a violation shall
be considered a separate offense.
(2) Every act or omission by an employee constituting a
violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
deemed the act or omission of the sexually-oriented
business licensee and/or operator, if such act or
omission occurs either with the authorization,
knowledge, or approval of the licensee and/or
operator’s negligent failure to supervise the conduct of
the employee, and the sexually-oriented business
licensee shall be punishable for such act or omission in
the same manner as if the licensee committed the act or
caused the omission.
(3) A sexually-oriented business licensee and/or
operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all
employees while on the licensed premises, and any
act or omission of any employee constituting a
violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
deemed the act or omission of the licensee and/or
operator for the purposes of determining whether
the licensee’s license shall be revoked, suspended,
or renewed.
15-17F-6 Severability. Clinton City Municipal
Code Title15-17 and each section and provision of
said chapter there under, are hereby declared to be
independent divisions and subdivisions and, not
withstanding any other evidence of legislative
intent, it is hereby declared to be the controlling
legislative intent that if any provisions of said
chapter, or the application thereof to any person or
circumstance is held to be invalid, the remaining
sections or provisions and the application of such
sections and provisions to any person or
circumstances other than those to which it is held
invalid, shall not be affected thereby, and it is
hereby declared that such sections and provisions
would have been passed independently of such
section or provision so known to be invalid.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 18. Newsracks
15-18-1 Intent
15-18-2 Definitions
15-18-3 Placement Prohibitions
15-18-4 General Requirements
15-18-5 Abandonment
15-18-6 Violations - Removal of Rack
15-18-1 Intent. It is the intent of the City to keep the
road edge, park strips, and sidewalks clear of
obstructions to facilitate ease of roadway work, snow
removal, pedestrian traffic, and aesthetics within the
City. The control of newsracks within the City is
intended to create and maintain a safe, clean and
maneuverable environment as well as an area for
storage of snow and construction materials related to
roadway projects.
15-18-2 Definitions. As used in this chapter, the
following terms and phrases shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this Section:
"Newsrack" means any self-service or coin-operated
box, container, storage unit or other dispenser,
installed, used or maintained for the display and sale
of newspapers or news periodicals or distribution of
fliers for sales and rental information.
15-18-3 Placement Prohibitions. No person shall
install or maintain any newsrack which rests upon or
projects onto the City right-of-way.
15-18-4 General Requirements. No newsrack shall,
whole or in part, rest upon, in or over any public
sidewalk or park strip in the City.
(1) No newsrack shall be chained, bolted or otherwise
attached to any property not owned by the owner of
the newsrack, or to any permanently fixed object.
(2) No newsrack shall be used for advertising signs or
publicity purposes other than that dealing with the
display, sale, purchase or distribution of the
newspaper, news periodical or material sold or
distributed therein.
(3) Each newsrack shall be maintained in a clean,
neat and attractive condition and in good repair at all
times.
15-18-5 Abandonment. In the event any newsrack
installed pursuant to this chapter is not serviced with
the publication it is designed to disseminate for a
period of fourteen (14) days, the City reserves the
right to remove the same pursuant to the procedure
set out in § 15-18-6. For purposes of this Section,
abandonment shall include, but is not limited to,
circumstances where no publication is in the rack for
a period of fourteen (14) days.
15-18-6 Violations - Removal of Rack.
(1) Any newsrack installed, used or maintained in
violation of the provisions of this chapter may be
summarily removed and stored in any convenient
place by the Community Development Director or his
designated representative. Prior to removal he shall
take reasonable steps to notify the owner thereof.
Upon failure of the owner, following notice, to claim
the newsrack and pay the expenses of removal and
storage within thirty (30) days after the removal, the
newsrack shall be deemed to be unclaimed property
in possession of the City and may be disposed of
pursuant to law.
(2) In the case of violations of this chapter relative to
restrictions upon attachments of newsracks to
property other than that owned by the owner of the
newsrack, to fixed objects or each other, and upon
location of newsracks, the Community Development
Director or his designated representative may, as an
alternative to removal under § (1) above, remove the
attachment and/or move the rack or racks in order to
restore them to a legal condition.
History: 03/10, 10/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 15 Licenses
Chapter 19. Repealed
History 04/11
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
TITLE 16. MOTOR VEHICLES, PARKING
AND TRAFFIC
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. Repealed
Chapter 3. Repealed
Chapter 4. General Provisions
Chapter 5. Administration
Chapter 6. Restricted and Hazardous Vehicles
Chapter 7. Parking Restrictions
Chapter 8. Vehicle Impoundment
Chapter 9. Vehicle Registration
Chapter 10. Transportation Master Plan
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. Repealed
Chapter 3. Repealed
Chapter 4. General Provisions
16-4-1 Adoption
16-4-2 Citation to Code
16-4-3 Purpose – Compliance Required
16-4-4 Penalty for Violations
16-4-5 State Code – Title 41, Adopted
16-4-1 Adoption. All The traffic rules and
regulations hereinafter set forth are enacted and
adopted and made a part of the City Code. Rules,
regulations, and schedules adopted in connection
therewith may be cited and designated as the traffic
code by reference to the respective sections thereof.
16-4-2 Citation to Code. Where a citation or
information is issued pursuant to a violation of the
Utah Traffic Code, it shall be sufficient to use the
section of the Utah Traffic Code followed by the
words, "Clinton City Traffic Code, Title 16."
History: 9/84
16-4-3 Purpose - Compliance Required. The
traffic code is adopted in the interest of public
convenience, safety, and welfare. Every person shall
comply with, observe and obey, when applicable
thereto, all the provisions, requirements, and orders
of the traffic code and of the Police Department
issued in compliance therewith. Every pedestrian
shall be cautious and every driver considerate of the
rights and welfare of others.
16-4-4 Penalty for Violations.
(1) Non Parking Violations; any person violating any
of the provisions of the City traffic code is guilty of a
Class "C" misdemeanor, unless designated otherwise,
and upon conviction shall be punishable as a Class
“C” misdemeanor.
(2) Parking Violations;
(a) Any person violating any provisions of this Title
relating to illegally parked vehicles within Clinton City
shall be liable to the City for a civil penalty;
(b) Civil penalties shall be set by the City Council by
resolution, from time to time and published in the
Consolidated Fee Schedule. All penalty fees
collected will be payable to Clinton City.
(c) If a civil penalty imposed pursuant to this Title
remains unpaid after the issuance and or the receipt
of a citation, the City may use such lawful means as
are available to collect such penalty and add to the
penalty costs any reasonable attorney’s fees. Any
violation of this section is civil in nature. A
collection agency will be used to collect on all unpaid
penalties.
State Code - Title 41, Adopted. That portion of the
Utah Code entitled "Motor Vehicles Code" known as
Title 41, together with all amendments, deletions, and
additions that may hereafter be made by state law, is
adopted by reference and made a part of the
ordinances of this City.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
Chapter 5. Administration
16-5-1 Authority to Install Traffic Control
Devices
16-5-2 Office of Primary Responsibility
16-5-3 Emergency and Experimental
Regulations
16-5-4 Establish Safety Zones - Mark Traffic
Lanes
16-5-5 Timing of Speed by Traffic Signals
16-5-6 Authority to Place and Obedience to
Turning Markings
16-5-7 Speed Limit in Clinton City Parks
Designated
16-5-8 Prima Facie Speed - Designate Streets
16-5-9 Utah Traffic Code not Conclusive
16-5-10 Low Profile Motorized Vehicle
Prohibited on Public Property
16-5-11 Obedience to Police and Fire
Department Orders Required
16-5-12 Compliance of Public Employees
16-5-13 Compliance of Persons Propelling
Push Carts or Riding Animals
16-5-14 Right of Real Property Owner to
Regulate Traffic
16-5-15 Coaster, Roller Skate Use Restrictions
16-5-16 Emergency Vehicles; Exempt
16-5-17 Removal of Brush, Foliage or Other
View Obstructions
16-5-18 Obstructing Sidewalks
16-5-19 Parents and Guardians Shall Not
Permit Violations
16-5-1 Authority to Install Traffic Control
Devices. The Chief of Police, in cooperation with the
Public Works and Community Development
departments of the City, is authorized to place and
maintain all traffic control devices, when and as
required under this Title, to make effective the
provisions of this Title, and may place and maintain
the additional traffic control devices as may be
deemed necessary to regulate, guide, or warn traffic
under this Title. The placement and maintenance of
traffic control devices shall comport, where practical,
with the standards established by the Federal
Highway Administration, the State Department of
Transportation, and the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices.
16-5-2 Office of Primary Responsibility. The
Clinton City Police Department is the Office of
Primary Responsibility for review and proposing
changes to this Title. The Chief of Police may call
on the Community Development Department and
City Court for assistance in reviewing this Chapter.
16-5-3 Emergency and Experimental
Regulations.
(1) The Chief of Police, by and with the approval of
the City Council, is empowered to make regulations
necessary to make effective the provisions of this
Title and to make and enforce temporary or
experimental regulations to cover emergency or
special conditions. No temporary or experimental
regulations shall remain in effect for more than
ninety (90) days.
(2) The Chief of Police may test traffic control
devices under actual conditions of traffic.
16-5-4 Establish Safety Zones - Mark Traffic
Lanes. The Chief of Police, in cooperation with the
Public Works and Community Development
departments of the City, is authorized:
(1) To establish safety zones at places as may be
deemed necessary for the protection of pedestrians;
and
(2) To mark lanes for traffic on street pavements at
places as may be deemed advisable, and consistent
with this Title.
16-5-5 Timing of Speed by Traffic Signals. The
Chief of Police is authorized to regulate the timing of
traffic signals so as to permit the movement of traffic
in an orderly and safe manner, at speeds somewhat
below the speeds otherwise applicable within the
district or at intersections, and may erect appropriate
signs giving notice thereof.
16-5-6 Authority to Place and Obedience to
Turning Markings. The Chief of Police, in
cooperation with the Public Works and Community
Development Departments of the City, is authorized
to place islands, markers, or signs within or adjacent
to intersections indicating the course to be traveled
by vehicles turning at intersections, and this course
shall be traveled irrespective of any other provisions
of this Title.
16-5-7 Speed Limit in Clinton City Parks
Designated.
(1) On the Clinton City Park perimeter streets of
2050 North from 1500 West to 1850 West, and 1850
West from 2050 North to 2300 North, the speed limit
shall be not to exceed 20 miles per hour.
History: 8/97, 5/08
(2) The speed limit on the internal Park roadways and
parking areas of any City Park shall be not to exceed
15 miles per hour.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
16-5-8 Prima Facie Speed - Designate Streets.
When appropriate street signs giving notice of speeds
thereon are erected, the prima facie speed limits are
hereby designated for the following streets:
(1) School Zones - Twenty miles per hour when
yellow lights are flashing. The speed limit shall be a
maximum of 20 mph in all signed school zones when
flashing yellow lights are present.
(2) Residential Streets – All non-arterial and noncollector
streets are designated as residential streets,
and, unless otherwise designated in this chapter, shall
have a maximum speed limit of 25 mph. One
collector street exception which is also 25 mph is:
750 West from 800 North to 1300 North.
(3) Collector Streets – thirty miles per hour. All
collector streets shall have a maximum speed limit of
30 mph, except those otherwise designated in this
chapter.
(4) Speed Limits on State Roads. Speed limits on
1800 North Street (SR-37) and 2000 West Street
(SR-108) shall be established by the Utah State
Department of Transportation (UDOT).
History: 3/69, 6/69, 8/71, 11/72, 11/74, 12/77, 2/78,
9/84, 9/89, 6/91, 11/94, 8/97, 10/99, 11/99, 11/03,
1/04
16-5-9 Utah Traffic Code not Conclusive. The
adoption of the Utah Traffic Code shall not be
conclusive of traffic acts or violations. Therefore,
other acts may be declared violations of the health,
safety and peace of the inhabitants of Clinton City.
History: 9/84
16-5-10 Low Profile Motorized Vehicle Prohibited
on Public Property.
(1) Definitions. For the purposes of this Section:
“Public Property” means any public street,
property or right-of-way, which includes sidewalks,
trails, parking lots, vacant fields, or parks.
“Low Profile Motorized Vehicle” means any
motorized vehicle that:
(a) Is not regulated by the State or by any other City
Code provision;
(b) Is not otherwise permitted upon the highways or
sidewalks; and
(c) Is less than thirty-six inches (36") in height when
in its normal operating position, notwithstanding any
flag, antenna, or other device attached, or
modifications made thereto. This definition includes,
but is not limited to, “pocket bikes” or miniature
motorcycles, and “go-carts.”
(2) Exceptions. These regulations do not apply to
motorized handicap vehicles, i.e. wheelchairs and
scooters, nor to authorized, City sponsored events,
i.e. parades, races, etc.
(3) Proscription. It is unlawful for any person to
operate a low profile motorized vehicle upon any
public property within the City. It is also unlawful
for an adult, parent, or guardian to allow a minor to
operate a vehicle on public property within the City.
History: 10/04
16-5-11 Obedience to Police and Fire Department
Orders Required. No person shall fail or refuse to
comply with any lawful order or direction of an
officer of the Police or Fire Department, in their
capacity as an officer.
16-5-12 Compliance of Public Employees.
(1) The provisions of this Title shall apply to the
driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service
of the United States Government, this state, or any
political subdivision thereof, and it is unlawful for the
driver to violate any of the provisions of this Title,
except as otherwise permitted herein.
(2) Unless specifically made applicable, the
provisions of this Title shall not apply to persons,
teams, motor vehicles, and other equipment while
actually engaged in authorized work upon the surface
of the street, or upon wires immediately above the
surface of the street, but shall apply to persons,
teams, vehicles, and equipment when traveling to or
from the work site.
16-5-13 Compliance of Persons Propelling Push
Carts or Riding Animals. Every person propelling
any push cart or riding an animal upon a roadway,
and every person driving any animal drawn vehicle,
shall be subject to the provisions of this Title
applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those
provisions which by their very nature can have no
application.
16-5-14 Right of Real Property Owner to
Regulate Traffic. Nothing in this Title shall be
construed to prevent the owner of real property, used
by the public for purpose of vehicular travel by
permission of the owner and not as matter of right,
from prohibiting the use, or from requiring other or
different or additional conditions than those specified
in this Title, or otherwise regulating the use as may
seem best to the owner.
16-5-15 Coaster, Roller Skate Use Restrictions.
No person upon roller skates, in-line skates, or riding
in or by means of any coaster, sled, toy wagon,
scooter, skateboard, or similar device, shall go upon
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
any roadway, except while crossing the roadway on a
crosswalk and when so crossing the person shall be
subject to all of the duties applicable to pedestrians.
16-5-16 Emergency Vehicles; Exempt. The driver
of an emergency vehicle shall be exempt from the
driving restrictions imposed by this Title when
driving under the conditions set forth in Section 41-6-
14, Utah Code (as amended), and as may hereafter be
amended.
16-5-17 Removal of Brush, Foliage or Other View
Obstructions. The City may remove from any
street, parking, gutter, sidewalk, or any other City
owned or controlled property all brush, foliage, or
other obstruction which interferes with or impairs the
view of an intersection or a railroad grade crossing or
which creates a traffic hazard.
16-5-18 Obstructing Sidewalks. Pedestrians shall
not obstruct or prevent the free use of sidewalks or
crosswalks by other pedestrians.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
Chapter 6. Restricted and Hazardous
Vehicles
16-6-1 Definitions
16-6-2 Restricted Vehicle and Hazardous Cargo
Routes
16-6-3 Tank Vehicle Restrictions
16-6-4 Loading – Confining, Securing and
Fastening Required
16-6-5 Exemptions
16-6-6 Towing Away of Vehicles
16-6-1 Definitions.
“Explosive” - Any chemical compound or
mechanical mixture that is commonly used or
intended for the purpose of producing an explosion,
that contains any oxidizing and combustible units or
other ingredients in the proportions, quantities, or
packing, that an ignition by fire, by friction, by
concussion, by percussion, or by detonator of any
part of the compound or mixture may cause a sudden
generation of highly heated gases that the resultant
gaseous pressures are capable of producing
destructive effects on contiguous objects or of
destroying life and limb.
“Corrosive Liquids” - Those acids, alkaline caustic
liquids, and other corrosive liquids which when in
contact with living tissue, will cause severe damage
of tissue by chemical action or are liable to cause fire
when in contact with organic matter or with certain
chemicals.
“Flammable Liquids” - Any liquid having a flash
point below one hundred degrees (100°) Fahrenheit
and having a vapor pressure not exceeding forty (40)
pounds per square inch (absolute) at one hundred
degrees (100°) Fahrenheit.
“Combustible Liquids” - Any liquid having a flash
point at or above one hundred degrees (100º)
Fahrenheit.
“Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LP Gas)” - Any
material which is composed predominantly of the
following hydrocarbons or mixtures of them;
propane, propylene, butane (normal butane or
isobutane), and butylenes.
“Hazardous Materials” - Materials as flammable
solids, corrosive liquids, radioactive materials,
oxidizing materials, highly toxic materials, poisonous
gases, reactive materials, unstable materials,
hyperbolic materials, and pyrophoric materials as
defined in Article 9 of the Uniform Fire Code, and
any substance or mixture of substances which is an
irritant, a strong sensitizer, or which generates
pressure through exposure to heat, decomposition, or
other means.
“Tank Vehicle" - Any vehicle, including those with
a cargo tank mounted thereon or built as an integral
part thereof, used for the transportation of flammable
liquids, combustible liquids, LP gas, hazardous
chemicals, explosives, or corrosive substances. Tank
vehicles include self-propelled vehicles, full trailers,
semi-trailers, and railroad cars, with or without
motive power and carrying part or all of the load.
“Restricted Vehicles” - All vehicles or combinations
of vehicle and load having a length of more than
forty-five feet (45'), or a gross vehicle weight of
thirteen thousand (13,000) pounds or greater, or a
width of more than eight feet (8') with load, or a
height of more than fourteen feet (14') with or
without load, are restricted vehicles. Excepted
herefrom are recreation vehicles and vehicles
assigned "EX" license plates.
“Hazardous Cargo Vehicles” - All vehicles
carrying explosives or corrosive substances in excess
of five (5) gallons (other than fuels carried in
permanently attached tanks and used exclusively for
propulsion of the vehicle to which attached).
“Servicing” - For purposes of this Chapter,
"servicing" shall mean the performance of
mechanical repairs or maintenance by a licensed
business, located within the proper zoning
designation, performed at said location.
16-6-2 Restricted Vehicle and Hazardous Cargo
Routes. All restricted vehicles and hazardous cargo
vehicles, and all trucks or similar vehicles registered
for thirteen thousand (13,000) pounds gross weight or
more, including unladened truck tractors as defined
in Section 41-6a-102, Utah Code (as amended), shall
be driven or parked only upon those streets or parts
of streets described below, deviating only when
necessary to traverse another street or streets for the
purpose of immediate loading, unloading, or
servicing or "refueling", and then only by deviation
from the nearest truck route as is reasonable and
practical; provided that no vehicle shall be loaded or
unloaded upon any street or part of a street if there is
usable off-street loading or unloading space
available. If the loading or unloading requires the
restricted vehicle to be located outside of the
restricted vehicle routes for more than twelve (12)
hours, the operator thereof shall obtain a permit from
the Police Department. The time period granted by
said permit cannot exceed twenty-four (24) hours.
(1) Approved Routes: SR 108 and SR 37
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
(2) Hazardous cargo vehicles shall be driven upon
those streets stipulated in 16-6-2(1) and none others
unless as authorized by a permit issued therefore by
the Chief of the Fire Department of this City.
16-6-3 Tank Vehicle Restrictions.
(1) A tank vehicle and hazardous cargo vehicles
carrying explosives, corrosive, or flammable
substances shall not be left unattended on any
residential street; nor parked in or within five
hundred feet (500') of any residential area, apartment
or hotel complex, educational, hospital or care
facility at any time; or at any other place that could,
in the opinion of the Fire Chief, present an extreme
life hazard.
(2) In locations other than those specified in
Subsection (1) above, a driver shall not leave a tank
vehicle unattended on any street, highway, avenue or
alley.
(3) Exceptions to Subsections (1) and (2) above:
(a) Stops for meals during the day or night for one (1)
hour, if the street is well lighted at the point of
parking.
(b) When, in case of accident or other emergency, the
operator must leave to obtain assistance.
16-6-4 Loading - Confining, Securing and
Fastening Required. No vehicle shall be driven or
moved on any public highway unless the vehicle is so
constructed or loaded as to prevent its contents from
dropping, shifting, leaking, or otherwise escaping
from, except that sand or other abrasives may be
dropped for the purpose of securing traction, or water
or other substances may be sprinkled on a roadway in
cleaning or maintaining the roadway.
16-6-5 Exemptions. The provisions of this Chapter
shall not apply to passenger buses operating under
the authority of the public service commission of this
state, or to authorized emergency vehicles.
16-6-6 Towing Away of Vehicles.
(1) In addition to any other legal remedy, any vehicle
in violation of this Chapter may be towed at the
discretion of the investigating public safety officer.
(2) No person shall operate on any public highway,
any vehicle with any load unless the load and any
covering is suitably fastened, secured, and confined
according to the nature of the load so as to prevent
the covering or load from becoming loose, detached,
or in any manner a hazard to other users of the
highway.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
Chapter 7. Parking Restrictions
16-7-1 Parking Restrictions
16-7-2 Streets - Parking Prohibited at all
Times
16-7-3 Streets - Parking Prohibited During
Certain Hours
16-7-4 School Zone Parking Restrictions
16-7-5 Time Limited Parking
16-7-6 Parking on Sidewalk or Parkstrip
Area Prohibited
16-7-7 Parks, Playgrounds, Grounds of
Public Buildings
16-7-8 Municipal Building Parking
16-7-9 Parallel Parking Required –
Exceptions
16-7-10 Parking Space Markings
16-7-11 Business District
16-7-12 Bus Zones
16-7-13 Buses
16-7-14 Blocking Traffic
16-7-15 Double Parking, Standing or Stopping
16-7-16 Using Streets for Storage
16-7-17 Working on Vehicles in Streets,
Parks or Parking Lots
16-7-18 Abandoned Vehicles
16-7-19 Snow Removal
16-7-20 Restricted Vehicles - Parking
Regulations
16-7-21 Restricted Recreational Vehicles
16-7-22 Vehicles Illegally Parked on Streets -
Police Authority to Move
16-7-23 Fire Lanes
16-7-24 Parking for Persons with Disabilities
16-7-25 Vacant Lots or Parking Lots - Display
for Sale Prohibited
16-7-26 Prohibited Parking in Front Yards on
Residential Property
16-7-27 Parking Violation and Unauthorized
Use of Streets: Strict Liability of
Owner
16-7-1 Parking Restrictions. In addition to other
parking restrictions in this Code and except when
necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in
compliance with law or the directions of a police
officer or official traffic control device, no person
shall:
(1) Stop, stand or park any vehicle:
(a) Over, above, on, or across any sidewalk or portion
thereof, or to park a vehicle in a manner so as to
obstruct access upon, or use of, the entire surface of
any sidewalk;
(b) Within an intersection;
(c) On a crosswalk;
(d) Alongside or opposite any street excavation or
obstruction when stopping, standing or parking
would obstruct traffic;
(e) That obstructs a Public Works project;
(f) Upon any bridge, viaduct, or elevated structure
where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic;
(g) Park facing the wrong direction;
(h) In the area between the travel lanes of a three or
five lane road, including crossovers;
(i) In any location that interferes with the delivery
and monitoring of essential services, such as utilities,
postal services, and refuse collection;
(j) To constitute a fire hazard or an obstruction to a
fire fighting vehicles, equipment, or personnel;
(k) That is unattended with faulty or defective
equipment;
(l) Carrying explosives, corrosives, or flammable
substances;
(m) Upon any street, public right-of-way, or publicly
owned or controlled property a vehicle that is
mechanically inoperable or cannot be lawfully
operated on public streets. For purposes of this
Subsection, "mechanically inoperable" includes, but
is not limited to, flat tire, dead battery, any
mechanical problem that would prohibit the
immediate starting of the engine and proceeding in a
normal manner, or any physical condition; missing or
inoperable lighting, prohibiting lawful operation.
"Lawfully operated" includes, but is not limited to,
having current registration, inspection, and required
equipment;
(n) Any place where official traffic control devices
prohibit stopping.
(2) Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not,
except momentarily to pick up or discharge a
passenger or passengers:
(3) On a public street in front of or within five (5)
feet of a residential driveway:
(a) On a public street in front of or within fifteen (15)
feet of a driveway serving a commercial or business
use;
(b) Within fifteen feet (15') of a fire hydrant;
(c) Within twenty feet (20') of a crosswalk at an
intersection;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
(d) Within thirty feet (30') upon the approach to any
flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic control
signal located at the side of a roadway;
(e) Within twenty feet (20') of the driveway entrance
to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite
the entrance to any fire station within seventy five
feet (75') of said entrance when properly signposted;
(f) In any fire lane or to otherwise block or obstruct
any fire lane established by the City;
(g) At any place where official traffic control devices
prohibit standing.
(4) Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except
temporarily for the purpose of and while actually
engaged in loading or unloading property or
passengers:
(a) On or within fifty feet (50') of the nearest rail of a
railroad crossing;
(b) Left parked in the same place on any street
continuously for (72) hours;
(c) The driver of which has been taken into custody
by the police under circumstances that would leave
the vehicle unattended on a street or restricted
parking areas;
(d) Trailer, boat, or similar apparatus upon any
developed parcel at a location other than that
designed for parking:
(i) Areas designed for parking must be concrete,
asphalt, or similar solid surface of sufficient size to
house the entire vehicle;
(ii) Exception. This Section shall not apply to
vehicles parked so as to facilitate the immediate
loading or unloading thereof or service vehicles
actively involved in the construction, repair, or
servicing of the premises.
(e) Park at any place where official traffic control
devices prohibit parking.
(5) Move a vehicle not lawfully under the person's
control into any prohibited area or an unlawful
distance from the curb.
(6) Park on residential streets, within the
Performance Zone, to frequent, either for services or
employment, commercial or office facilities.
16-7-2 Streets - Parking Prohibited at all Times.
(1) It shall be unlawful to park a vehicle or permit the
vehicle to remain parked upon any street, part of a
street or roadway when signs or traffic markings are
erected by the City which gives notice that parking is
prohibited.
(2) The Chief of Police is authorized to determine
and designate by proper signs placed, not exceeding
two hundred feet (200') in separation, in which the
stopping, standing, or parking of vehicles would
create an especially hazardous condition or would
cause unusual delay to traffic. Considerations in
evaluating such sites are:
(a) Proximity of commercial drive access to an
intersection;
(b) Parking clearances required as established in
Section 16-7-2 thru 16-7-5;
(c) Sight triangle issues as defined in the Clinton City
Zoning Ordinance;
(d) Establishment of or the need for establishing a
left turn lane on the residential street at the
intersection;
(e) Turning conflicts with street traffic and traffic
exiting and entering drive accesses into commercial
or office parking areas; or
(f) Speed differences between traffic on intersecting
streets.
16-7-3 Streets - Parking Prohibited During
Certain Hours. When signs or traffic markings are
erected or placed by direction of the City, no person
shall park a vehicle or permit said vehicle to remain
standing during the hours and days specified by the
signs and markings upon any street, parts of a street,
or roadway.
16-7-4 School Zone Parking Restrictions.
(1) On 1800 North at 1200 West, there shall be no
curbside parking on the north side of the street within
100 feet east of and 50 feet west of the crosswalk.
On the south side, there shall be no curbside parking
within 100 feet west and 50 feet east of the
crosswalk.
(2) On 1000 West, on the west side of the street, from
1800 North intersection south to the south boundary
of Veteran’s Park, no vehicle parking shall be
allowed at any time; except, along the street
boundary of Veteran’s Park, where 10 minute loading
and unloading will be allowed.
(3) On 1800 North in front of West Clinton
Elementary School, on the north side of the street,
there shall be no curbside parking within 100 feet
east and 50 feet west of the crosswalks.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
16-7-5 Time Limited Parking. It shall be
unlawful to park a vehicle or permit the vehicle to
remain parked upon any street, part of a street, or
roadway, for a period of time longer than the time
specified, between the hours shown, when signs or
traffic markings are erected or placed by the City
restricting the times for parking. The parking time
restrictions established shall not be applicable on
Sundays, and the time before eight o'clock (8:00)
A.M. and after six o'clock (6:00) P.M. on any day,
and on state legal holidays.
16-7-6 Parking on Sidewalk or Parkstrip Area
Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to
leave or cause to be left, or parked, any vehicle over,
above, on, or across the public easement or any
portion of a street between the sidewalk and curbing
or the lateral lines of a roadway and the adjacent
sidewalk abutting any public street.
16-7-7 Parks, Playgrounds, Grounds of Public
Buildings.
(1) Except by City Council direction pertaining to a
specific park use event, no vehicle shall stop, stand or
park curbside within interior roadways of the Clinton
City park. This also applies to the Park perimeter
streets as follows:
(a) 2300 North, South side from just west of 1850
West to 1500 West;
(b) 1500 West, West side from 2300 North to 2050
North;
(c) 2050 North, North side from 1500 West to 1850
West;
(d) 2050 North, South side from 1720 West to 1850
West; and,
(e) 1850 West, both sides from 2050 north to 2300
North.
(2) Unless specifically authorized by the City
Manager, it shall be unlawful for any person to park a
motor vehicle:
(a) At any place in any public park, playground or
grounds of any public building other than on the
roads or parking lots provided for public parking and
then only in accordance with provisions of any
officially installed signs; and,
(b) On any footpath or trail in any City park or
playground.
16-7-8 Municipal Building Parking. Designation
for Employees and Officials: Certain areas of the
parking lots or streets within the municipal building
block, located within the City Campus and Public
Works area may be designated by the City Manager
for parking by employees and officials of the City,
Davis County and the state. These parking areas shall
be designated by appropriate signs setting forth the
nature of the restriction and the times. If no times are
indicated parking is restricted 24 hours a day 7 days a
week.
16-7-9 Parallel Parking Required - Exceptions.
Except when necessary in obedience to traffic
regulations or traffic signs or signals, the operator of
a vehicle shall not stop, stand or park the vehicle in a
roadway other than parallel with the edge of the
roadway, headed in the direction of traffic, and with
the curb side wheels of the vehicle within twelve
inches (12") of the curb or edge of the roadway,
except as provided in the following subsections:
(1) Designated Angle Parking: Upon those streets
which have been designated and marked or signed for
angle parking, vehicles shall be parked at the angle to
the curb indicated by the marks or signs.
(2) Loading Or Unloading Merchandise; Permit
Required: In places where, and at hours when,
stopping for the loading or unloading of merchandise
or materials is permitted, vehicles used for the
transportation of merchandise or materials may back
into the curb to take on or discharge loads, but not
otherwise, when the owner of the vehicle holds a
permit granting him the special privilege under §16-
6-2 of this chapter; provided, that the permit shall be
either in the possession of the operator or on the
vehicle at the time the vehicle is backed against the
curb to take on or discharge a load. It is unlawful for
any owner or operator to violate any of the special
terms or conditions of the special permit.
16-7-10 Parking Space Markings. At any place
where parking is limited by time restrictions the City
Manager is authorized, when he finds that the
demand for parking space and the orderly use thereof
requires action, to cause to be marked and designated
upon the curbs and roadways the parking spaces to be
used for parking of vehicles. Whenever parking
spaces have been designated and marked as set forth
in this section, it is unlawful to park any vehicle in a
manner that it occupies or encroaches upon more
than one parking space unless the vehicle is of a size
that it cannot be parked wholly within one space.
16-7-11 Business District. No person shall stop any
motor vehicle in the business district of the City for a
period of time longer than is reasonably necessary for
loading or unloading passengers, except in a proper
parking zone or in obedience to an official sign or
signal, whether said motor vehicle is attended or
unattended.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
16-7-12 Bus Zones. It is unlawful for the operator
of any vehicle other than a bus to stand or park in an
officially designated bus stop except that the operator
of any passenger vehicle may temporarily stop or
stand in this zone for the purpose of and while
actually engaged in the loading or unloading of
passengers.
16-7-13 Buses. It is unlawful for the operator of any
bus to stand or park upon any street upon which
parking is prohibited, restricted, or limited as to time,
at any place other than at a bus stop except that this
provision shall not prevent the operator of any
vehicle from temporarily stopping in accordance with
other stopping or parking regulations at any place for
the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading
or unloading passengers.
16-7-14 Blocking Traffic. It is unlawful for any
operator to stop, stand or park any vehicle upon a
street in a manner or under conditions as to leave
available less than ten feet (10') of the width of the
roadway for the movement of vehicular traffic,
except that an operator may stop temporarily during
the actual loading or unloading of passengers, when
necessary in obedience to traffic regulations, traffic
signs, signals, or a police officer.
16-7-15 Double Parking, Standing or Stopping.
No person shall park, stand or stop a vehicle upon the
roadway side of another vehicle which is parked,
standing or stopped except in compliance with
directions of a police officer or traffic control device,
or when necessary to avoid other traffic.
16-7-16 Using Streets for Storage.
(1) Restrictions: No person who owns or has
possession, custody or control of any nonmotorized
vehicle, utility trailer, house trailer, boat, boat trailer
or any other type of trailer shall park or store the
vehicle, trailer or boat, whether attached or
unattached to a motor vehicle, upon any public street
for a period of time more than twenty four (24) hours.
Nonmotorized vehicles shall be considered to be in
violation of this section if parked in any one location
for longer than twenty four (24) hours or if the
vehicle has been parked in one or more locations
within the same block for longer than a twenty four
(24) hour period.
(2) Unmounted Camper; Automobile Hulk: It shall
be unlawful to park, place, store, abandon, or
otherwise leave any unmounted camper or any
"automobile hulk", (as defined in section 10-2-1 of
this Title), on any public street, sidewalk or right of
way, at any time.
16-7-17 Working on Vehicles in Streets, Parks or
Parking Lots. No person shall park or operate a
motor vehicle or any type trailer upon the public
street or in any City park or public parking lot for the
purpose of repairing, painting or greasing a vehicle,
and no person shall repair, grease or paint a motor
vehicle or any type trailer on a public street or in any
City park or public parking lot except to make repairs
necessitated by an emergency.
16-7-18 Abandoned Vehicles. It shall be unlawful
to abandon any vehicle:
(1) Upon any street. A vehicle is presumed to be
abandoned if it is left unattended on a street for a
period in excess of seventy two (72) hours.
(2) On public or private property for a period in
excess of seven days without express or implied
consent of the owner or person in lawful possession
or control of the property.
16-7-19 Snow Removal. From November 15 of
each year to March 15 of the following year, the
following regulations shall apply.
(1) It shall be unlawful to stop, stand, park or permit
a vehicle or trailer owned by that person to stop stand
or park, in any manner upon the public street from
12:00 a.m. (midnight) until 7:00 a.m.
(2) During all times, other than those set forth in
paragraph (1) above, no person, who owns or has
possession, custody, or control of any vehicle, shall
park, or allow or permit another to park any vehicle
upon any public street when the removal of snow
from the streets is apparent or imminent, or when
necessary, as determined by the City Manager or his
appointee. A citation may be issued and/or the
vehicle or trailer shall be subject to removal and
impound under Chapter 8 of this Title.
(3) Snowbound Vehicles; Removal: It shall be
unlawful for the owner of a vehicle to allow his
vehicle to remain standing upon any public street for
longer than forty eight (48) consecutive hours after
the vehicle has become snowbound due to
snowplows plowing around the vehicle. Vehicles
shall be presumed to be abandoned. Abandoned
vehicles, as provided under Section 16-7-18 of this
Title, shall be subject to removal and impound under
Chapter 8 of this Title.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
(4) Obstructing Snow Removal; Impoundment: It
shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or permit a
vehicle owned by that person to park in a manner that
obstructs snow removal by failing to leave adequate
room for passage of plows and other removal
equipment. Vehicles so parked are subject to
impoundment under Chapter 8 of this Title.
(5) Temporary Prohibited Parking; Authority: In
order to permit the removal of accumulations of
snow, or to respond to unseasonal snow storms the
City Manager shall have the authority to announce a
temporary period suspending parking in any specific
area or throughout the entire City. It shall be
unlawful to park or fail to remove a vehicle on a
street when so designated and posted and any vehicle
in violation may be removed and impounded under
Chapter 8 of this Title. Adequate designation and
posting shall occur by posting for at least twenty four
(24) hours, at intervals not exceeding one-half (1/2)
mile.
16-7-20 Restricted Vehicles - Parking
Regulations.
(1) Defined: For purposes of this section, "restricted
vehicle" shall mean:
(a) A vehicle or trailer with a rated capacity of one
and one-half (11/2) tons or more;
(b) A vehicle licensed for or trailer rated for more
than sixteen thousand (16,000) pounds gross;
(c) A vehicle or trailer with a length of more than
forty feet (40') feet; or, a width of more than eight
feet six inches (8' 6”); or, fourteen (14) feet in height,
including any attached trailer;
(d) Construction vehicles or equipment, except as
allowed under this title; or
(e) Farm tractors or self-propelled implements of
husbandry, or other agricultural equipment or
implements.
(2) Loading And Unloading: No person shall park, or
allow to remain standing, any restricted vehicle, as
defined in subsection 1 of this Section, upon any
street, part of a street or roadway in any area of the
City except while actually loading or unloading. In
no event shall it remain parked for purposes of
loading or unloading in excess of twelve (12) hours.
(3) Time Limitation: For purposes of this Section a
restricted vehicle shall be deemed parked, even
though the motor is running, if the vehicle is left
standing for any period in excess of three (3) minutes
when the same is not attended by a driver lawfully
authorized to drive the said vehicle (except when
unloading or loading as provided in subsection 2 of
this Section).
16-7-21 Restricted Recreational Vehicles.
(1) Definitions:
“Recreational Vehicle” means vehicular unit,
primarily designed as a temporary dwelling for
travel, recreational, and vacation use, which is either
self-propelled or is mounted on or pulled by another
vehicle, including but not limited to, a travel trailer, a
camping trailer, a truck camper, a motor home, a fifth
wheel trailer and a van.
“Restricted Recreational Vehicle” means
recreational vehicle which has or exceeds either a
body height of seven feet (7'), a body width of eight
feet (8') or a body length of twenty feet (20').
“Residential Areas” means it shall be unlawful to
park, place, store, or otherwise leave a restricted
recreational vehicle upon any street in a residential
area for a period of time longer than twenty four (24)
hours. Vehicles shall be considered to be in violation
of this Section if parked in any one location for
longer than twenty four (24) hours or if the vehicle
has been parked in one or more locations within the
same block for a twenty four (24) hour period.
“Intersections” means it shall be unlawful to stop,
stand or park a restricted recreational vehicle within
forty feet (40') of an intersection.
16-7-22 Vehicles Illegally Parked on Streets -
Police Authority to Move. Whenever any police
officer finds a vehicle parked or standing upon a
street and the vehicle is creating a danger to persons
or property, the officer is hereby authorized to move
the vehicle, cause the vehicle to be moved or require
the driver or other person in charge of the vehicle to
move the same, to a safe position off the street.
16-7-23 Fire Lanes.
(1) The Chief of the Fire Department or
representative thereof has the authority to designate
the location of fire lanes. The Fire Chief, the Chief of
Police, and their respective departments are
authorized to enforce the provisions of designated
fire lanes.
(2) With the exception of Subsection (1) above, it
shall be unlawful for any person to establish, create,
post, mark, or otherwise designate areas as fire lanes
or fire access roadways.
(3) Within private parking lots, it is unlawful for any
person to stop, stand, or park any vehicle within City
designated fire lanes. Any vehicle found within said
area is subject to the enforcement procedures of
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
Chapter 8 as well as other enforcement measures.
For the purpose of this section “Parking Lot” is
defined as any outdoor space, plot, place, lot, parcel,
yard, or enclosure, or any portion thereof, where
more than two (2) motor vehicles may be parked,
stored, serviced, housed, or kept. “Parking Lot”
includes, but is not limited to, the driving and parking
areas of drive-in restaurants, drive-in banks, shopping
centers, gasoline service stations, grocery parking
lots, factory parking lots, and all other parking lots
used in connection with the operation of a business.
“Parking Lot” also includes those parking areas
owned, operated, or maintained by the City in parks,
recreation areas, or administrative facilities.
16-7-24 Parking for Persons with Disabilities.
(1) Authority To Park In Restricted Areas:
(a) "Appropriately marked", as used in this Section,
shall mean:
(i) A vehicle bearing a disability special group
license plate which will be displayed like any other
license plate; or
(ii) A temporary removable windshield placard or
removable mirror placard, displayed in the front
windshield of the vehicle; and the plate or
identification card shall have been issued by the State
Department of Motor Vehicles, in accordance with
Utah Code Annotated section 41-1a-408, as
amended.
(b) Any disabled person qualifying under Utah Code
Annotated section 41-1a-408(6), as amended, shall be
allowed to park an appropriately marked motor
vehicle in the following identified restricted parking
areas, notwithstanding any other State or City
parking restriction: freight loading zones, passenger
loading zones and time-limited parking zones for a
reasonable period of time, and in a manner which
allows proper access to the automobile by the
disabled person.
(c) It is unlawful for a disabled person to park for
longer than reasonable periods of time in any
restricted parking areas.
(d) Nothing herein shall be construed to permit
parking by any individual, contrary to or as an
exception to the limited purpose of the following
designated areas at:
(i) Any area where official signs or traffic markings
absolutely prohibit stopping, standing or parking;
(ii) Areas reserved for emergency use. "Emergency
use", as used herein, means and shall include, but not
be limited to, fire hydrant zones as defined in Section
16-7-1, of this Chapter; fire lanes, as designated in
Section 16-7-23, of this Chapter, whether private or
public property; or any other designated area of the
City posted as restricted for emergency vehicles or
emergency use;
(iii) Any area where parking is prohibited under
Section 16-7-1, of this Chapter.
(2) Parking Spaces Identified As Reserved For
Disabled Persons; Public And Private Property: It is
unlawful for any vehicle to be parked in any parking
space or area designated as reserved for use by
disabled persons, unless the vehicle is displaying a
disability special group license plate, temporary
removable windshield placard or removable mirror
placard issued by the State and the vehicle is
transporting a qualifying handicapped person. This
subsection applies to and may be enforced on public
property and on private property which is used or
intended for use by the public, whether parking is
provided to the general public for free or for a fee.
(3) Out of State Vehicles: The parking privileges
granted by subsections 1 and 2 of this Section also
apply to vehicles displaying a distinctive disability
license plate or transferable identification card issued
by another state, if displayed on a vehicle being used
by a person with a disability.
(4) Issuance of Citations by Volunteers: The Chief of
Police may appoint volunteers to issue citations for
violations of subsection 2 of this Section. The Chief
of Police may establish reasonable guidelines for the
appointment of volunteers and shall establish a
training program for all volunteers. No volunteer
shall issue a citation until the training program is
completed. A volunteer appointed under this
subsection shall be twenty one (21) years or older.
The Chief of Police may remove a volunteer
appointed under this subsection at any time for any
reason. A citation issued by a volunteer appointed
under this subsection has the same force and effect as
a citation issued by a peace officer for the same
offense.
16-7-25 Vacant Lots or Parking Lots - Display for
Sale Prohibited.
(1) Unlawful Unless Licensed: It shall be unlawful
for the owner of a motor vehicle, attached or
unattached camper, trailer or boat or for any other
person to park the vehicle, attached or unattached
camper, trailer or boat or allow the vehicle, attached
or unattached camper, trailer or boat to be parked on
a vacant lot or parking lot owned by another person
for the purpose of displaying it for sale unless the
owner or lessee of the property on which it is parked
has a City business license to engage in the business
of selling motor vehicle, attached or unattached
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
camper, trailer or boat at that location. It shall also be
unlawful for the owner or lessee of the property to
allow another person to park a motor vehicle,
attached or unattached camper, trailer or boat on the
property for the purpose of displaying it for sale
unless the owner or lessee is duly licensed to engage
in the business of selling motor vehicles, attached or
unattached camper, trailer or boat at that location.
(2) It shall be unlawful for the owner of a motor
vehicle, attached or unattached camper, trailer or boat
or for any other person to park the vehicle, attached
or unattached camper, trailer or boat upon any public
street or roadway or public property for the purpose
of displaying it for sale or displaying for advertising.
(3) Public Nuisance: Any vehicle, trailer or boat
parked in violation of this Section is declared to be a
public nuisance. If a notice of violation has been
placed upon the vehicle, trailer or boat and it is not
removed within twenty four (24) hours thereafter, or
if two (2) or more notices of violation have been
placed on the same vehicle, trailer or boat within the
last thirty (30) days, the vehicle, trailer or boat shall
be impounded as a nuisance. The vehicle, trailer or
boat shall be released to the owner or responsible
party only after the Police Department has received a
receipt for the same acknowledging responsibility of
that person for the item being unlawfully parked.
Impoundments under this Section shall be
accomplished in accordance with the provisions and
procedures outlined under Chapter 8 of this Title.
(4) Each Day Separate Violation: Each day a vehicle,
boat, or trailer is parked contrary to the provisions of
this Section represents a separate violation.
(5) Defense: It shall be a defense to the owner or
lessee of any parking lot or vacant lot on which
vehicles have been parked in violation of this
Section, if the owner or lessee has posted signs on the
lots restricting the parking of vehicles for sale.
16-7-26 Prohibited Parking in Front Yards on
Residential Property.
(1) Front Yard Area Defined: "Front yard area"
means the open space, on the same lot with a building
used as a dwelling, between the line of the building
and the lot line adjacent to any public street and
extending across the full width or length of the lot.
(2) Unlawful: It shall be unlawful to park a motor
vehicle, trailer or boat in a front yard area on any
residential property in excess of two hours except as
provided and allowed in Clinton Zoning Code 28-4-
15(4).
16-7-27 Parking Violation and Unauthorized Use
of Streets: Strict Liability of Owner. Whenever
any vehicle shall have been parked in violation of this
Title, the person in whose name the vehicle is
registered or the driver shall be responsible for any
violation and penalty.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
Chapter 8. Vehicle Impoundment
16-8-1 Nuisance Designated
16-8-2 Enforcement Authority
16-8-1 Nuisance Designated. The following
together with, or in addition to any other vehicles
parked in violation of any City ordinance, or state
law are declared to be nuisances:
(1) Any unattended vehicle stopped, standing, or
parked in violation of any of the provisions of this
Title;
(2) A vehicle found upon the streets or alleys of this
City with faulty or defective equipment;
(3) Any vehicle left unattended upon any bridge or
viaduct where the vehicle constitutes an obstruction
to traffic;
(4) Any vehicle upon a street so disabled as to
constitute an obstruction to traffic and the person or
persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of
physical injury incapacitated to an extent as to be
unable to provide for its custody or removal;
(5) Any vehicle left unattended upon a street and so
parked illegally as to constitute a hazard or
obstruction to the normal movement of traffic;
(6) Any vehicle left abandoned as described in
Chapter 7;
(7) Any vehicle, the driver of which has been taken
into custody by the Police Department, under
circumstances as would leave the vehicle unattended
in a street, alley, or restricted parking area;
(8) Any vehicle found being driven on the streets not
in a proper condition to be driven; or
(9) Any vehicle found so parked as to constitute a fire
hazard or an obstruction to fire fighting apparatus.
16-8-2 Enforcement Authority. Any vehicle in
violation of this Chapter may either be towed away
and impounded immediately or may be ticketed in
the name of the registered owner.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
Chapter 9. Vehicle Registration
16-9-1 Vehicle Registration
16-9-1 Vehicle Registration.
(1) Every vehicle at all times while being driven,
stopped or parked upon the streets of Clinton City
shall be:
(a) Registered in the name of the owner thereof in
accordance with the laws of the State unless the
vehicle is not required to be registered; and,
(b) Have current validation of registration attached to
the rear plate and in a manner complying with the
laws of the State of Utah, free from defacement,
mutilation, grease and other obscuring matters so as
to be plainly visible and legible at all times.
(2) If the vehicle is not required to be registered in
this State, and the indicia of registration issued by
another state, territory, possession or district of the
United States or of a foreign country, substantially
complies with the provisions hereof, the registration
shall be considered in compliance with this code.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 16 Motor Vehicles, Parking and Traffic
Chapter 10. Transportation Master Plan
16-10-1 General Purpose and Intent
16-10-2 Transportation Master Plan Approved
16-10-1 General Purpose and Intent.
(1) In developing and approving a Transportation
Master Plan the City desires to:
(a) Provide a convenient and adequate major street
network to meet the needs of residents, commercial,
and industrial traffic within the City, and to facilitate
the flow of traffic through and around the City.
(b) Establish a major street network to reduce the use
of minor streets for through traffic, thus contributing
to the safety and comfort of dwellers along the minor
streets.
(c) Express the intent, and thereby give assurance and
guidance, concerning location of major streets, that
developers, residents, and commercial and industrial
interests may be directed thereby.
(d) Provide a basis for City programs for right-ofway
acquisition, and for design and construction
appropriate to the streets.
(e) Guide planning and control of land use along the
streets in order to minimize potential marginal
interference with free traffic flow, and to protect the
uses along streets from potential damaging effects of
concentrated traffic flow.
History: 7/85
16-10-2 Transportation Master Plan Approved.
(1) The City Council has adopted the Clinton City
Transportation Master Plan Update, dated March
2006, by resolution, together with all amendments,
deletions, and additions that may hereafter be made
and adopted by resolution.
(2) This plan is adopted by resolution allowing the
Council to use it as a guide for future development
and is not bound by any specific findings within the
Plan.
(3) Deviations and alterations from the Plan should
be established using thorough evaluation of the intent
and conditions set in the plan and the affect any
changes would have on the stated goals. The Council
is responsible for outlining findings that justify the
reasons behind any deviations from the plan.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 17 Noise
TITLE 17. NOISE
Chapter 1. General Provisions
Chapter 1. General Provisions
17-1-1 Definitions
17-1-2 Purpose
17-1-3 Noise from Vehicle Stereos
17-1-4 Noise from Home Stereos or Band
a. Equipment
17-1-5 Noise from Exhaust/Loud Vehicles
17-1-6 Noise from Lighting
17-1-7 Noise from Implements of Husbandry
17-1-8 Noise from Construction/Building
17-1-9 Noise from Maintenance Equipment
17-1-10 Noise from Loud Parties
17-1-11 Noise from Personal Behavior
17-1-12 Noise from Emergency Work
17-1-13 Noise from Police and Fire
17-1-14 Noise from Fireworks and Explosives
17-1-15 Undue Hardship
17-1-16 Penalties
17-1-1 Definitions. As used in this title, unless the
context otherwise requires, the following words or
phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in
this section:
“Plainly heard” Any noise that can be heard in a
clear way;
“Unusually loud” Noise that shocks, disturbs,
overwhelms, or is offensive;
“Annoyance” Something that annoys, is a nuisance,
or is irritating;
“Vehicles” Including, but not limited to,
snowmobiles, ATVs, motorcycles, cars, trucks, boats,
minibikes, motorized scooters, go-carts, etc...;
“Parties” A social gathering of people or the
entertainment provided for it.
17-1-2 Purpose. These rules and regulations
establish minimum standards for residential,
commercial and business conditions:
(1) To reduce the making and creation of excessive,
unnecessary, or unusually loud noises within the
limits of Clinton City;
(2) To prevent the making, creation, or continue to
cause to be made or continued, any excessive,
unnecessary, or unusually loud noises, which either
annoys, disturbs, injures, or endangers the comfort,
health, peace, sanctity, or safety of others within the
limits of Clinton City;
(3) To secure and promote the public health, comfort,
convenience, safety, welfare, and the peace and quiet
of the inhabitants of Clinton City.
17-1-3 Noise from Vehicle Stereos. It shall be
unlawful for the volume of stereo music from a
vehicle to be played so loudly that the music, sound,
or noise coming from the speakers can be plainly
heard or felt further than 50 feet from the noise
source. It is irrelevant if the vehicle is moving on the
roadways or parked on private or public property.
17-1-4 Noise from Home Stereos or Band
Equipment. It shall be unlawful for any person to
play their stereos, radios, or other musical devices so
loudly that it disturbs, offends, or annoys another
neighbor. A neighbor to the source of the annoyance
is not restricted to an adjacent residence, the
complainant can be up to several homes away.
Musical instruments and sound amplified instruments
are not exempt.
17-1-5 Noise from Exhaust/Loud Vehicles. It
shall be unlawful for vehicles to be operated on the
roadways or on private property that are in violation
of Utah Traffic Code 41-6A-1626.
17-1-6 Noise from Lighting. It shall be unlawful
for the exterior lighting on homes to illuminate the
yards of adjacent homes so brightly that it interferes
with other home owners. This annoyance is limited
to lights that may shine in a window during night
hours and interferes with a person’s sleep or normal
routine. Lighting that is exempt from this ordinance
is limited to: the city parks, utility poles, street lights,
business signs, lighting from traffic, and city
sponsored fireworks.
17-1-7 Noise from Implements of Husbandry.
Implements of husbandry, which include, but are not
limited to, tractors and farm equipment, are exempt
from the noise ordinance as long as the equipment is
actively being used in a field or on a farm, or is in
transit to arrive at the field or farm, unless such noise
is deemed to be detrimental to the health, safety and
welfare of Clinton residents.
17-1-8 Noise from Construction/Building. Noise
caused by home or business construction or repair are
exempt from this section when performed between
the hours of 6:30 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. any day of the
week. Music or the radio that workers may be
listening to is not exempt and is in violation of
Clinton City Ordinance 17-1-4.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 17 Noise
17-1-9 Noise from Maintenance Equipment.
Noise from maintenance equipment, such as lawn
mowers, weed eaters, trimmers, aeration, etc., are
exempt from this section when used between the
hours of 6:30 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. any day of the
week. Residential garbage collection is exempt from
this chapter.
17-1-10 Noise from Loud Parties. It shall be
unlawful for any person to make, continue to make or
cause, or fail to stop, any excessive, unnecessary, or
unusual noise, which annoys, disturbs, injures,
endangers the comfort, health, peace, or safety, of
others within the limits of Clinton City.
At parties or large gatherings, and it can be
determined who committed the noise violation, the
person can individually be held responsible. If it is
undetermined who is committing the noise violation,
then the person in charge, or the home owner, or
renter can be held accountable by being charged with
the noise violation.
In determining what is viewed as loud, the following
standards apply:
(1) If the noise can be plainly heard from the public
roadway in front of the residence.
(2) If the noise can be plainly heard when standing at
any property line to the home where the noise is
emitting.
In this section, it is irrelevant if the complaining
person remains anonymous with the police
department or dispatch center. If an officer either
arrives on scene through being dispatched or
preventive patrol, the officer can take action without
contacting the complainant. If the noise is terminated
prior to police arrival, the complainant must sign a
complaint before any person can be charged for the
noise violation.
17-1-11 Noise from Personal Behavior. It shall be
unlawful for any person to make unreasonable noises,
to fight, to cause any public inconvenience,
annoyance, or alarm, within the limits of Clinton
City.
17-1-12 Noise from Emergency Work.
Construction equipment, including backhoes,
derricks, generators, lights, etc., and personnel
required to operate such equipment, that are needed
to repair utilities, broken pipes, water lines, etc., are
exempt from this section. Emergency work is
required to protect persons or property from exposure
to danger or to potential danger. This work is
necessary to restore property to a safe condition
following a public calamity.
17-1-13 Noise from Police and Fire. While in the
performance of their official duties, training, etc., the
Clinton City Police Department and the Clinton City
Fire Department are exempt from this section, 24
hours a day, 7 days per week.
17-1-14 Noise from Fireworks and Explosives.
This chapter shall not apply to class “c” fireworks
and explosives when said fireworks and explosives
are used pursuant to a written permit from the City
Manager. Fireworks permitted by state law for
residential use are also exempted.
17-1-15 Undue Hardship. Application for a permit
for relief from the noise levels designated in this Title
on the basis of undue hardship may be made to the
City Manager and granted by him, or his duly
authorized representative, upon a showing that
compliance with this Ordinance would create an
undue hardship upon the applicant. The permit to
create noise levels in excess to the listed limitations
set forth in this Title shall not be granted for more
than 30 days, unless approved by the Clinton City
Council for a longer period of time.
17-1-16 Penalties. Any person who violates this
title shall be guilty of committing a class C
misdemeanor.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 18 Nuisances
TITLE 18. NUISANCES
Chapter 1. General
Chapter 2. Graffiti
Chapter 1. General
18-1-1 Definitions
18-1-2 Author of Nuisance Declared
18-1-3 Declaration of Nuisance
18-1-4 Toilet and Sewer Facilities
18-1-5 Vehicular on Site Residential Parking
18-1-6 Inspector
18-1-7 Duties of Inspector
18-1-8 Compliance and Reinspection
18-1-9 Penalties for Failure to Comply
18-1-10 Revocation
18-1-1 Definitions. As used in this code, the
following words mean:
“Abandoned Vehicle”. Any wrecked, junked,
inoperable or obsolete vehicle or portion of vehicle
which is four (4) months or greater past the valid
licensing period; any vehicle not in drivable
condition, i.e. no tires, missing windshields, no
engine or transmission or rear end gears, unless the
owner has attained a vehicle restoration permit from
the Police Department, and parking legally pursuant
to the City Zoning laws.
“Nuisance”. Any unsightly or injurious object,
structure, or disused or abandoned motor vehicles or
equipment, or injurious or noxious weeds, trash, junk,
refuse or garbage, grass or weeds over 10 inches
high, or anything dangerous to human life or health,
or anything rendering the soil, air, water or food to be
impure or unwholesome.
“Noxious Weeds”. Vegetation that is determined by
the State of Utah or by Davis County to be an
endangerment to the public health and safety.
“Refuse, Junk, Debris or Garbage”. Useless,
worthless or discarded materials; used tires; parts of
vehicles; old and unused machinery, appliances or
parts thereof; trash; rubbish; plant, grass and tree
trimmings; litter; scrap building materials; food
products waste; and dead animals.
“Vehicle Restoration Permit”.
(1) A twelve (12) month written permit issued by the
Police Department to an owner allowing the
unlicensed or unregistered vehicle to be on the
owner’s premises for the purpose of repair and
restoration for a period not to exceed twelve (12)
consecutive months. One (1) twelve (12) month
permit extension is available. Only three (3) vehicle
restoration permits are allowed at a time per
household or dwelling site.
(2) Any unlicensed or unregistered vehicle being
repaired or restored under the Vehicle Restoration
Permit authorization, must be stored in a garage or
must be parked on a concrete or asphaltic surface, or
an approved rock/gravel surface as allowed by the
zoning laws.
(3) The repair or restoration of the vehicle must be
for personal hobby or recreational purposes, and not
be for business purposes, except through the Home
Occupation licensing process.
History: 05/99, 11/03
18-1-2 Author of Nuisance Declared. Where a
nuisance exists upon property, the landlord thereof, or
his agent, the tenant, or his agent, and all other
persons having control of the property on which the
nuisance exists, shall be deemed to be the authors
thereof and shall be equally liable therefore.
History: 05/99
18-1-3 Declaration of Nuisance. Every act or
condition made, permitted, allowed, or continued in
violation of this chapter, including, but not limited to,
the acts and conditions hereinafter specified, are
hereby declared to be nuisances and may be abated
and punished as hereinafter provided:
(1) To permit or cause to keep, deposit, dump, burn,
bury or allow to exist any unsightly or injurious
objects, structures, junk, discarded or unused objects
or equipment, or disused or abandoned vehicles or
equipment, or injurious or noxious weeds, or grass or
weeds over ten (10) inches in height;
(2) To allow vegetable waste, garbage, litter, filth,
refuse or any manure to accumulate within or upon
any private alley, yard or area, except when it is
temporarily deposited for immediate removal;
(3) To discharge or place any offensive water, liquid
waste, or refuse of any kind into any street, alley,
sidewalk, gutter, stream, wash natural water course,
ditch, canal, or any vacant property which is offensive
or liable to become offensive, or obstruct any
watercourse;
(4) To permit any garbage container to remain on
premises when it has become unclean or offensive or
overflowing;
(5) To obstruct or interfere with the access or use of
city streets, sidewalks, easements or right-of-ways
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 18 Nuisances
without permission from the city;
(6) To permit the accumulation of manure in any
stable, stall, corral, yard, feed yard, or in any other
building or area in which any animals are kept;
(7) To permit any person, firm or corporation to
endanger the health of any person in violation of Title
14 of the Clinton City Code;
(8) To permit to be kept or collected any stale or
putrid grease or other offensive matter;
(9) To have or permit upon any premises any fly or
mosquito producing condition;
(10) To befoul water in any spring, stream, well, or
water source supplying water for culinary purposes;
(11) To allow any privy, vault or cesspool to become
a menace to public health, safety or welfare;
(12) To neglect or refuse to discontinue use of, clean
out, disinfect, and fill up all privy vaults and
cesspools within 20 days after notice from an official
of the city;
(13) To permit or perform any body cleansing or
washing in or near any public drinking fountain or
culinary water supply;
(14) To permit any lot or excavation to become the
repository of stagnant water or any decaying or
offensive substances;
(15) To allow tree roots to enter the city's storm
drain, field and land drain or sewer systems, or cause
heaving of sidewalks, curbs, gutters or streets;
(16) To allow trees or shrubs to obstruct the clear
view of regulatory, traffic, street and caution signs,
fire hydrants, city utilities, public right-of-ways,
sidewalks, curbs, and corner property sight triangles;
(17) To fail to properly keep adjoining public
sidewalks clear of snow and other obstructions (Title
25 of City Code)
(18) To put or cause to have put snow or water,
causing a hazard or an obstruction, or litter into the
paved street area (Title 25 of City Code);
(19) To operate a business within the City without
obtaining the appropriate City Business License (Title
15 of City Code); and
(20) For any person, firm, entity or corporation to fail
to control and prevent backflow and eliminate all
cross connections between any auxiliary water source
and the culinary water systems of the City (Title 27 of
City Code)
History: 05/99
18-1-4 Toilet and Sewer Facilities. All toilet or
sewer facilities shall be constructed and maintained in
accordance with the ordinances, laws, rules and
regulations of Clinton City and Davis County. All
facilities that do not comply with these provisions are
hereby declared to be a nuisance and are subject to
abatement as provided in this chapter.
History: 05/99
18-1-5 Vehicular on Site Residential Parking.
(1) On residential properties, the parking of licensed
and registered vehicles, trailers and RV’s which are
not “abandoned vehicles”, shall be only on the hard
surface driveway, within a garage or carport, on back
yard weed less gravel surfaces or on side yard hard
surfaces as allowed by the City Zoning laws.
(2) Property owners not in compliance with (1) above
and who are parking on the allowed side yard, but not
on the required hard surface, may get a one-time only
three (3) month time period within which to remedy
the parking violation. Such time period may be
granted by the Inspector at his discretion, based on
the proposed remedy of the property owner, such as,
install hard surface, put in a gravel pad in the rear of
property, sell vehicle, and other reasonable proposals.
History: 11/03
18-1-6 Inspector.
(1) The position of Inspector is hereby created for the
purpose of administering the provisions of this Title
and the powers delegated to it by laws and statutes
relating to nuisances and obnoxious substance in the
City, subject to such control, assignment and review
as the City Manager may from time to time direct.
(2) The City Manager may appoint the Inspector and
Assistant Inspectors as needed. The powers and
duties of the assistants shall be the same as those of
the Inspector unless otherwise specified by the City
Manager.
History: 05/99, 11/03
18-1-7 Duties of Inspector.
(1) The Inspector is hereby authorized and directed
to:
(a) Perform all functions necessary to enforce the
provisions of this code;
(b) Inspect or cause to be inspected, as often as
needed, all buildings, structures, lots or places for the
purpose of determining whether they are in
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 18 Nuisances
compliance with all provisions of this code as
outlined in this chapter.
(2) If the Inspector determines that any of the
conditions listed in this chapter exist on any property
within the limits of Clinton City, the Inspector shall:
(a) Ascertain the names of the owners and occupants
of the premises where the conditions exist, together
with a description of the premises; and may either,
(b) Issue a letter of notification to the owner or
occupant of the property identifying the conditions
violating this chapter and give notice that they must
be corrected within the next fourteen (14) calendar
days, as dated in letter. The notice shall also state
that failure to comply with this request shall result in
the issuance of a citation, which requires
accountability to the Clinton Justice Court; or
(c) Issue a citation to the owner or occupant of the
property by either serving the citation personally
upon the owner or occupant, or mailing the citation
registered mail, postage prepaid, addressed to the
owner or occupant at his or her last known address as
disclosed by the records of the County Assessor or as
otherwise ascertained. In the event the inspector
elects to mail the notice, it shall be deemed served
when it is sent by registered mail, postage prepaid. In
the event the notice is returned unaccepted, the notice
shall be turned over to the Clinton City Prosecutor for
prosecution.
(d) The citation shall:
(i) Require the person to whom it is sent to correct the
violation within the time period the Inspector shall
designate, which shall be not less than ten (10) days,
nor greater than twenty (20) days and shall be known
as the correction period, except as noted in
Subsection 18-1-8(3) of this code. The time given to
remedy the violation shall begin to run on the day
following the day on which the citation is issued.
(ii) Inform the person to whom it is sent to appear in
Justice Court of Clinton, normally within five (5)
days following the end of the correction period. This
shall be known as the appearance date.
(iii) Contain a specific statement of the nature of the
violation and generally describe the premises on
which the violation exists.
(iv) Inform the person to whom the citation is issued
that if compliance is accomplished within the
correction period and is fully remedied as outlined in
Section 18-1-7, the citation will be signed off by the
Inspector and must be returned by the cited person to
the Justice Court of Clinton by or before the
appearance date.
(v) Inform the person that in the event a criminal
prosecution is pursued, the prosecution shall be for a
Class C Misdemeanor
History: 05/99, 08/03, 11/03
18-1-8 Compliance and Reinspection. In the
event the person complies with the notice of the
Inspector within the correction period, the person
shall notify the Inspector a minimum of 48 hours (not
including weekends or holidays) prior to the end of
the correction period. A date and time for inspection
prior to the appearance date shall be assigned and the
Inspector shall again inspect the property.
(1) If the property is in compliance with this chapter,
the Inspector shall sign off compliance on the cited
person's copy of the citation. The person receiving
the citation must take the signed citation to the
Clinton Justice Court on or before the appearance
date indicated on the citation, in order to have the
charges dismissed. Failure to perform this step will
result in prosecution by the Court.
(2) In the event the person in violation has not
received a reinspection indicating compliance with
this chapter prior to the end of the correction period,
criminal prosecution of the matter shall proceed.
(3) In the event that the violation is an immediate
threat to the public health, safety or welfare, the
Inspector may require immediate correction or up to a
period of 48 hours. Examples of these types of
violations may be found in 18-1-3 of this chapter. If
this violation is not corrected and reinspection
requested within the required time, the citation will be
referred directly to the Clinton City Prosecutor.
(4) In the event that the violation listed on the citation
is not corrected within the appropriate time period,
whether it be the normal or immediate correction time
period, the City Manager may order the Public Works
Director to abate or procure the abatement of the
violation. Should the City abate the violation, the
cited person shall still face criminal prosecution and
shall be required to appear before the Justice Court of
Clinton on the designated appearance date. The
actual expenses and the appointed administrative fee
for the City abating the violation shall be collected
from the person, firm or corporation in violation of
this chapter, by the Justice Court of Clinton and be
added to any fine and penalties set by that court. The
City may place a lien against the property in
accordance with Utah Code chapter 10-11.
History: 05/99, 11/03
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 18 Nuisances
18-1-9 Penalties for Failure to Comply. Any
owner, occupant or person having an interest in, or
control over, the property to which a citation is issued
under the provisions of this chapter, who fails to
comply with a citation from the Inspector or order
given pursuant to this chapter shall be guilty of a
Class C Misdemeanor.
History: 05/99, 11/03
18-1-10 Revocation. This ordinance supersedes
reference to time, fines, penalties, periods of
notification, appeals and other references to
appointment of Inspector, procedural inspection
and/or notification outlined in the Code of Revised
Ordinances of Clinton City.
History: 05/99, 11/03
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 18 Nuisances
Chapter 2. Graffiti
18-2-1 Statement of Purpose
18-2-2 Definitions
18-2-3 Graffiti Prohibited
18-2-4 Graffiti Removal - Private Property
18-2-1 Statement of Purpose. The Purpose of this
chapter is to:
(1) Establish control and eradication measures for
graffiti within the city;
(2) Establish penalties associated with enforcement of
this chapter; and,
(3) Establish procedures associated with the eradication
of graffiti.
18-2-2 Definitions. For the purpose of this chapter
the following definitions apply:
Property: As used herein shall mean all property,
public and private, with or without apparent ownership,
real and personal property, and anything temporarily or
permanently affixed thereto or thereon, including but
not limited to structures, plant life, signs, banners, etc.
Graffiti: As used herein shall mean the painting,
writing, drawing, application of stickers or logos of
any material or otherwise marking of any property
without the express written consent of the true owner,
or that is not otherwise allowed by ordinance, which
defaces, detracts or diminishes the value or
reasonable appearance of the property. For purposes
of Section 10-11-1 et. seq., of the Utah Code, graffiti
is deleterious and/or unsightly.
Gang: As used herein shall mean a group or
association which condones, encourages, facilitates or
promotes among its membership unlawful activities,
is including but not be limited to:
(1) The establishment of alleged territorial areas
beyond their own actual property ownership, wherein
they intend to exclude those that otherwise may
lawfully enter in or proceed through; or
(2) Divisiveness among other such groups,
neighborhoods, races, colors, or nationalities.
Gang Graffiti: As used herein shall mean, in addition
to the definition for graffiti given herein, graffiti that
identifies, indicates, infers, or communicates in any
way that it was done by a gang or member thereof, is
about a gang or member thereof, or is to a gang or
member thereof. The criteria to be used in making
such a determination may include, but is not limited
to content (whether words, names, letters, initials,
signs, pictures or symbols), style of writing, colors
used, location of the graffiti and that location's history
regarding graffiti, how it was placed in reference to
existing graffiti or gang graffiti (such as overstriking
other graffiti or in response to other graffiti or gang
graffiti), absence of or overstriking of certain letters,
or the absence of particular colors.
18-2-3 Graffiti Prohibited. It is unlawful for any
person to place, or assist, encourage, aid or
participate, in the placement of, or cause to be placed,
or be in attendance with others and acquiescing in the
placement of graffiti upon any property.
(1) Penalties; Enhancement.
(a) Any violation of any provision of this chapter
shall be a Class C Misdemeanor and is punishable as
such.
(b) Any person found guilty of violating this
ordinance shall be punished as follows:
(i) Upon a first conviction a minimum fine of Three
Hundred Dollars ($300.00) shall be imposed.
(ii) Upon a second conviction a minimum fine of Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00) shall be imposed.
(iii) Upon a third conviction a minimum fine of Seven
Hundred Dollars ($700.00) shall be imposed.
(iv) Upon a fourth and subsequent conviction a
minimum fine of Nine Hundred Dollars ($900.00) shall
be imposed.
(c) Upon any of the foregoing convictions restitution
shall be ordered in an amount sufficient to reimburse
the victim or victims for the cost of restoration of the
property to the condition as it existed prior to the
violation.
(d) Any incarceration, probation, or other conditions of
sentencing are left to the discretion of the sentencing
court. It is recommended that for second and
subsequent convictions the court weigh seriously the
imposition of a jail sentence. It is also recommended
that if the court, in its discretion, imposes any
community service in lieu of a fine as penalty and/or a
jail sentence, that said community service be assigned
in the area of graffiti removal.
(2) Gang Enhancement Provision. The fines set forth in
18-2-3(1) above shall be enhanced by an amount equal
to one hundred percent (100%) of the fine to otherwise
be imposed under either one of the following criteria:
(a) If the actor is shown, by clear and convincing
evidence at a sentencing hearing, to be a member of a
gang, to hold oneself out to be a member of a gang, or
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 18 Nuisances
to purposely appear to be a member of the gang,
regardless of whether the graffiti was gang graffiti;
(b) If the graffiti which formed the basis of the actors
conviction was shown, by clear and convincing
evidence at a sentencing hearing, to be gang graffiti,
regardless of whether the actor was associated with a
gang.
18-2-4 Graffiti Removal - Private Property.
(1) Owners of property, structures, buildings or natural
features upon which graffiti has been placed shall
report the incident to the Clinton City Police
Department as soon as reasonably possible.
(2) Owners of property, structures, buildings or natural
features upon which graffiti has been placed shall
remove the graffiti within five (5) calendar days after
the initial report of the incident whether made by the
actual owner or by a third party. If the owner of said
structure fails to remove such graffiti within the
required five (5) calendar days, owner shall be given
written notice sent by certified mail that if not removed
within five (5) days after service of the notice, said
graffiti may be removed by the City at the expense of
the owner. The City shall do so at the expense of a
property owner for the actual and reasonable costs of
cleaning the graffiti, including labor.
(3) The owner may appeal the notice requiring graffiti
clean-up by filing an appeal with the City Manager or
designee within five (5) days of the date of the order.
The City Manager or designee may sustain, modify or
reverse the order based on evidence regarding the
following criteria: history of graffiti being placed on
the same location and the owner's timely removal
thereof; the extent and frequency of graffiti incidents;
owner's ability to bear the costs of removal; general
upkeep of the property; and other related, articulated
criteria.
(4) After the time for appeal has expired and the
property is cleaned by the City, if the owner fails to
make payment to the City treasurer within twenty (20)
days of the date of billing, the City may either cause
suit to be brought in an appropriate court of law, or
certify the amount to the county treasurer for inclusion
in the tax notice of the property owner.
(5) In the event collection of expenses of removal are
pursued through the court, the City shall sue for and
receive judgment for all expenses of removal, together
with reasonable attorney's fees, interest and court costs,
and shall execute upon such judgment in the manner
provided by law.
(6) In the event that the City elects to certify the
expenses of removal to the county treasurer for
inclusion in the tax notice of the property owner, an
itemized statement of all expenses incurred in such
removal shall be delivered to the county treasurer
within ten (10) days of the completion of the graffiti
removal
History: 02/09
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
TITLE 19. PUBLIC PARKS AND
TRAILS
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. Repealed
Chapter 3. Repealed
Chapter 4. General Provisions
Chapter 5. Definitions
Chapter 6. Administration
Chapter 7. Permits
Chapter 8. General Public Park Standards
Chapter 9. Public Park Use
Chapter 10. No Smoking Allowed
Chapter 11. Public Parks Advisory Board
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. Repealed
Chapter 3. Repealed
Chapter 4. General Provisions
19-4-1 Statement of Purpose
19-4-2 Application
19-4-3 Inappropriate Activities
19-4-4 Penalty for Violations
19-4-1 Statement of Purpose. The purpose of this
Title is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
users of the Clinton City Public Parks and Trails by
establishing and controlling the use of Public Park
and amenities outlined in this Title, as well as setting
up procedures related to management and outside
influences. The objectives of this Title are:
(1) To insure an enjoyable experience by all users of
Public Park.
(2) To prohibit damage from improper use of Public
Parks and accompanying facilities.
(3) To manage and control group use of Public Parks
and accompanying facilities.
(4) To protect the environment.
(5) To effectively utilize public money in creating
and maintaining Public Parks.
(6) To minimize prolonged interruptions to Public
Park use.
(7) To insure the directed development of Public
Parks and infrastructure.
(8) To establish legal authority to regulate and
monitor the use of Public Parks.
(9) To establish guidelines that will protect Public
Parks and Trails for generations to come.
19-4-2 Application. This Title shall apply to all
Public Parks, Trails, and Public Park Facilities and
improvements associated with Public Parks and
Trails as outlined in this Title. Rules, regulations and
schedules adopted in connection with this Title may
be cited and designated as the “Public Parks Code”
by reference to the respective Sections.
19-4-3 Inappropriate Activities: Individuals
causing a hazardous situation due to apparent willful,
wanton, or reckless disregard for public safety,
individuals, or private or public property in or on any
area covered by this Title may be cited as being in
violation of this ordinance.
19-4-4 Penalty for Violations. Any person or legal
entity violating any of the provisions of this Title or
committing any acts prohibited by this Title shall be
deemed in violation of a Class “C” misdemeanor and
shall be subject to an order of restitution for any
damage, cleanup, or expense borne by the City.
History: 6/83, 9/8, 6/93, 5/99, 8/02, 5/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
Chapter 5. Definitions
19-5-1 Definitions
19-5-1 Definitions. For the purposes of this title,
the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
“City” means Clinton City Corporation.
"Group Event" means an organized picnic, exhibit,
show, class, or similar gathering at which food is
served, or for which the group brings to the Public
Park furniture and equipment such as tables, booths,
tents or play equipment. It does not include Citysponsored
or co-sponsored events. A group event
shall be considered Clinton-based if the applicant is a
City resident, a business or school located in the City,
or a nonprofit community organization, a majority of
whose members or board are City residents. All other
group events shall be considered nonresident group
events. An event that uses a public right-of-way is
classified a “Special Event” and is covered in title 25.
History: 10/10
“Operating Hours” means the regular operating
hours for Public Parks, 5:00 a.m. to 11:00 p.m.
except as noted for City functions, trails, and lit
sports fields and courts, and walking paths.
History: 10/10
“Outdoor Public Place” means any outdoor public
or private place open to the general public regardless
of any fee or age requirement. Examples of Outdoor
Public Places include but are not limited to: Public
Parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, golf courses,
amphitheaters, sports fields, concession stands,
boweries, bleachers, cemeteries, public gardens,
outdoor eating areas, walking/running trails and
pathways and skate parks.
“Permit” or “Public Park Use Permit” means a
certificate, written approval or other system
established by the Recreation Director to engage in
activities in Public Parks in the City as specified in
this Title. Unless otherwise expressly provided in this
Title, all permits required under this Title shall be
obtained from the Recreation Department.
“Park” or “Public Park” means a specific piece of
ground, owned, operated, maintained or under the
contractual control of the City and set apart for the
recreational use of the general public, whether
developed or undeveloped, including natural parks
and that is usually, or may be, planted with trees,
lawns and other shrubbery. A Public Park may
include within its boundary facilities for sports,
entertainment, dancing, recreation, swimming, or a
Public Park may be planned for any beneficial use by
the public. A Public Park may have numerous
facilities or consist of only a single facility. Facilities
means any building, playground equipment,
basketball court, tennis court, skate court, croquette
court, volleyball court, baseball field, softball field,
soccer field, wading pool, and/or recreation area
which are owned or operated by the City, or for
which the City has enforcement and/or maintenance
responsibilities. A Public Park includes the entire
site of the Public Park, including, without limitation,
all structures thereon, and any Public Park parking
lots in or adjacent to the Public Park site.
“Person” means any individual, public or private
corporation, partnership, association, firm, trust,
estate, the state or any department, institution,
bureau, or agency thereof, any municipal corporation,
county, City and county, or other political
subdivision of the state, or any other legal entity
whatsoever which is recognized by the law as being
subject to rights and duties.
“Playground” means any Public Park or
recreational area designed in part to be used by
children that has play or sports equipment installed or
has been designed or landscaped for play, swimming
or sports activities, or any similar facility located on
public or private grounds.
“Privately Owned” means any privately-owned
business that is open to the general public regardless
of any fee or age requirement.
“Publically Owned” means any indoor or outdoor
place or portion of a place owned, leased, or rented
by any state, county, or city government, or by any
agency supported by appropriation of, or by contracts
or grants from funds derived from the collection of
federal, state, county, or city taxes.
“Public Works” means the Clinton City Public
Works Department.
“Public Works Director” means the Director of the
Clinton City Public Works Department or his
appointed representative.
“Supervisor” or “Parks Supervisor” means the
Clinton City Parks Supervisor as appointed by the
Clinton City Public Works Director.
“Recreation Department” means the Clinton City
Recreation Department.
“Recreation Director” means the Clinton City
Recreation Director or any person designated by the
City Manager or the Recreation Director to perform
the duties under this title.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
“Smoke” or “Smoking” means the possession of
any lighted tobacco product in any form. Ref. Davis
County Board of Health Regulation on Smoking.
“Trails” means designated pedestrian and biking
trails within the City, e.g. Denver Rio Grand West
Railroad Historic Trail, Clinton City Creek Trail,
Clinton City Park and Powerline Trail.
“Walking Paths” means designated walking areas
within Public Parks that generally circle back on
themselves within a reasonable short distance, e.g.
Meadows Park, Kestrel Park, Pond Park, and
Powerline Park.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
Chapter 6. Administration
19-6-1 Use of Public Parks
19-6-2 Regulations
19-6-3 Responsibility of Administration
19-6-4 Office of Primary Responsibility
19-6-5 The Recreation Director
19-6-6 The Public Works Director
19-6-7 Duties of the Parks Supervisor
19-6-8 Policies
19-6-9 Fees
19-6-1 Use of Public Parks. The use of all Public
Parks and other areas under the direction of the City
is permitted under the rules and regulations
hereinafter set forth in this title.
19-6-2 Regulations. The City Council shall have
power and retains the right to adopt regulations
controlling the manner and circumstances under
which Public Park may be used in addition to the
regulatory provisions set forth expressly in this Title.
These regulations may include, but are not limited to,
the types of activities, functions, and organizations
that may use a Public Park.
19-6-3 Responsibility of Administration. The
City Manager shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this Title. Any powers
granted or duties imposed upon the City may be
delegated by the City Manager to persons or entities
acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of
the City.
19-6-4 Office of Primary Responsibility. The
Clinton City Public Works Department is the Office
of Primary Responsibility for review and proposing
changes to this Title. The Public Works Director
may call on other departments for assistance in
reviewing this Chapter.
19-6-5 The Recreation Director. The Recreation
Director shall be responsible for the implementation
of programs and facility scheduling within Public
Park.
19-6-6 The Public Works Director. The Public
Works Director shall appoint a person to act as the
Parks Supervisor for implementation of this Title.
19-6-7 Duties of the Parks Supervisor. The
Public Works Director shall prescribe the
Supervisor’s duties, and direct the manner and
frequency of reporting on Public Park as outlined in
this Title.
19-6-8 Policies. The Public Works and Recreation
Directors may coordinate and adopt policies, with the
City Manager’s review and approval, consistent with
this Title and any resolutions passed by the City
Council, to assist in the application, administration
and interpretation of this Title and management of
Public Park and Public Park facilities as established
in this Title.
19-6-9 Fees. The Clinton City Council shall set the
amount of fees required to facilitate actions outlined
in this Title by resolution and published in the
Clinton City Consolidated Fee Schedule.
Consideration of fees shall include but not be limited
to those needed to cover the cost of administration,
reviews, publications, and related issues. Deposits to
cover the cost of restoring the public property
together with the incidental expenses in connection
therewith may be included. Use fees shall not exceed
the reasonable costs of providing the services. Fees
for nonresident group events shall reflect the fact that
nonresident groups do not contribute to the support of
Public Park through the payment of real property
taxes and assessments.
History: 5/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
Chapter 7. Permits
19-7-1 Intent
19-7-2 Permit Required
19-7-3 Permit – Cost – Deposit
19-7-4 Permit – Application – Contents
19-7-5 Permit – Review and Issuance
19-7-6 Appeal
19-7-7 Signs – Permitted Site
19-7-8 Interfering with a Permitted Use
19-7-1 Intent. The use of Public Parks in the City
by groups causes wear and tear on the turf, Public
Park equipment, and facilities, and it requires staff
time to provide coordination. Additional supplies,
restroom cleaning and rubbish service are required.
These uses can subject neighboring residents to
excessive noise and traffic, particularly when the
Public Park is small or use is particularly intense.
Groups wishing to use a Public Park sometimes find
that their use is in conflict with that of another group,
and on occasion, group use is so intense that casual
use by families and individuals, which is one of the
principal purposes of Public Park, is not possible.
Because Public Parks are attractive and well
maintained, their use is intensifying, particularly for
activities like employee picnics, family gatherings,
church groups and by groups from other cities. These
groups do not contribute to the maintenance of Public
Park through the payment of property taxes and
assessments. If the City does not regulate the
intensity of group use of its Public Parks, and provide
for the payment of fees where appropriate, it will not
be able to maintain the very qualities in its Public
Parks that make them attractive.
19-7-2 Permit Required.
(1) No group desiring to have exclusive use of a
reservable bowery within a Public Park, for a specific
period of time, shall do so without first obtaining a
permit from the Recreation Director.
(2) No group desiring to utilize the Community
Center or other building within Public Park shall do
so without first obtaining a permit from the
Recreation Director.
(3) Permits are intended to secure the area
specifically stated on the permit for the permitee and
do not imply exclusive use of any other area or the
entire area of a Public Park unless specifically
outlined in the permit.
19-7-3 Permit - Cost - Deposit. All fees and
deposits are to be paid to the Recreation Department
upon a permit being issued. No permit is valid unless
the cost and deposit required by §19-6-9 have been
paid to the Recreation Department.
19-7-4 Permit - Application - Contents.
Applications for permits shall be made in writing on
forms provided by the Recreation Director, or other
means developed by the Recreation Director, and
shall be filed with the Recreation Department
together with any application fees as may be
established as set in §19-6-9. The application shall
accurately identify the applicant, the nature of the
event, the preferred date, time and location, the
expected attendance, the activities proposed, if power
is requested and any furniture, equipment, banners, or
sound amplification proposed, together with other
information as the Recreation Director shall
determine is necessary to determine if the application
should be issued under the standards of this chapter.
19-7-5 Permit - Review and Issuance.
(1) The Recreation Director shall propose and City
Council shall review and adopt by resolution time
limits within which applications must be filed or
reservations made, establishing and designating those
portions of Public Parks for which reservations and
permits shall be allowed or required for group events.
Consideration shall be given to setting insurance
requirements, setting priorities among categories of
City-based and nonresident group events, length of
time for which an area may be reserved, and
otherwise establishing the procedures and standards
for group events by the Recreation Director. No
Public Park may be entirely reserved for group
events.
(2) The Recreation Department shall provide notice
to owners of property within three hundred feet of
any Public Park when the recreation department
approves any Public Park use by any group of three
hundred or more or by any group which wishes to use
amplified sound. City sponsored functions are
exempt from notice requirements.
(3) The Recreation Director, in consultation with the
Superintendent, shall issue a group event permit upon
determining that the proposed group event can be
accommodated at the time and date requested, and at
a location in which it can take place without
damaging the Public Park landscaping and
equipment, overloading any restroom and other
facilities, conflicting with other events, or creating
traffic congestion or excessive noise in the
neighborhood. In allocating sites for group events,
the Recreation Director shall consider both the
impact of the particular group event and the
cumulative impact of events in that location. The
permit shall be issued with conditions as are
necessary to carry out the intent of this chapter, and
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
may include a requirement that City staff be present
during the event. Fees for staff required at an event
shall be established as set in §19-6-9. Equipment and
activities that may damage the Public Park or
adversely impact the neighborhood may be
prohibited. While applicants may designate a
preferred location, the decision as to which site may
be used shall be made by the Recreation Director.
(4) A permit shall be denied if the findings of § (3)
above cannot be made to create an acceptable impact
upon the Public Park, and it may be denied if, within
the past two years, the applicant or the group has
failed to abide by the terms of a previously issued
permit, or has otherwise violated the provisions of
this title.
19-7-6 Appeal. The Recreation Director's decision
may be appealed to the City Manager by filing an
appeal, in writing, within ten (10) days of receiving
the Recreation Director’s decision.
19-7-7 Signs – Permitted Site.
(1) This chapter shall apply in all Public Parks even if
signs are not posted advising of the requirement of
permits for group events.
(2) If a permit has been issued a minimum of seven
(7) days prior to an event, the Recreation Director
shall cause a notice to be placed at the location,
within the Public Park, indicating when the site is
reserved.
19-7-8 Interfering with a Permitted Use.
(1) No unauthorized person shall occupy a reserved
site thirty (30) minutes prior to or after a permitted
event without the explicit permission of the permitted
event organizers.
No unauthorized person shall interfere with an event
or the participants of an event in the area for which a
permit has been issued without explicit permission of
the permitted event organizers.
History: 5/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
Chapter 8. General Public Park Standards
19-8-1 Public Park Hours
19-8-2 Fires
19-8-3 Firearms
19-8-4 Missiles
19-8-5 Parking
19-8-6 Roads
19-8-7 Garbage and Waste
19-8-8 Commercial Enterprises
19-8-9 Speed Limit
19-8-10 Vandalism
19-8-11 Dogs
19-8-12 Golf
19-8-13 Obstructions - Prohibited
19-8-14 Other Non-Permitted Uses and Activities
19-8-1 Public Park Hours. No person shall
remain, stay, or loiter in any Public Park, in the
buildings therein, or the Public Park parking lot, or
park a vehicle in any Public Park parking lot,
between 11:00 p.m. and 5:00 a.m. without first
obtaining a permit from the Recreation Department,
unless using a lit trail, sports field or court, or
participating in a City function.
19-8-2 Fires. No person shall light or maintain any
fire, except in a stove, fire circle or other place
provided for that purpose, without first having
obtained a permit from the Recreation Director.
19-8-3 Firearms. No unauthorized person shall
discharge any firearms, firecrackers, rockets or any
other fireworks, air gun or slingshot in a Public Park
in the city.
19-8-4 Missiles. No person shall throw, launch, or
project along, upon or across any public highway or
driveway within a Public Park any object capable of
causing personal injury or damage to personal
property.
19-8-5 Parking. No person shall park or stand any
vehicle on any road or path except at places and at
any times designated by the City. No person shall
park in any lot within the Public Park in violation of
posted restrictions or park hours.
19-8-6 Roads. No person shall ride or drive any
horse or other animal or propel any vehicle, cycle or
automobile in a Public Park other than on roads, trails
or driveways provided for that purpose and in the
directions posted.
19-8-7 Garbage and Waste. No person shall
throw, discard, place or dispose of any garbage or
solid waste in a Public Park, in any place other than a
garbage can or other container maintained for that
purpose. No person shall bring or transport bulk
waste, garbage, green waste, hazardous waste, or
solid waste, to a Public Park and place it in a garbage
can or other container maintained for that purpose in
a Public Park.
19-8-8 Commercial Enterprises. Public Parks in
the city are intended as places for recreation and
relaxation and the free exchange of ideas, but not as a
forum for commercial enterprise. Therefore, no
person shall sell, offer or solicit the sale of goods or
services within a Public Park, or pass out commercial
handbills or advertising, or offer commercial teaching
services within a Public Park. This prohibition shall
not apply to activities when authorized by a special
event permit, or other city permit or function.
19-8-9 Speed Limit. No person shall drive any
vehicle at a speed in excess of fifteen (15) miles per
hour maximum in any Public Park or Public Park
parking lot.
19-8-10 Vandalism. No person shall:
(1) Pick, dig, remove, destroy, injure, mutilate or cut
any tree, plant, shrub, bloom or flower, or any portion
thereof growing in a Public Park;
(2) Cut, break, deface or injure any building,
monument, sign, fence, bench, equipment or property
in a Public Park;
(3) Cut or remove any wood, turf, grass, soil, rock,
sand or gravel in a Public Park.
19-8-11 Dogs. No person shall:
(1) Take or permit any dog within any Public Park in
the City. This prohibition shall apply irrespective of
whether or not the dog may be restrained by a leash
or carried; provided, however, that the provisions of
this section may be waived for activities or events of
a recreational nature authorized and/or supervised by
the recreation department.
(2) Exceptions to this provision are outlined in § 19-
9-9, however at no time shall dogs be allowed off
leash in a Public Park unless part of an authorized
and/or supervised event by the recreation department.
19-8-12 Golf. No golf equipment of any kind shall
be used in Public Parks. The provisions of this
section may be waived for activities of a recreational
nature authorized and/or supervised by the
Recreation Department.
19-8-13 Obstructions - Prohibited. A person shall
not willfully and maliciously loiter or stand in or
upon any street, trail, walkway, sidewalk, crosswalk,
off-street parking area or otherwise occupy any
portion of a Public Park, trail, or walkway in a
manner as to obstruct or unreasonably interfere with
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
the free passage of pedestrians or motorists except as
allowed in this Title.
History: 5/10
19-8-14 Other Non-Permitted Uses and Activities.
All activities which endanger the health, safety and
welfare of Public Park users shall be prohibited,
including, but not limited to:
(1) Equestrian uses;
(2) Drinking of alcoholic beverages;
(3) Use of tobacco as established in Chapter 10;
(4) Driving of unauthorized motor vehicles in areas;
not designed as roadways and parking lots;
(5) Parking in no parking areas;
(6) Archery;
(7) Allowing animals, like dogs, cats and other
household pets, in a Public Park;
(8) Unauthorized camping overnight;
(9) Climbing on power poles or utility structures;
(10) Depositing, leaving, or abandoning of any
domesticated or wild animal in any Public Park;
(11) Feeding, hiding or leaving food or otherwise
facilitating the habitation of any domesticated or wild
animals in any Public Park unless part of a permitted
use or as otherwise stated in this Title; or,
(12) Engaging in any other activity deemed by a
police officer to affect the health, safety, and welfare
of other Public Park users.
(13) Riding bicycles is not allowed on the walking
path located at Meadows Park. This is not intended
to exclude: toddler bicycles, bicycles with training
wheels, tricycles or similar juvenile riding toys when
the operator is under the direct supervision of an
adult walking the path; or, police officers performing
their assigned duties on bicycles.
History: 6/83, 9/84, 6/93, 9/02, 5/10, 9/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
Chapter 9. Public Park Uses
19-9-1 Alcohol
19-9-2 Drugs
19-9-3 Gas and Charcoal Barbeque Grills
19-9-4 Skateboard Park Use
19-9-5 BMX Bicycle Track
19-9-6 Pond Park
19-9-7 Trails
19-9-8 Walking Paths
19-9-9 Exceptions for Dogs
19-9-1 Alcohol.
(1) No person shall enter, be or remain in any Public
Park, Public Park parking lot or Public Park building
while in possession of, transporting, purchasing,
selling, giving away or consuming any alcoholic
beverage.
(2) Alcoholic beverages shall not be allowed and a
permit shall not be issued for any function where
alcohol will be served, in a Public Park, Public Park
parking lot or building.
History: 5/10
19-9-2 Drugs. All Public Parks are drug free zones
as established in State Statute § 58-37-8, § 58-37a,
and 58-37b in that it is unlawful:
(1) For any person knowingly or intentionally to
possess or use a controlled substance analog or a
controlled substance, unless it was obtained under a
valid prescription or order, directly from a
practitioner while acting in the course of his
professional practice or as otherwise authorized in or
within 1000 feet of a Public Park, trail, walkway, or
public building.
(2) For any person knowingly or intentionally to
deliver, distribute, give, sell, transfer, dispense or
otherwise make available to another person any
controlled substance analog or controlled substance
in or within 1000 feet of a Public Park, trail,
walkway, or public building. This is not intended to
apply to a parent or legal guardian administering to a
minor where the substance was obtained under a
valid prescription or order, directly from a
practitioner while acting in the course of his
professional practice or as otherwise authorized.
(3) For any person knowingly or intentionally to use,
to possess with intent to use, deliver, distribute, give,
sell, transfer, dispense or otherwise make available to
another person drug paraphernalia designed for
processing, ingesting, or otherwise using a controlled
substance in or within 1000 feet of a Public Park,
trail, walkway, or public building.
(4) For this section it is at least a Class B
misdemeanor but may be higher or increased in
severity as established in the referenced sections of
the Utah State Code.
History: 5/10
19-9-3 Gas and Charcoal Barbeque Grills. Care
should be exercised by all persons using a barbeque
grill to insure that heat or flames do not ignite
anything in proximity to the grill or cause smoke
stains upon any structure. At a minimum the
following must be followed:
(1) When using gas grills on concrete or other surface
where grease and oil will stain or mar the surface
operators must protect the area under the grill; or,
(2) When using charcoal grills they must not be
placed on tables, landscaped areas or other areas
where heat may kill vegetation or embers may mar or
ignite the surface.
History: 5/10
19-9-4 Skateboard Park Use. In addition to
prohibited activities found in § 19-8-14, the
following rules shall be in effect for the City
Skateboard Park:
(1) All participants involved in any on-site skating
activity shall at a minimum wear the following safety
equipment:
(a) A safety helmet secured on the head with straps
under the chin;
(b) Protective Knee pads;
(c) Protective elbow pads; and,
(d) Wrist supports and gloves are recommended,
(2) No disorderly conduct is allowed;
(3) Be respectful and courteous to other Skateboard
Park participants;
(4) No motorized or remote controlled vehicles are
allowed in or on the Skateboard Park at any time;
(5) Bicycles are allowed in or on Skateboard Park
only on Mondays. Bicycle use rules shall be the
same as Section § 19-9-5.
(6) Skating is allowed in or on Skateboard Park every
day except Mondays;
(7) All participants use the facilities at their own risk.
History: 8/02; 9/07
19-9-5 BMX Bicycle Track. In addition to
prohibited activities found in § 19-8-14, the
following rules shall be in effect for the City BMX
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
Bicycle Track:
(1) All participants shall at a minimum wear a safety
helmet secured on the head with straps under the
chin.
(2) Other recommended safety equipment - protective
knee and elbow pads, wrist supports, shoes, and
gloves.
(3) No disorderly conduct is allowed;
(4) Be respectful and courteous to other BMX Track
participants;
(5) No motorized or remote controlled vehicles are
allowed in or on the BMX Track at any time that a
bicyclist is on the track or intending to use the track.
(6) No unauthorized alterations to the BMX track
shall be allowed.
(7) All participants use the facilities at their own risk.
History: 8/02, 5/10
19-9-6 Pond Park. In addition to the prohibited
activities found in § 19-8-14, the following
provisions apply to Pond Park and the Pond at Pond
Park:
(1) All Public Park rules apply to this Public Park;
(2) All Utah State fishing regulations apply at this
pond;
(3) Anglers 12 years old and older must possess a
valid Utah Fishing License;
(4) Shore fishing only;
(5) Fishing allowed daily;
(6) Small non-motorized boats, paddleboats, kayaks,
or canoes are permitted on the pond from noon to
6:00 p.m.
(7) Remote control model boats may only be used
during boating hours outlined in § (6) above.
(8) Youth under the age of sixteen (16) must be
accompanied by an adult when using small boats
outlined in §(6) above;
(9) No swimming or wading at any time; and
(10) All participants use the pond and facilities at
their own risk.
History: 5/10, 4/12
19-9-7 Trails. In addition to the prohibited
activities found in § 19-8-14, the following
provisions apply to the trails established within the
City:
(1) All Public Park rules apply to trails within the
City;
(2) All individuals utilizing the trails within the City
shall be responsible for removing their own rubbish;
(3) No individuals shall enter private yards, or harass
animals or individuals in yards adjoining trails;
(4) No individuals shall climb fences adjoining trails;
(5) Bicycle riders shall yield to all other trail users,
i.e. roller-skater’s/bladders, pedestrians and
individuals with walking or transportation aids such
as wheelchairs; and,
(6) No unauthorized motorized vehicles are allowed
on the trails.
19-9-8 Walking Paths. In addition to the
prohibited activities found in § 19-8-14, the
following provisions apply to the trails established
within the City:
(1) All Public Park rules apply to walking paths
within the City;
(2) All individuals utilizing the walking paths within
the City shall be responsible for removing their own
rubbish;
(3) Roller-skater’s, Roller-blader’s, scooter users and
bicyclists, where allowed, shall yield to pedestrians
and individuals with walking or transportation aids
such as wheelchairs; and
(4) No unauthorized motorized vehicles are allowed
on the walking paths.
19-9-9 Exceptions for Dogs. The provisions of
this Title relative to walking of dogs are modified as
follows:
(1) No more than two (2) dogs may be walked by any
one person at a time;
(2) In all situations, dog handlers are required to
clean up and properly dispose of any waste left by
their animals;
(3) Aid dogs, "seeing-eye" or "hearing" dogs
properly trained to assist handicapped individuals
when dogs are actually being used to aid an
individual are allowed in all City Parks;
(4) Aid dogs may be fed while in a Public Park,
however all food not consumed by the animal shall
be removed from the Public Park;
(5) Dogs may be walked on a leash only, along the
following trails and walkways: Clinton City Creek
trail; Powerline Park walkway; Clinton Rail Trail;
Clinton Pond walkway, Clinton City Park walkway,
and Kestrel Park walkway.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
(6) Individuals walking dogs in areas permitted in §
(5) above are responsible for the behavior of their
animals. At no time shall dogs be allowed to act
aggressively toward any individuals or other animals;
and,
(7) Approved walking areas for dogs have bag
dispensers and receptacles for waste; however the
lack of bags or receptacles is not an excuse for not
cleaning up and removing waste from approved
walking areas for dogs.
History: 6/93, 8/02, 10/09, 5/10, 4/14
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
Chapter 10. No Smoking Allowed
19-10-1 Findings
19-10-2 Adoption of County Regulations
19-10-3 Golf Courses
19-10-4 Employee Smoking Areas
19-10-5 Signs
19-10-1 Findings. The City Council has determined
that there is ample evidence that smoking in any
form, and the resultant secondhand smoke, poses a
serious hazard to the health of members of the
general public and City employees and can have a
deleterious effect on the health and welfare of those
in the vicinity of smoking activity. Smoking includes
the definition of E-cigarette found in Utah Code 26-
38-2, which includes all manner of vapor and oral
devices. Secondhand smoke has been deemed a
Class “A” Carcinogen which produces substances
considered hazardous and dangerous to individuals’
health. In order to serve the public health, safety and
welfare, the City Council has determined that it is
necessary and desirable to establish regulations that
prohibit smoking in Publically-Owned and Privately-
Owned Outdoor Public Places.
19-10-2 Adoption of County Regulations. The
Davis County Board of Health Regulation on
Smoking in Outdoor Public Places and Electronic
Smoking Device Regulation are adopted in Clinton
City to regulate smoking in outdoor public and
private places. (Authorized under (Utah Code 26A-
1-121).
19-10-3 Golf Courses. Golf course practice greens,
driving ranges and areas around the clubhouse are
considered outdoor public places and are subject to
the smoking restriction outlined in this chapter.
However, all other golf course areas including
fairways and tee areas are exempt.
19-10-4 Employee Smoking Areas. This regulation
does not apply to smoking areas for employees.
Designated employee smoking areas are subject to
the Utah Indoor Clean Air Act 26-38-1-9.
19-10-5 Signs. Signs stating that smoking is
prohibited in Public Parks shall be clearly,
sufficiently and conspicuously posted in all Public
Parks. The manner of posting, including the wording,
size, color, design and place of posting, shall be
determined by the City Manager or his designee.
History: 1/03, 9/07, 5 /10, 09/15
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 19 Public Parks and Trails
Chapter 11. Public Parks Advisory Board
19-11-1 Board Created – Appointment – Term –
Purposes – Voting – Meetings
19-11-2 Removal and Vacancy
19-11-1 Board Created – Appointment – Term –
Purposes – Voting – Meetings.
(1) There shall be a Public Parks Advisory Board
consisting of seven (7) volunteer members, each of
whom shall be appointed to serve by the Mayor and
the advice and consent of the City Council. Each
member shall be appointed for two (2) years, except
that three (3) of the initial members shall be
appointed to serve for one (1) year.
(2) The voting Board membership shall consist of six
(6) citizens of Clinton City over the age of eighteen
(18) years of age and of one current City Council
member. The Board members shall by majority vote
annually elect one (1) of the six (6) citizen appointed
members as the Chair. Four (4) members shall be
required for a quorum. Voting shall be by majority
rule of that quorum, with a minimum of four (4)
votes in favor for passage of a recommendation.
Items not passed by a minimum four (4) votes in
favor, shall be passed onto the City Council without a
recommendation. The City Manager shall staff the
Board with such City staff members as may be
necessary.
History: 10/10, 2/11
(3) The Public Parks Advisory Board shall advise and
make recommendations, when necessary, to the
Mayor and City Council on policies and matters
relating to development and use of Public Parks and
trails; gather local citizen input on Public Parks and
trails; periodically review Public Park uses,
equipment and development needs; and, annually
review the Public Parks portion of the City’s Capital
Facilities Plan in conjunction with the annual Plan
update.
(4) The Public Parks Advisory Board shall meet at
least quarterly, but may meet as frequently as needed
to accomplish their duties and responsibilities.
(5) The City will seek to achieve diversity of interest
and a balanced geographical representation of
committee membership.
19-11-2 Removal and Vacancy.
(1) Any member of the Board may be removed by the
Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City
Council.
(2) A member’s seat automatically becomes vacant if
that member establishes residence outside the City
boundary, or lives outside the boundary for more than
sixty (60) consecutive days.
(3) If any member does not attend three (3)
consecutive meetings, the Board by majority vote,
may recommend to the Mayor and City Council to
remove the absent member and provide a
replacement member for the remainder of the existing
term.
History: 1/06, 9/07
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 20 Police
TITLE 20. POLICE
Chapter 1. Police Department
Chapter 2. Police Chief
Chapter 3. Police Officers
Chapter 1. Police Department
20-1-1 Creation of Police Department
20-1-2 Creation of Positions and Manning
20-1-3 Office of Primary Responsibility
20-1-4 Policies
20-1-1 Creation of Police Department. The
Clinton City Police Department is created by this
Ordinance.
History: 12/75; 05/10
20-1-2 Creation of Positions and Manning. The
Police Department includes the following personnel
positions:
(1) Police Chief.
(2) Staffing as approved by the City Council.
(3) Other police officer positions as deemed
necessary by the Police Chief and as allocated
through the budget process.
History: 05/10
20-1-3 Office of Primary Responsibility. The
Clinton City Police Department is the Office of
Primary Responsibility to review and propose
changes to this Title. The Police Chief may call on
other departments for assistance in reviewing this
Chapter.
History: 05/10
20-1-4 Policies. The Police Chief may adopt
policies, consistent with State Law, this Title, and
resolutions passed by the City Council, to assist in the
application, administration and interpretation of this
Title and the orderly operation of the Department.
History: 05/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 20 Police
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 20 Police
Chapter 2. Police Chief
20-2-1 Police Chief
20-2-2 Police Chief's Powers and Duties
20-2-3 Report to City Council
20-2-4 Absence from City
20-2-5 Sale of Impounded or Abandoned
Property
20-2-1 Police Chief. The head of the police
department.
History: 12/75, 9/84, 05/10
20-2-2 Police Chief’s Powers and Duties. In
addition to those powers and duties applicable to
police officers and enumerated in paragraph 20-3-1 of
this title, the Police Chief shall:
(1) Be responsible for direction and control of the
police department and all police officers.
(2) Perform all functions and exercise all powers
conferred upon him by the city's code and ordinances
or by other competent authority.
(3) Establish ranks, grades, and positions in the
department and designate the authority and
responsibility of each rank, grade, and position.
(4) Establish for the department standards and
qualifications and fix prerequisites of training,
education, and experience for each rank, grade, and
position; make recommendations to the City Council
for salaries for each rank, grade, and position.
(5) Appoint personnel to each rank, grade, and
position as are deemed by him to be necessary for the
efficient operation and administration of the
department, after the opening in the department is
approved by the City Council.
(6) Discharge, demote, or temporarily suspend any
employee in the department.
(7) Prescribe uniforms to be worn and equipment to
be used by employees of the department.
(8) Charge against each employee of the department
the value of any property of the city lost or destroyed
through the negligence of the employee.
(9) Establish, with the approval of the City Council or
with the city manager, if the City Council delegates,
the terms and conditions under which expense
allowance should be paid to any employee while he is
away from his station.
(10) Formulate rules and regulations governing the
department as from time to time appear to him
advisable.
History: 12/75
20-2-3 Report to City Council. The Police Chief
shall from time to time and upon request of the
Mayor make a report to the City Council of the affairs
and conditions of his department, which report shall
include a statement on the conduct of various officers
with relation to their employment and the execution
of other duties. The Mayor may require the Police
Chief to attend any meeting of the City Council and
to be examined about the conduct and affairs of his
office or to receive any orders from the Mayor or City
Council.
History: 12/75, 9/84, 05/10
20-2-4 Absence from City. In the event that the
Police Chief shall be absent from the city or
incapacitated from performing the duties of his
position the Assistant Police Chief or highest ranking
officer shall act in the capacity of the Police Chief.
History: 05/10
20-2-5 Sale of Impounded or Abandoned
Property. The Police Chief has the authority to
process the sale of impounded or abandoned property
as outlined below.
(1) Notice to owner: Whenever personal property,
including a motor vehicle, is lawfully impounded or
is abandoned, or otherwise comes into the lawful
custody of the city or its agents, the city shall notify
the owner and lien holder of record, if any, by written
notice sent by mail that it is being held by the city
and that it will be sold at public auction as provided
by city ordinances if not claimed within twenty days
of the date of mailing.
(2) Procedure: If, at the expiration of twenty days
after mailing the notice provided for in § (1) above,
the personal property is not claimed by the owner or
his authorized representative, the Police Chief or his
lawful agent shall proceed to sell the property at
public auction to the highest bidder, after giving at
least ten days notice of the sale by publishing the
notice at least once in a newspaper having general
circulation in Clinton and by posting the notice on
three conspicuous places within the city stating the
time and place of the sale. The notice shall describe
the property to be sold with reasonable certainty and
shall show any facts of ownership which may be in
possession of the Police Chief, and if the name of the
owner is unknown that fact shall be stated. If the
owner and his whereabouts are known, the Police
Chief shall send the owner a copy of the notice as
published.
(3) Disposition of proceeds: The money received by
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 20 Police
the city from the sale of property shall be applied first
to the actual cost of preserving or storing the
property, and then to the cost of advertising the sale
of the property. The balance, if any, shall be paid into
the general fund of the city. At any time within one
year after the sale, the former owner of the property
sold, upon application to the City Council with
satisfactory proof that he was the owner of the
property, will be paid the proceeds of the sale thereof
less the expenses outlined above and a reasonable
administrative fee. The administrative fee shall be
established by the City Council and adopted by
resolution and published in the Clinton City
Consolidated Fee Schedule.
History: 05/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 20 Police
Chapter 3. Police Officers
20-3-1 Powers and Duties
20-3-2 Offenses Against Police Office
20-3-3 Assisting or Permitting Escape
20-3-4 Taking or Destroying Goods from
Officer's Custody
20-3-1 Powers and Duties. In addition to those
powers conferred upon constables by law, all police
officers of the department shall have the following
powers and duties:
(1) General powers and duties: It shall be the duty of
the police force of this city to preserve the public
peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest offenders,
suppress riots, protect persons and property, remove
nuisances existing in the public streets, roads, and
highways, enforce every law relating to the
suppression of offenses, and perform all duties given
them by law.
(2) Service of process: All police officers when
called upon or directed so to do by a court of
competent jurisdiction shall serve all legal process,
civil or criminal, and shall serve all warrants of arrest
and take into custody any person ordered arrested by
the justice of the peace of Clinton City or any other
court of competent jurisdiction, and in the
administration of justice shall faithfully and promptly
carry out and execute any lawful order.
(3) Right of arrest: The members of the police
department shall have the power and authority,
without process, to arrest and take into custody any
person who shall commit or threaten or attempt to
commit in the presence of any offender, or within his
view, any breach of the peace, or any offense directly
prohibited by the laws of this state or by any
provisions of the code or ordinances of this city.
History: 12/75, 9/84, 05/10
20-3-2 Offenses Against Police Officer.
(1) Refusing to assist officers. It is unlawful for any
person to refuse, when called upon by any officer of
Clinton City, to aid in arresting or securing an
offender.
(2) Impersonating an officer. It is unlawful for any
person to represent himself falsely to be an officer of
the law, or to attempt to impersonate an officer
without authority, or to perform any official act for or
in behalf of any officer.
(3) Resisting an officer. It is unlawful for any person
to willfully resist, delay or obstruct any public officer
in the discharge or attempted discharge of the duties
of his office, or to willfully fail to obey a lawful order
of any officer.
History: 05/10
20-3-3 Assisting or Permitting Escape. It is
unlawful for any person within the limits of Clinton
City to aid or assist any other person to escape, or to
attempt to escape, from lawful custody or
confinement.
History: 05/10
20-3-4 Taking or Destroying Goods from
Officer's Custody. It is unlawful for any person to
willfully injure, destroy, take or attempt to take or
assist any person in taking or attempting to take from
the custody of any officer any personal property
which the officer has in charge under any process of
law.
History: 05/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 21 Purchasing
TITLE 21. PURCHASING
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. General Provisions
Chapter 3. Definitions
Chapter 4. Administration
Chapter 5. Purchasing System
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. General Provisions
21-2-1 Statement of Purpose
21-2-2 Application
21-2-3 Penalty for Violations
21-2-1 Statement of Purpose. The purpose of this
Title is to protect and insure that the funds entrusted
to the City are expended as set within established
guidelines. The objectives of this Title are:
(1) To simplify, clarify, and modernize the law
governing and procedures associated with the
procurement process by this City;
(2) To ensure the fair and equitable treatment of all
persons who deal with the procurement system of this
City;
(3) To provide guidelines to City employees and
Officers;
(4) To provide increased economy in City
procurement activities; and,
(5) To foster effective broad-based competition
within the free enterprise system.
21-2-2 Application. This Title shall apply to all
employees and office holders when making purchases
or establishing contracts, as established in this title,
for the City.
History: 05/11
21-2-3 Penalties.
(1) The penalty for employees or Officers of the City
who fail to comply with this section could be liability
for the expenses incurred and disciplinary action up
to and including termination.
(2) Conflicts Of Interest. No Employee or Officer
may have a direct or indirect interest in any contract
entered into by the City unless all conflicts are
revealed and action is approved by the City Council
after legal review by the City Attorney, Utah code
Ann. § 10-3-1305, 1306, & 1307.. A violation of this
provision shall subject such member or employee to
all penalties applicable by law.
(3) Collusion among Bidders. Any agreement or
collusion among bidders or prospective bidders, in
restraint of freedom of competition, by agreement to
bid a fixed price, or otherwise, shall render the bids
of such bidder void.
(4) Advance Disclosures. Any disclosure about the
bids made or permitted by an Employee or Officer of
the City, in advance of the bid opening, shall render
all Bids void. This applies whether the bids were
solicited by advertisement or by request.
(5) Gratuities. All City Employees and Officers are
required to adhere to the requirements of Utah Code
Ann. § 10-3-1304, 63G-6-1001 & 1002, regarding the
acceptance of any gratuity in the form of cash,
merchandise, or any other thing of value. Violations
shall subject such member or employee to all
penalties applicable by law.
(6) Any person or legal entity violating any of the
provisions of this Title or committing any acts
prohibited by this Title shall be deemed in violation
of a Class “C” misdemeanor and shall be subject to
an order of restitution for any damage or expense
borne by the City.
History: 05/11
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 21 Purchasing
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 21 Purchasing
Chapter 3. Definitions
21-3-1 Definitions
21-3-1 Definitions. For the purposes of this title,
the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them by this
section:
“Budget” means the budget adopted and if
applicable amended by the Clinton City Council for
the fiscal year in which a purchase is being made.
“Bid Limits” means:
(1) For building improvements:
(a) For the year 2011, $49,194.95; and,
(b) For each year after 2011, the amount of the bid
limit for the previous year, plus an amount calculated
by multiplying the amount of the bid limit for the
previous year by the lesser of 3% or the actual
percent change in the Consumer Price Index during
the previous calendar year; and,
(2) For public works project:
(a) For the year 2011, $153,734.20; and,
(b) For each year after 2011, the amount of the bid
limit for the previous year, plus an amount calculated
by multiplying the amount of the bid limit for the
previous year by the lesser of 3% or the actual
percent change in the Consumer Price Index during
the previous calendar year.
"Building Improvement" means the construction or
repair of a public building or structure.
“Capital Assets” means a purchase of land,
buildings, improvements, and equipment, for
financial reporting purposes, if the dollar value equals
or exceeds the amount as follows, otherwise the
purchase shall be considered an operational
expenditure, supply or expense. Purchases of land,
buildings, improvements, and equipment shall be
considered a capital asset for financial reporting
purposes if the dollar value equals or exceeds the
amount for that class of asset as follows:
(1) Land $1
(2) Buildings $25,000
(3) Improvements other than buildings and land:
(a) Infrastructure $25,000
(b) Other $10,000
(4) Equipment:
(a) Rolling stock $15,000
(b) Other $10,000
“City Manager” means the Clinton City Manager.
“City Purchasing Agent” or “Purchasing Agent”
means the City Manager unless the Council has
appointed another individual as the City Purchasing
Agent or as otherwise outlined in this ordinance.
“Council” means the Clinton City Council.
"Lowest Responsive Responsible Bidder" means
any prime contractor who has bid in compliance with
the invitation to bid, either sealed bid or open market,
and within the requirements of the plans and
specifications for a construction project or item, who
is the low bidder and has met the "Standard of
Responsibility" outlined in § 21-5-19, who has
furnished a bid bond or equivalent in money as a
condition to the award of a prime contract, and who
furnishes a payment and performance bond as
required by law.
“Officer” means elected, appointed, volunteer, or
other non-employee of the City who is associated
with the functions of the City.
“Prime Contractor” means the contractor bidding
on a project or item. Sub-contractors may not be
broken out of a contract and be established as a prime
contractor.
"Public Works Project" means the construction of a
park facility, recreation facility, pipeline, culvert,
dam, canal, water system, sewer system, storm drain
system, street, curbs, sidewalks, and other public
facilities except for buildings.
History: 05/11
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 21 Purchasing
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 21 Purchasing
Chapter 4. Administration
21-4-1 Purchasing System Adopted
21-4-2 Applicability to State Code
21-4-3 Responsibility of Administration
21-4-4 Administration
21-4-5 Office of Primary Responsibility
21-4-6 The Treasurer
21-4-7 Duties of the Accounts Payable Clerk
21-4-8 Department Heads
21-4-9 Project Manager
21-4-10 Exemptions
21-4-11 Interlocal Agreement in Letting of
Contracts for Commodities or Services
21-4-12 Records
21-4-1 Purchasing System Adopted. As established in
Utah Code Ann., § 10-7-86 and §§ 63G-6-104(3)(d), as
amended, and other pertinent provisions of the laws of the
State of Utah, there is hereby adopted and established a
purchasing system for Clinton City.
History: 4/84, 12/94, 05/00, 05/11
21-4-2 Applicability to State Code. Clinton City may
operate within the guidelines established in Utah Code
Ann., § 63G-6-101 et. seq., Utah Procurement Code and
the procedures established in this Title.
History: 05/11
21-4-3 Responsibility of Administration. The City
Manager shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this Title. Any powers granted or duties
imposed upon the City may be delegated by the City
Manager to persons acting in the beneficial interest of or
in the employ of the City.
History: 05/11
21-4-4 Administration. The City Purchasing Agent
shall administer the purchasing system and perform the
duties and has powers concerning purchasing matters as
follows:
(1) Administer and maintain the purchasing system
according to the rules and regulations established or
authorized by this Title and applicable law.
(2) Establish a reasonable procedures manual to govern
this Title.
(3) Prescribe and maintain such forms as are reasonably
necessary for the operation of this Title and other rules
and regulations.
(4) Recommend to the Mayor and Council additional
changes from time to time that may be considered
desirable, and to interpret, with legal advice, the
provisions of this act and applicable statutes.
(5) Negotiate and recommend execution of
contracts for the purchase of supplies, materials,
equipment, and contractual services after
consultation with department heads and other
responsible City agents.
(6) Keep informed of current developments in
the field of purchasing, i.e., prices, market
conditions, new products, etc.
(7) Seek to obtain as full and open competition
as possible either by bidding or negotiation.
History: 4/84,9/84, 12/94, 05/00, 05/11
21-4-5 Office of Primary Responsibility. The
Clinton City Treasurers Department is the Office
of Primary Responsibility for review and
proposing changes to this Title. The Treasurer
may call on other departments for assistance in
reviewing this Title.
21-4-6 The Treasurer. The Treasurer shall
appoint a person to act as Accounts Payable
Clerk to oversee the systems outlined in this
Title.
21-4-7 Duties of the Accounts Payable
Clerk. The Treasurer shall prescribe the duties
of the Accounts Payable Clerk.
21-4-8 Department Heads. Each Department
Head is designated as a Purchasing Agent for his
respective Department's budget on behalf of the
City Purchasing Agent and shall have authority
for purchases not exceeding the amount
authorized by the City Purchasing Agent for any
purchases made for the Department.
21-4-9 Project Manager. The Council may
appoint, by resolution, a Project Manager for the
length of a specific project that has a bid that has
been received and accepted by the Council. The
Council may give a Project Manager authority to
act as the Purchasing Agent for the project with
authority to sign documents as representative of
the City, procure items for the project and pay
bills related to the project once the contract has
been executed.
21-4-10 Exemptions.
(1) This Title shall not prevent the City
Purchasing Agent from complying with the terms
and conditions of any grant, gift, or bequest that
is otherwise consistent with law.
(2) Whenever any purchase or encumbrance is
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 21 Purchasing
made with state or federal funds and the applicable state
or federal law or regulations are in conflict with this Title
to the extent that following the provisions of this Title,
would jeopardize the use of those or future state or federal
funds, such conflicting provisions of this Title shall not
apply and the City shall follow the procedure required by
the state or federal law regulation.
History: 05/11
21-4-11 Interlocal Agreement in Letting of Contracts
for Commodities or Services. The City shall have the
power to enter into joint purchase agreements with any or
all other public agencies within the state for the purchase
of any commodity or service, when it is determined by the
City Purchasing Agent to be in the best interest of the
City. Interlocal Agreements shall be adopted by the
Council as established in Utah Code Ann. § 11-13-101 et.
seq.
History: 05/11
21-4-12 Records.
(1) The City Purchasing Agent shall establish
procedures for all procurement records retention
and disposal.
(2) The Treasurer shall maintain all procurement
records, retention and disposal, in accordance
with the procedures established by the City.
(3) A written record of all contracts is to be made
and kept for three (3) years after the order of
supplies, materials, or capital assets.
(4) The City Manager shall establish procedures
for maintaining an inventory of all items, not
permanently affixed, having a value of over
$1,000.00.
All procurement records shall be retained and
disposed of in accordance with Clinton City
Code Title 2.
History: 05/11
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 21 Purchasing
Chapter 5. Purchasing System
21-5-1 Provisions for Purchasing
21-5-2 Acquisition of Supplies, Materials, and
Equipment
21-5-3 Acquisition of Services
21-5-4 Construction of Building Improvements and
Public Works Projects
21-5-5 Exceptions to Bidding Requirements
21-5-6 Awarding Construction Contracts not
Requiring Sealed Bidding
21-5-7 Open Market Procedure
21-5-8 Competitive Sealed Bidding
21-5-9 Rejection of Bids
21-5-10 Bid Bonds
21-5-11 Award of Bids
21-5-12 Performance Bonds
21-5-13 Exemptions to Competitive Bidding
Requirements
21-5-14 Purchases of Real Property
21-5-15 Emergency Purchases
21-5-16 Prohibited Practices
21-5-17 City Force Construction
21-5-18 Change Orders of Contracts
21-5-19 Pre - Qualification of Bidders and Suppliers
21-5-20 Disposition of Real Property
21-5-21 Disposition of Capital Assets and Supplies
21-5-22 Identification, Review, and Approval for
Disposal
21-5-23 Methods of Disposal
21-5-24 Conveyance for Value
21-5-25 Disposition of Proceeds
21-5-26 Irrevocable Transfer by Contribution,
Donation, or Gift to Qualifying Entities
21-5-27 Conveyance Documents
21-5-28 Validity of Actions
21-5-1 Provisions for Purchasing.
(1) No purchases shall be made and no encumbrances
shall be incurred for the benefit of the City:
(a) Except as provided in this Title and in Utah Code Ann.
§ 10-6-122, 10-6-123, 10-6-139, 11-39-101 et. seq.
and 72-6-109, and other sections of the as may be
applicable;
(b) Unless funds sufficient to cover the purchase or
encumbrance have been designated in the budget and are
available and the purchase is approved by the appropriate
Purchasing Agent as set in this Title. Any obligation
contracted by any unauthorized official shall not be valid
or enforceable against the City; and,
(c) Purchases are processed as established in the
procedures manual referenced in § 21-4-4(2) and this
Title.
History: 05/11
(2) No Employee or Officer of the City shall
purchase for and on behalf of the City any
material or supplies, goods, wares, merchandise,
services of any kind or character, except as
provided for by this title and other administrative
procedures. No voucher, check, or other
methods of payment shall be honored if this
method is not followed; however, this subsection
shall not apply to emergency purchases as
specifically provided for in § 21-5-15.
(3) The City Recorder shall sign all contracts
made on behalf of the City and shall maintain a
properly indexed record of all such contracts.
History: 4/84, 9/84, 12/94, 05/11
21-5-2 Acquisition of Supplies, Materials,
and Equipment.
(1) In order to promote overall economy and the
best use for the purpose intended, the City
administration shall be responsible for assuring
that all purchases or contracts for purchase shall
obtain the desired supplies, materials, and capital
assets for the lowest possible price.
(2) Purchases or contracts for purchases of
capital assets designated in the approved budget
must be approved by the City Manager or his
designee.
(3) Purchases or contracts for purchases of
capital assets not established in the approved
budget shall be subject to approval by the
Council.
(4) Purchases or contracts for purchase of
supplies, materials or equipment costing the City
$25,000.00 or more must be approved by the
Council, even those established in the budget.
(5) Open market procedures as set forth in § 21-
5-7 may be used for purchases or contracts for
purchase of supplies, materials, or equipment
costing the City less than the bid limits
established in § 21-3-1. A written record of the
informal quotations shall be made and kept by
each department for three (3) years after the
order of supplies, materials, or capital assets.
(6) Notwithstanding the process in § (5) above,
the City Manager may require any purchase for
supplies, materials or equipment to go through
competitive sealed bidding if in his determination
such actions would be in the best interests of the
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 21 Purchasing
City.
(7) Formal bidding, as set forth § 21-5-8 shall be used for
purchases or contracts for purchases where the cost to the
City is in excess of the bid limits established in § 21-3-1.
(8) The restriction contained in § (4) and (6) above shall
not apply whenever the requesting department determines
in writing, to the satisfaction of the Council, that there is
only one source for the requisitioned item or that the use
of open market procedures or formal bidding is either not
practicable or advantageous to the City under the
circumstances.
History: 4/84, 9/84, 12/94, 05/00, 05/11
21-5-3 Acquisition of Services.
(1) Contracts for services that are outlined in the approved
budget, costing the City less than the bid limits established
in § 21-3-1annually must be approved and authorized by
the City Manager or his designee.
(2) Contracts for services where the cost to the City is in
excess of the bid limits established in § 21-3-1 annually
must be approved by the Council, even those approved in
the budget.
(3) Open market procedures, as set forth in § 21-5-7, will
be used for all contracts for services with the exception of
contracts for architectural, engineering, legal, computer
programming, or other professional or technical services.
These types of service contracts shall be negotiated for on
the basis of demonstrated competence and qualification
and at fair and reasonable prices.
(4) Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require
bids on contracts let for the management of any of the
departments, business, or property of the City.
(5) The City Manager may require any acquisitions of
services to be bid formally if, in his determination, such
actions would be in the best interests of the City.
History: 4/84, 9/84, 12/94, 05/00, 05/11
21-5-4 Construction of Building Improvements and
Public Works Projects.
(1) When the City shall contemplate making any building
improvement or public works project to be paid for out of
the funds of the City, the City shall cause appropriate
plans, specifications, and an estimate of the cost of the
building improvement or public works project to be made.
If the estimated cost of a building improvement or public
works project exceeds the bid limits established in Utah
Code Ann. § 21-3-1of this Title or § 11-39-101, the City
shall call for formal competitive bids as outlined in § 21-
5-8.
(2) Building improvements or public works projects shall
not be divided into parts to avoid subjecting the
City to the bidding requirements. However, they
may be divided if the City complies with the
bidding requirements with respect to each
divided part of the building improvement or
public works project.
21-5-5 Exceptions to Bidding Requirements.
The following are exceptions to the bidding
requirements.
(1) The building improvement or public works
project is below the bid limits;
(2) The building improvement or public works
project is undertaken in an emergency to
eliminate an imminent risk of damage to or loss
of public or private property and such action
shall be limited to the elimination of the
imminent risk;
(3) The expense is to remedy a condition that
posses immediate physical danger; or,
(4) The expense is to reduce a substantial,
imminent risk of interruption of an essential
public service, the City Manager may proceed to
direct the improvements be made.
History: 05/11
21-5-6 Awarding Construction Contracts
not Requiring Sealed Bidding.
(1) Construction contracts costing the City less
than the bid limit must be approved by the City
Manager or his designee.
(2) Construction contracts costing the City more
than the bid limit must be approved by the
Council.
(3) Open market procedures, as set forth in § 21-
5-7, may be used for awarding construction
contracts costing the City less than the bid limit
for public works projects and general fund
improvements.
(4) Formal bidding, as set forth in § 21-5-8, will
be used for awarding construction contracts
costing the City more than the bid limit for public
works projects and general fund improvements.
(5) For Class “C” roadway construction and
maintenance as defined in Utah Code Ann. 72-6-
109, formal bids are required for construction
projects over the bid limit.
(6) The City Manager may require any
construction contract for construction to be bid
formally if, in his determination, such actions
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 21 Purchasing
would be in the best interests of the City.
History: 4/84, 9/84, 12/94, 05/00, 05/11
21-5-7 Open Market Procedure.
(1) Open market purchases shall, whenever possible, be
based upon at least three (3) bids or price quotations
submitted either in person, by telephone, or in writing as
required by the City Manager.
(2) Notwithstanding the foregoing, purchases costing less
than $5,000.00 that are not a capital asset shall not require
solicitation of bids, but shall nevertheless require the
purchase of goods at the lowest possible cost to the City.
History: 4/84, 9/84, 12/94
21-5-8 Competitive Sealed Bidding.
(1) If the City determines to proceed with the
building improvement or public works project or
Class “C” roadway project over the bid limit, it shall
request bids in the following manner:
(a) Building improvement or public works project
requests for bids shall be made in accordance with
Utah Code Ann. 11-39-103.
(b) Class “C” roadway project requests for bids shall
be made in accordance with Utah Code Ann. 72-6-
108.
(2) Except as provided in § 21-5-5 above and § 21-
5-9, the City shall enter into a contract for
completion of the building improvement or public
works project with the lowest responsive responsible
bidder.
History 9/11; 05/17 - Ord 17-2
21-5-9 Rejection of Bids. At its discretion, the Council
may reject any or all bids presented, and all notices calling
for bids shall so state. If all bids are rejected and the
Council decides to continue with the purchase contract, it
shall advertise anew in the same manner as before. If
after twice advertising and no bid is received that is
satisfactory, the City may proceed under open market
procedures outlined in § 21-5-7.
21-5-10 Bid Bonds. The City Manager may require as a
condition of bidding a bid bond or a cashier's check in lieu
thereof in the amount of five percent (5%) of the amount
bid. Such bid bond shall be required on public works
projects.
21-5-11 Award of Bids.
(1) Except as noted in § 21-5-9, within 30 days of the bid
opening, the Council shall award the bid to the lowest
responsive responsible bidder.
(2) If the low bid is rejected, a full and complete
statement of the findings and reasons shall be
prepared by the City Manager, approved by the
City Council and filed with the other papers
relating to the transaction.
21-5-12 Performance Bonds. Before entering
into a contract the Purchasing Agent may require
a performance bond in such amounts as he shall
find reasonably necessary to protect the best
interests of the City and to assure complete,
proper, and full performance of the contract. A
performance bond shall be required on public
works projects.
History: 4/84, 9/84, 12/94, 05/00
21-5-13 Exemptions to Competitive Bidding
Requirements.
(1) Whenever the requesting department head
and the City Purchasing Agent concur that a
particular product surpasses competing products
in terms of quality, serviceability, and longevity,
such a product may be purchased
notwithstanding that a competing product could
be procured for less cost.
(2) If the City Purchasing Agent determines the
supplies, materials or equipment can be
purchased at any public auction, closeout sale,
bankruptcy sale or other similar sale, and if a
majority of the Council at a regular or special
meeting concurs in such determination and
makes a finding that a purchase at any such
auction or sale will be made at a cost below the
market cost in the community, a contract or
contracts may be let, or the purchase made
without complying with the competitive bidding
requirements of this Chapter.
History: 4/84, 9/84, 12/94, 05/11
21-5-14 Purchases of Real Property.
Negotiations for purchases of real property shall
be directed by the City Manager or his
representative. The final purchase price must be
approved by the Council.
History: 4/84, 9/84, 12/94
21-5-15 Emergency Purchases.
(1) Definition of Emergency Conditions. An
emergency condition is a situation which creates
a threat to public health, welfare, or safety as
may arise by reason of floods, epidemics, riots,
equipment failures, or other reason as may be
determined by the City Purchasing Agent. The
existence of this condition creates an immediate
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 21 Purchasing
and serious need for supplies, services, or construction
that cannot be met through normal procurement methods.
(2) Scope of Emergency Procurements. Emergency
procurement shall be limited to only those supplies,
services, or construction items necessary to meet the
emergency.
(3) Authority to Make Emergency Procurements. The
Purchasing Agent may delegate to any employee to make
emergency procurements of up to an amount set forth in
the delegation.
(4) Source Selection Methods.
(a) General. The source selection method used shall be
selected with a view to the end of assuring that the
required supplies, services, or construction items are
procured in time to meet the emergency. Given this
constraint, competition that is practicable shall be
obtained.
(b) Determination of Emergency Procurement. The
Purchasing Agent shall make a written determination
stating the basis for an emergency procurement and for the
selection of the particular supplier. The determination
shall be sent promptly to the City Council.
History: 4/84, 9/84, 12/94; 05/11
21-5-16 Prohibited Practices.
(1) Gratuities. Gratuities are prohibited as stated in Utah
Code Ann. § 10-3-1304, 63G-6-1001 and 1002, as
amended.
History: 05/11
(2) Personal purchases. Purchases of supplies or
equipment for the personal use of an official or employee
of the City shall be made only when the item or items are
required parts of a worker's equipment and are necessary
to the successful performance of the duties of such City
official or employee. Other personal purchases shall not
be permitted and shall be cause for disciplinary action.
History: 4/84, 9/84, 12/94
21-5-17 City Force Construction. Notwithstanding
anything in this title to the contrary, the City shall retain
the discretion to accomplish public works projects and
other new improvements using its own personnel and
equipment without requiring bids as allowed by Utah law.
History: 4/84, 9/84, 12/94
21-5-18 Change Orders of Contracts. The City
Manager is authorized to approve change orders to
prevent work stoppage in an amount not to exceed 10% of
any contract, when such added expense is in the best
interest of the City. Change orders exceeding this amount
must be approved by the Council. Change orders
are to be reported to the Council at a subsequent
Council meeting.
History: 05/00; 05/11
21-5-19 Pre - Qualification of Bidders, and
Suppliers. Where deemed appropriate by the
City, bidders, or suppliers may be pre-qualified
for particular types of supplies, services, and
construction to determine the responsibility of
such bidder or supplier.
(1) Standard of responsibility. Factors to be
considered in determining whether the standard
of responsibility has been met by a bidder or
supplier include:
(a) Availability of the appropriate financial,
material, equipment, facility, and personnel
resources and expertise, or the ability to obtain
them, necessary to indicate the capability of the
bidder or supplier to meet all contractual
requirements;
(b) A satisfactory record of performance;
(c) A satisfactory record of integrity and
reliability;
(d) Legal qualifications to contract with the City;
and,
(e) Whether all necessary information has been
supplied in connection with the inquiry
concerning responsibility.
(2) Information pertaining to responsibility. The
bidder or supplier shall supply information
requested by the City concerning the
responsibility of such bidder or supplier. If such
information is not supplied, City shall base the
determination of responsibility upon any
available information or may find the bidder or
supplier nonresponsible if such failure, as
determined by City, is unreasonable.
History: 05/11
21-5-20 Disposition of Real Property. The
process outlined in Title 28, Chapter 3, shall be
followed when dealing with the disposition of
real property.
History: 05/11
21-5-21 Disposition of Capital Assets and
Supplies. No buildings, improvements,
equipment, or other assets classified as a capital
asset per § 21-3-1, or supplies with an aggregate
value of Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00) or
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 21 Purchasing
more, shall be transferred, traded, sold, salvaged,
discarded, or destroyed, except as provided in this Title.
Buildings, improvements, equipment, or other assets not
classified as a capital asset per § 21-3-1, may be disposed
at the direction of the City Manager as deemed
appropriate without regard to this Title, yet with the
objective of obtaining optimum value for the City.
History: 05/11
21-5-22 Identification, Review, and Approval for
Disposal.
(1) Department directors shall, at the direction of the City
Manager, identify surplus capital assets within their
departments and report the surplus to the City Manager.
The City Manager shall review the reports with
department directors to determine whether the property is
in fact surplus and the method of disposal of the surplus
property.
(2) Upon written approval of the City Manager such
property may be disposed of as directed and in a manner
consistent with this Chapter.
History: 05/11
21-5-23 Methods of Disposal. Capital assets and
supplies with an aggregate value of Three Thousand
Dollars ($3,000.00) or more and determined to be surplus
under the criteria set forth in this Title shall be disposed of
by any of the following methods:
(1) Interdepartmental transfer. Transfers between
departments within may be made without regard to
monetary value exchange. The book value of the asset at
the time of transfer will be shifted to the receiving
department/division on the fixed asset schedules.
(2) Trade-in. Surplus capital assets may be traded for
other property or equipment being purchased.
(3) Sale. The City Manager may conduct sales of surplus
capital assets by:
(a) Sealed bid or public auction, unless stated otherwise in
this Title, in accordance with § 21-5-24, of this Chapter.
Notice of the sale or auction shall be given by publication
in a newspaper of general circulation in the City at least
five (5) days prior to the opening of bids or the date of the
auction.
(b) Through a private auction company.
(4) Salvage, discard, or destruction. Capital assets shall
not be salvaged, discarded, or destroyed without the
express authorization of the Council.
(5) Replacement. Capital assets approved for replacement
in the annual budget by the Council may be disposed by
any of the means set forth in this Chapter without further
action of the Council. Department directors, with
approval of the City Manager, may trade the item
for the replacement item without further
application of this Chapter. All other disposal
means must comply with the provisions of this
Title.
(6) Irrevocable transfer. Capital assets may be
disposed by contributing, donating, or making a
gift of the property to another governmental unit,
civic, or nonprofit organization in accordance
with § 21-5-26, of this Chapter.
History: 05/11
21-5-24 Conveyance for Value.
(1) Every transfer, sale, or trade of property
classified as a capital assets per § 21-3-1, or
supplies with an original purchase price to the
City of Three Thousand Dollars ($3,000.00) or
more, shall be based upon the highest and best
economic return to the City, except that special
consideration may be given to other units of
government, other public organizations, quasipublic
organizations, or nonprofit organizations.
If a transfer is made to a qualifying
governmental, public, quasi-public, or nonprofit
entity, the value of the item transferred may be
determined by the City Manager, or by a method
specified by the City Manager and shall be
conducted in conformance with § 21-5-26 and
this Chapter.
(2) The highest and best economic return to the
City, as referred to in this Title, shall be
determined by one or more of the following
methods:
(a) Sealed competitive bid;
(b) Public auction;
(c) Valuation by qualified and disinterested
consultant;
(d) Other professional publications, auctions and
valuation services; or,
(e) An informal market survey in the case of
items possessing readily discernible market
value.
(3) The sale of capital assets shall be directed by
the Treasurer and shall be by sealed bid or public
auction pursuant to § 21-5-23(3). The City
Manager may waive the sealed bid or auction
requirement when the value of the property has
been valued by an alternate method specified
under this Subsection, and:
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 21 Purchasing
(a) The value of the property is considered negligible in
relation to the cost of sale by bid or at public auction;
(b) Sale by bidding procedures at public auction are
deemed unlikely to produce a competitive offer; or,
(c) Circumstances indicate that bidding or sale at public
auction will not be in the best interests of the City.
History: 05/11
21-5-25 Disposition of Proceeds. All revenue derived
from sales of personal property shall be credited to the
general fund of the City, except when the property is
owned and was purchased by an enterprise fund or an
internal service fund, in which case the revenues shall be
credited to the enterprise or internal service fund which
owned the property.
History: 05/11
21-5-26 Irrevocable Transfer by Contribution,
Donation, or Gift to Qualifying Entities.
(1) If determined to be in the best interest of the City,
capital assets may be disposed by contribution, donation,
or gift to another governmental unit, civic, or nonprofit
organization, which meets the following criteria:
(a) The entity has obtained an exemption pursuant to
Section 501(C)(3), Internal Revenue Code, from the
Internal Revenue Service;
(b) The entity exists primarily to serve the needs
of the public; and,
(c) The property is to be used for bona fide
public purposes with only incidental benefit to
the nonprofit entity.
(2) Written requests for transfer to a qualifying
agency shall be made to the City Manager. The
City Manager shall determine the value of the
property to be transferred as directed in § 21-5-
24.
History: 05/11
21-5-27 Conveyance Documents. The City
Treasurer will convey any capital asset by
signing and executing the appropriate title, bill of
sale, or other document.
History: 05/11
21-5-28 Validity of Actions. No provision of
this Title shall be construed to require or to
invalidate any conveyance by the City nor to vest
rights of action of any kind against the City, its
Officers, or employees.
History: 05/1
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 22 Sales and Taxes
TITLE 22. SALES AND TAXES
Chapter 1. Uniform Sales and Use Tax
Chapter 2. Municipal Energy Sales and Use
Tax
Chapter 3. Repealed
Chapter l. Uniform Sales and Use Tax
22-1-1 Sales Tax
22-1-2 Use Tax
22-1-3 Authority of Mayor
22-1-4 Contract with State Tax Commission
22-1-5 Penalties
22-1-1 Sales Tax.
(1)
(a) From and after 12:01 o'clock a.m., July 1, 1986,
there is levied and there shall be collected and paid a
tax on every retail sale of tangible personal property,
services, and meals made within the municipality at
the rate of one percent (1%).
(b) For the purpose of this chapter, all retail sales
shall be presumed to have been consummated at the
place of business of the retailer unless the tangible
personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or
his agent to an out-of-state destination. If a retailer
has no permanent place of business in the state, or has
more than one place of business, the place or places
at which the retail sales are consummated shall be as
determined under the rules and regulations prescribed
and adopted by the State Tax Commission. Public
utilities as defined by Title 54, Utah Code Annotated,
l953, shall not be obligated to determine the place or
places within any county or municipality where
public utilities services are rendered, but the place of
sale or the sales tax revenues arising from such
service allocable to the municipality shall be as
determined by the State Tax Commission pursuant to
an appropriate formula and other rules and
regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it.
(2)
(a) Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar
as they are inconsistent with the provisions of the
Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law of Utah, all of
the provisions of Chapter l5, Title 59, Utah Code
Annotated, l953, as amended, and in force and effect
on the effective date of this chapter, insofar as they
relate to sales taxes, excepting sections 59-l5-l and
59-l5-2l thereof, and excepting for the amount of the
sales tax levied therein, are hereby adopted and made
a part of this chapter as though fully set forth herein.
(b) Wherever, and to the extent that in Chapter l5 of
Title 59, Utah Code Annotated, l953, the State of
Utah is named or referred to as the taxing agent, the
name of Clinton City shall be substituted therefore.
Nothing in this subparagraph (2) shall be deemed to
require substitution of the name of the city for the
word "State" when that word is used as part of the
title of the State Tax Commission, or of the
Constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the city be
substituted for that of the State in any section when
the result of that substitution would require action to
be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof,
rather than by or against the State Tax Commission in
performing the functions incident to the
administration or operation of this chapter.
(c) If an annual license has been issued to a retailer
under section 59-l5-3, Utah Code Annotated, l953, an
additional license shall not be required by reason of
this section.
(d) There shall be excluded from the purchase price
paid or charged by which the tax is measured:
(i) The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the
State of Utah on a retailer or consumer;
(ii) Receipts from the sale of tangible personal
property on which a sales or use tax has become due
by reason of the same transaction to any other
municipality and any county in the State of Utah,
under a Sales or Use Tax Ordinance enacted by that
county or municipality in accordance with the
Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law of Utah.
Cross-reference: UCA §11-9-1, et seq
History: 2/83, 9/84, 6/86, 1/90
22-1-2 Use Tax.
(1) An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage,
use, or other consumption in this city of tangible
personal property from any retailer on or after the
operative date of this title for storage, use or other
consumption in the city at the rate of one percent
(1%) of the sales price of the property.
(2)
(a) Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar
as they are inconsistent with the provisions of the
Uniform Local Sales and Use Tax Law of Utah, all of
the provisions of Chapter l6, Title 59, Utah Code
Annotated, l953, as amended and in force and effect
on the effective date of this chapter, applicable to use
taxes, excepting the provisions of sections 59-l6-l and
59-l625 of Utah Code Annotated, and excepting for
the amount of the tax levied therein, are hereby
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 22 Sales and Taxes
adopted and made a part of this section as though
fully set forth herein.
(b) Wherever and to the extent that in Chapter l6 of
Title 59, Utah Code Annotated, l953, the State of
Utah is named or referred to as a taxing agency, the
name of Clinton City shall be substituted therefore.
Nothing in this subparagraph (2) shall be deemed to
require the substitution of the name of this city for the
word "State" when that word is used as part of the
title of the State Tax Commission, or of the
Constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the city be
substituted for that of the state in any section when
the results of that substitution would require action to
be taken by or against the city or any agency thereof,
rather than by or against the State Tax Commission in
performing the functions incident to the
administration or operation of this chapter.
(c) There shall be exempt from the tax due under this
section:
(i) The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the
State of Utah upon a retailer or consumer;
(ii) The storage, use or other consumption of tangible
personal property, the gross receipts from the sales of
or the cost of which has been subject to sales or use
tax under a sales or use tax ordinance enacted in
accordance with the Uniform Local Sales and Use
Tax Law of Utah by any other municipality and any
county of the state.
Cross-reference: UCA §11-9-1, et seq
History: 2/83, 9/84, 6/86, 1/90
22-1-3 Authority of Mayor. The mayor is
authorized to execute whatever documents are
necessary to distribute sales and use tax revenues on
the combination of point of sale and population
factors set forth in section ll-9-5, Utah Code
Annotated, l953.
History: 2/83, 6/86
22-1-4 Contract with State Tax Commission.
Heretofore, this city has entered into an agreement
with the State Tax Commission to perform all
functions incident to the administration or operation
of the sales and use taxes of the city. That contract is
hereby confirmed and the mayor is hereby authorized
to enter into such supplementary agreement with the
State Tax Commission as may be necessary to the
continued administration and operation of local sales
and use taxes of the city as reenacted by this chapter.
History: 2/83, 6/86
22-1-5 Penalties. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a
class C misdemeanor.
History: 2/83, 6/86, 05/99
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 22 Sales and Taxes
Chapter 2. Municipal Energy Sales
and Use Tax
22-2-1 Purpose
22-2-2 Definitions
22-2-3 Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax
22-2-4 Exemptions from the Municipal Energy
Sales and Use Tax
22-2-5 No Effect Upon Existing Franchises –
Credit for Franchise Fees
22-2-6 Tax Collection Contract with State Tax
Commission
22-2-7 Incorporation of Part 1, Chapter 12, Title
59, Utah Code, Including Amendments
22-2-8 No Additional License to Collect the
Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax
Required - No Additional License or
Reporting Requirements
22-2-9 Effective Date
22-2-1 Purpose. It is the intent of Clinton City to
adopt the municipal energy sales and use tax,
pursuant to, and in conformance with, Utah Code
Ann. § 10-1-301 et seq, "The Municipal Energy
Sales and Use Tax Act."
History: 6/97
22-2-2 Definitions.
(1) "Consumer" means a person who acquires taxable
energy for any use that is subject to the Municipal
Energy Sales and Use Tax.
(2) "Contractual Franchise Fee" means:
(a) a fee;
(i) provided for in a franchise agreement; and
(ii) that is consideration for the franchise agreement;
or
(b)
(i) a fee similar to subsection (2)(a); or
(ii) any combination of subsections (2)(a) or (2)(b).
(3)
(a) "Delivered Value" means the fair market value of
the taxable energy delivered for sale or use in the
municipality and includes:
(i) the value of the energy itself; and
(ii) any transportation, freight, customer demand
charges, service charges, or other costs typically
incurred in providing taxable energy in usable form to
each class of customer in the municipality,
(b) "Delivered Value" does not include the amount of
a tax paid under Part 1 or Part 2 of Chapter 12, Title
59 of the Utah Code Annotated.
(4) "Energy Supplier" means a person supplying
taxable energy, except for persons supplying a de
minimus amount of taxable energy, if such persons
are excluded by rule promulgated by the State Tax
Commission.
(5) "Franchise Agreement" means a franchise or an
ordinance, contract, or agreement granting a
franchise.
(6) "Franchise Tax" means:
(a) a franchise tax
(b) a tax similar to a franchise tax; or
(c) any combination of subsections (a) or (b).
(7) "Person" includes any individual, firm,
partnership, joint venture, association, corporation,
estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, this
state, any county, city, municipality, district, or other
local governmental entity of the state, or any group or
combination acting as a unit.
(8) "Sale" means any transfer of title, exchange, or
barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner, of
taxable energy for a consideration. It includes:
(a) installment and credit sales;
(b) any closed transaction constituting a sale;
(c) any transaction under which right to acquire, use
or consume taxable energy is granted under a lease or
contract and the transfer would be taxable if an
outright sale were made.
(9) "Storage" means any keeping or retention of
taxable energy in Clinton City for any purpose except
sale in the regular course of business.
(10)
(a) "Use" means the exercise of any right or power
over taxable energy incident to the ownership or the
leasing of the taxable energy.
(b) "Use" does not include the sale, display,
demonstration, or trial of the taxable energy in the
regular course of business and held for resale.
(11) "Taxable Energy" means gas and electricity.
History: 6/97
22-2-3 Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
There is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of
this chapter, a tax on every sale or use of taxable
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 22 Sales and Taxes
energy made within Clinton City equaling six percent
(6%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to
the consumer. This tax shall be known as the
Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
(1) The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value
of the taxable energy to the consumer.
(2) The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax
on taxable energy imposed by Clinton City as
authorized by Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 2 of the Utah
Code Annotated, The Local Sales and Use Tax Act.
History: 6/97
22-2-4 Exemptions from the Municipal Energy
Sales and Use Tax.
(1) No exemptions are granted from the Municipal
Energy Sales and Use Tax except as expressly
provided in Utah Code Ann. § 10-1-305(2)(b);
notwithstanding an exemption granted by § 59-1-104
of the Utah Code.
(2) The following are exempt from the Municipal
Energy Sales and Use Tax, pursuant to Utah Code
Ann. § 10-1-305(2)(b):
(a) Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel, and
special fuels subject to taxation under Title 59,
Chapter 13 of the Utah Code Annotated;
(b) Sales and use of taxable energy that is exempt
from taxation under federal law, the United States
Constitution, or the Utah Constitution;
(c) Sales and use of taxable energy purchased or
stored for resale;
(d) Sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if the
primary use of the taxable energy is for use in
compounding or producing taxable energy or a fuel
subject to taxation under Title 59, Chapter 13 of the
Utah Code Annotated;
(e) Taxable energy brought into the state by a
nonresident for the nonresident's own personal use or
enjoyment while within the state, except taxable
energy purchased for use in the state by a nonresident
living or working in the state at the time of purchase;
(f) The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose
other than as a fuel or energy; and
(g) The sale of taxable energy for use outside the
boundaries of Clinton City.
(3) The sale, storage, use, or other consumption of
taxable energy is exempt from the Municipal Energy
Sales and Use Tax levied by this Chapter, provided:
(a) The delivered value of the taxable energy has
been subject to a municipal energy sales or use tax
levied by another municipality within the state
authorized by Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 3 of the Utah
Code Annotated; and
(b) Clinton City is paid the difference between the tax
paid to the other municipality and the tax that would
otherwise be due under this Chapter, if the tax due
under this Chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other
municipality.
History: 6/97
22-2-5 No Effect Upon Existing Franchises -
Credit for Franchise Fees.
(1) This Chapter shall not alter any existing franchise
agreements between Clinton City and energy
suppliers.
(2) There is a credit against the tax due from any
consumer in the amount of a contractual franchise fee
paid if:
(a) the energy supplier pays the contractual franchise
fee to Clinton City pursuant to a franchise agreement
in effect on July 1, 1997;
(b) the contractual franchise fee is passed through by
the energy supplier to a consumer as a separately
itemized charge; and
(c) the energy supplier has accepted the franchise.
History: 6/97
22-2-6 Tax Collection Contract With State Tax
Commission.
(1) On or before the effective date of this Chapter,
Clinton City shall contract with the State Tax
Commission to perform all functions incident to the
administration and collection of the Municipal
Energy Sales and Use Tax, in accordance with this
Chapter. The Mayor is hereby authorized to enter
agreements with the State Tax Commission that may
be necessary to the continued administration and
operation of the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax
Ordinance enacted by this Chapter.
(2) An energy supplier shall pay the Municipal
Energy Sales and Use Tax revenues collected from
consumers directly to Clinton City monthly if:
(a) Clinton City is the energy supplier; or
(b)
(i) the energy supplier estimates that the municipal
energy sales and use tax collected annually from its
Utah consumers equals $1,000,000 or more, and
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 22 Sales and Taxes
(ii) the energy supplier collects the Municipal Energy
Sales and Use Tax.
(3) An energy supplier paying the Municipal Energy
Sales and Use Tax directly to Clinton City may
deduct any contractual franchise fees collected by the
energy supplier qualifying as a credit and remit the
net tax less any amount the energy supplier retains as
authorized by § 10-1-307(4), Utah Code Annotated.
History: 6/97
22-2-7 Incorporation of Part 1, Chapter 12, Title
59, Utah Code, Including Amendments.
(1)
(a) Except as herein provided, and except insofar as
they are inconsistent with the provisions of Title 10,
Chapter 1, Part 3, Municipal Energy Sales and Use
Tax Act, as well as this Chapter, all of the provisions
of Part 1, Chapter 12, Title 59 of the Utah Code
Annotated 1953, as amended, and in force and effect
on the effective date of this Chapter, insofar as they
relate to sales and use taxes, excepting Sections 59-
12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, and excepting for the
amount of the sales and use taxes levied therein, are
hereby adopted and made a part of this Chapter as if
fully set forth herein.
(b) Wherever, and to the extent that in Part 1, Chapter
12, Title 59, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended,
the State of Utah is named or referred to as the
"taxing agency," the name "Clinton City" shall be
substituted insofar as is necessary for the purposes of
that part, as well as Part 3, Chapter 1, Title 10, Utah
Code Annotated 1953, as amended. Nothing in this
subparagraph (b) shall be deemed to require
substitution of the name Clinton City for the word
"State" when that word is used as part of the title of
the State Tax Commission, or of the Constitution of
Utah, nor shall the name of Clinton City be
substituted for that of the State in any section when
the result of such a substitution would require action
to be taken by or against Clinton City or any agency
thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax
Commission in performing the functions incident to
the administration of operation of this Chapter.
(c) Any amendments made to Part 1, Chapter 12,
Title 59, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended,
which would be applicable to Clinton City for the
purposes of carrying out this Chapter are hereby
incorporated herein by reference shall be effective
upon the date that they are effective as a Utah statute.
History: 6/97
22-2-8 No Additional License to Collect the
Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Required -
No Additional License or Reporting
Requirements. No additional license to collect or
report the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax
levied by this Chapter is required, provided the
energy supplier collecting the tax has a license issued
under Section 59-12-106, Utah Code Annotated.
History: 6/97
22-2-9 Effective Date. This Chapter is effective
June 30, 1997. The Municipal Energy Sales and Use
Tax shall be levied beginning 12:01 A.M., July 1,
1997.
History: 6/97
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 22 Sales and Taxes
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 22 Sales and Taxes
Chapter 3. Repealed Ord. 15-11, 11/2015
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
TITLE 23. SEWERAGE,
STORMWATER, AND FLOOD
IRRIGATION SYSTEMS
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. Repealed
Chapter 3. Repealed
Chapter 4. Repealed
Chapter 5. General Provisions
Chapter 6. Definitions
Chapter 7. Administration
Chapter 8. Sewerage System
Chapter 9. Fats, Oils and Grease Control
Chapter 10. North Davis Sewer District
Wastewater Control
Chapter 11. Stormwater System
Chapter 12. Flood Damage Prevention
Chapter 13. Flood Irrigation Systems
Chapter 14. Enforcement - Prohibited Actions
- Penalties
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. Repealed
Chapter 3. Repealed
Chapter 4. Repealed
Chapter 5. General Provisions
23-5-1 Statement of Purpose
23-5-2 Application
23-5-1 Statement of Purpose. The purpose of
this Title is to protect the health, safety and welfare
of the Clinton City residents by establishing, and
controlling the systems outlined in this Title as well
as setting up procedures related to management, and
outside influences upon the systems. The
objectives of this Title are:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to
the systems;
(3) To manage and control flows and the
introduction of inappropriate materials into the
systems;
(4) To protect the environment;
(5) Minimize expenditure of public money for
costly public works and infrastructure projects;
(6) Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts
associated with flooding generally undertaken at the
expense of the general public;
(7) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(8) Minimize damage to public facilities and
utilities such as water, sewer, stormwater and gas
mains, electric, telephone and cable lines, streets
and bridges located in and servicing the City;
(9) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for
the sound use and development of areas in such a
manner as to provide adequate infrastructure and
minimize blight areas;
(10) To guide, regulate and control the design,
construction, use, and maintenance of any
development or other activity that results in the
movement of earth on land within the City;
(11) Insure that potential buyers are notified of
probability of incompatibility of land features that
may make that property inappropriate for an
intended use. To establish legal authority to carry
out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring
procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this Title; and,
(12) To establish a viable and fair method of
financing the construction, operation and
maintenance of the systems.
23-5-2 Application. This Title shall apply to all
water, waste water, sewerage, effluent, and other
materials entering the systems established in this
Title generated on any developed and undeveloped
lands unless explicitly exempted by an authorized
enforcement agency.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
Chapter 6. Definitions
23-6-1 Definitions
23-6-1 Definitions. Unless specifically defined
below, words or phrases used in this Title shall be
interpreted to give them the meaning they have in
common usage and to give this Title it’s most
reasonable application.
“48 Hours” means a 48-hour period occurring
during business days which includes any day except
Saturday, Sunday, legal holidays, or other days
where general notice is given, more than 48-hours
in advance, that the City Offices will be closed.
History: 08/09
“Alluvial Fan Flooding” means a flooding
occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar
landform, which originates at the apex and is
characterized by high-velocity flows: active
processes of erosion, sediment transport, and
deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.
“Apex” means a point on an alluvial fan or similar
landform below which the flow path of the major
stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable
and alluvial fan flooding can occur.
“Area of Shallow Flooding” means a designated
AO, AH, or VO zone (flood hazard zones) on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)
with a one percent chance or greater annual chance
of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet
where a clearly defined channel does not exist,
where the path of flooding is unpredictable and
where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding
is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.
“Area of Special Flood Hazard” means the land in
the floodplain within a community subject to a one
percent or greater chance of flooding in any given
year.
“Authorized Enforcement Agency” means
employees of Clinton City as designated by the City
Manager.
“Base Flood” means the flood having a one percent
chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given
year.
“Basement” means any area of the building having
its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides.
“Berm” means an earthen mound used to direct the
flow of runoff around or through a structure.
“BMP’s (Best Management Practices)” means
schedules of activities, prohibitions of practices,
maintenance procedures, design standards, and
other management practices to prevent or reduce
the discharge of pollutants directly or indirectly into
the waters of the United States. BMP’s also include
treatment requirements, operating procedures,
educational activities, and practices to control plant
site runoff spillage or leaks, sludge or waste
disposal, or drainage from raw material storage.
“Catch Basin” means receptacle with a slotted
opening leading to an underground pipe or open
ditch for carrying surface runoff.
“Clean Water Act” means the federal Water
Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.),
and any subsequent amendments thereto.
“Construction Activity” means activities subject
to UPDES Construction Permits. These include
construction projects resulting in land disturbances
greater than 1 acre. Such activities include but are
not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading,
excavating, and demolition.
“Conveyance System” means any channel or pipe
for collecting and directing the stormwater.
“Critical Feature” means an integral and readily
identifiable part of a flood protection system,
without which the flood protection provided by the
entire system would be compromised.
“Culvert” means a covered channel or large
diameter pipe that directs water flow below the
ground surface.
“Degradation” (Biological or chemical) means the
breakdown of chemical compounds into simpler
substances, usually less harmful than the original
compound, as with the degradation of a persistent
pesticide. (Geological) Wearing down by erosion.
(Water) The lowering of the water quality of a
watercourse by an increase in the amount of
pollutants.
“Development” means any man-made change in
improved and unimproved real estate, including but
not limited to buildings or other structures, mining,
dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or
drilling operations or storage of equipment or
materials.
“Dike” means an embankment to confine or control
water, often built along the banks of a river to
prevent overflow of lowlands.
“Discharge” means the release of stormwater or
other substance from a conveyance system or
storage container.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
“Discharging Food Service Establishments”
means those establishments primarily engaged in
activities of preparing, serving, or otherwise making
available for consumption by the public such as
restaurant, delicatessen, bakery, commercial
kitchen, caterer, hotel, school, hospital, prison,
correctional facility, and care institution. These
establishments use one or more of the following
preparation activities: cooking by frying (all
methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sautéing,
rotisserie cooking, broiling (all methods), boiling,
blanching, roasting, toasting, or poaching. Also
included are infrared heating, searing, barbecuing,
and any other food preparation activity that
produces a hot, non-drinkable food product in or on
a receptacle that requires washing.
“Drainage” means the collection, conveyance,
containment, and/or discharge of surface and
stormwater runoff.
“Drain, Field” means an underground drainage
system installed to drain farmers fields and
typically ends in a irrigation tail water ditch,
however where tail water ditches have been
incorporated into the stormwater system it will be
piped into the system.
“Drain, Land” means an underground drainage
system installed during the development of a
subdivision, installed within the public right-of-way
and designed to meet City standards.
“Elevated Building” means a non-basement
building to have the top of the elevated floor above
the ground level by means of pilings, columns
(posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow
of the water and adequately anchored so as not to
impair the structural integrity of the building during
a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood;
"elevated building" also includes a building
elevated by means of fill or solid foundation
perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate
the unimpeded movement of flood waters.
“Erosion” means the wearing away of land surface
by wind or water. Erosion occurs naturally from
weather or runoff but can be intensified by landclearing
practices related to farming, residential or
industrial development, road building, or timber
cutting.
“Excavator” means any person or entity that
excavates or conducts excavation activities.
History: 08/09
“Excavate or Excavation” means an operation in
which earth, rock, or other material on or below the
ground is moved or displaced by tools, equipment,
or explosives.
History: 08/09
“ESU (Equivalent Service Units)” means
equivalent service units are used to determine the
amount that each parcel contributes to, benefits
from, or otherwise uses the stormwater utility.
“Existing Construction” means the purposes of
determining rates, structures for which the "start of
construction" commenced before the effective date
of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs
effective before that date. "Existing construction"
may also be referred to as "existing structures."
“Existing Subdivision” means a subdivision for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the homes are to be affixed
(including, at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading) is completed before the effective date
of the floodplain management regulations adopted
by a community.
“Expansion to an Existing Subdivision” means
the preparation of additional sites by the
construction of facilities for servicing the lots on
which the manufactured homes are to be affixed
(including the installation of utilities, the
construction of streets, and either final site grading
or the pouring of concrete pads).
“Fats, Oils, and Greases” means organic polar
compounds derived from animal and/ or plant
sources that contain multiple carbon chain
triglyceride molecules. All are sometimes referred
to herein as “grease” or “greases”.
“Fill” means a deposit of earth material placed by
artificial means.
“Final Stabilization Plan” means the final
stabilization plan shall show how the site will be
stabilized when construction is completed. The
plan may include landscaping, armoring, and other
erosion stabilizing measures.
“First Flush” means the delivery of a
disproportionately large load of pollutants during
the early part of storms due to the rapid runoff of
accumulated pollutants.
“Flood or Flooding” means a general and
temporary condition of partial or complete
inundation of normally dry land areas from:
(1) the overflow of inland waters;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
(2) the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of
surface waters from any source; or,
(3) ground water.
“Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)” means
an official map of a community, issued by the
Administrator, where the boundaries of the flood,
mudslide (i.e., mudflow) related erosion areas
having special hazards have been designated as
Zones A, M, and/or E (flood hazard zones).
“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means an
official map of a community, on which the Federal
Emergency Management Agency has delineated
both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk
premium zones applicable to the community.
“Flood Insurance Study” means the official report
provided by the Federal Emergency Management
Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water
surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the
Flood Boundary-Floodway Map.
“Floodplain or Flood-Prone Area” means any
land area susceptible to being inundated by water
from any source (see definition of flooding).
“Floodplain Management” means the operation of
an overall program of corrective and preventive
measures for reducing flood damage, including but
not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood
control works and floodplain management
regulations.
“Floodplain Management Regulations” means
zoning and land use ordinances, subdivision
regulations, building codes, health regulations,
special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain
ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control
ordinance) and other applications of police power.
The term describes such state or local regulations,
in any combination thereof, which provide
standards for the purpose of flood damage
prevention and reduction.
“Flood Protection System” means those physical
structural works for which funds have been
authorized, appropriated, and expended and which
have been constructed specifically to modify
flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas
within a community subject to a "special flood
hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated
flooding. Such a system typically includes
hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or
dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are
those constructed in conformance with sound
engineering standards.
“Flood Proofing” means any combination of
structural and non-structural additions, changes, or
adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate
flood damage to real estate or improved real
property, water and sanitary facilities, structures
and their contents.
“Floodway (Regulatory Floodway)” means the
channel of a river or other watercourse and the
adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to
discharge the base flood without cumulatively
increasing the water surface elevation more than a
designated height.
“Functionally Dependent Use” means a use which
cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is
located or carried out in close proximity to water.
The term includes only docking facilities, port
facilities that are necessary for the loading and
unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building
and ship repair facilities, but does not include longterm
storage or related manufacturing facilities.
“General Permit” means a permit issued under the
UPDES NPDES program to cover a class or
category of stormwater discharges.
“Grading” means the cutting and/or filling of the
land surface to a desired slope or elevation.
“Grease Trap” means a device for separating and
retaining waterborne greases and grease complexes
prior to the wastewater exiting the trap and entering
the sewerage collection system. Such traps are
typically compact under-the-sink units that are near
food preparation areas.
“Grease Interceptor” means a structure or device
designed for the purpose of removing and
preventing fats, oils, and grease from entering the
sewerage collection system. These devices are often
below-ground units in outside areas and are built as
two or three chamber baffled tanks.
“Hazardous Waste” means by-products of society
that can pose a substantial or potential hazard to
human health or the environment when improperly
managed. Possesses at least one of four
characteristics (flammable, corrosive, reactive, or
toxic), or appears on special EPA lists.
“Heavy Metals” means metals of high specific
gravity, present in municipal and industrial wastes
that pose long-term environmental hazards. Such
metals include cadmium, chromium, cobalt, copper,
lead, mercury, nickel, and zinc.
“Highest Adjacent Grade” means the highest
natural elevation of the ground surface prior to
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
construction next to the proposed walls of a
structure.
“Historic Structure” means any structure that is:
(1) Listed individually in the National Register of
Historic Places (a listing maintained by the
Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined
by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the
requirements for individual listing on the National
Register;
(2) Certified or preliminarily determined by the
Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the
historical significance of a registered historic
district or a district preliminarily determined by the
Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
(3) Individually listed on a state inventory of
historic places in states with historic preservation
programs which have been approved by the
Secretary of Interior; or,
(4) Individually listed on a local inventory or
historic places in communities with historic
preservation programs that have been certified
either;
(a) By an approved state program as determined by
the Secretary of the Interior; or,
(b) Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states
without approved programs.
“Illegal Discharge” means any direct or indirect
non-stormwater discharge to the stormwater system,
except discharges exempted in this Title.
“Illicit Connection” means any physical
connection to the Clinton City stormwater system
allowing discharge of non-stormwater, which has
not been permitted by this Title.
“Impervious Surface” means a surface which
prevents or retards the penetration of water into the
ground including, but not limited to roofs,
sidewalks, patios, driveways, parking lots, concrete
and asphalt paving, and oiled, macadam, or other
surfaces which similarly impede the natural
infiltration of stormwater.
“Individual Permit” means a permit issued under
the UPDES program for a specific facility, whereby
the unique characteristics of that facility may be
addressed through the imposition of special
conditions or requirements.
“Infiltration” means the downward movement of
water from the surface to the subsoil. The
infiltration capacity is expressed in terms of
inches/hour.
“Ingress/Egress” means the points of access to and
from a property.
“Inlet” means an entrance into a ditch, stormwater,
or other waterway.
“Levee” means a man-made structure, usually an
earthen embankment, designed and constructed in
accordance with sound engineering practices to
contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to
provide protection from temporary flooding.
“Levee System” means a flood protection system
which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated
structures, such as closure and drainage devices,
which are constructed and operated in accordance
with sound engineering practices.
“Lowest Floor” means the lowest floor of the
lowest enclosed area (including basement). An
unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable
solely for parking or vehicles, building access or
storage in an area other than a basement area is not
considered a building's lowest floor; provided that
such enclosure is not built so as to render the
structure in violation of the applicable nonelevation
design requirement of Section 60.3 of the
National Flood Insurance Program regulations.
“Manufactured Home” means a structure
transportable in one or more sections, which is built
on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with
or without a permanent foundation when connected
to the required utilities. The term "manufactured
home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".
“Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision”
means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land
divided into two or more manufactured home lots
for rent or sale.
“Mean Sea Level” means for purposes of the
National Flood Insurance Program, the National
Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other
datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a
community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are
referenced.
“Minimum Design Capability” means the design
features of a grease interceptor and its ability or
volume required to effectively intercept and retain
greases from grease -laden wastewaters discharged
to the sanitary sewer.
“Mulch” means a natural or artificial layer of plant
residue or other materials covering the land surface
which conserves moisture, holds soil in place, aids
in establishing plant cover, and minimizes
temperature fluctuations.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
“Nonpoint Source” means pollution caused by
diffuse sources (not a single location such as a pipe)
such as agricultural or urban runoff.
“NPDES (National Pollutant Discharge
Elimination System)” means EPA’s program to
control the discharge of pollutants to waters of the
United States.
“NPDES Permit” means an authorization, or
license, or equivalent control document issued by
EPA or an approved state agency to implement the
requirements of the NPDES program.
“New Construction” means, for the purpose of
determining insurance rates, structures for which
the "start of construction" commenced on or after
the effective date of an initial FIRM or after
December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and
includes any subsequent improvements to such
structures. For floodplain management purposes,
"new construction" means structures for which the
"start of construction" commenced on or after the
effective date of a floodplain management
regulation adopted by a community and includes
any subsequent improvements to such structures.
“New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision”
means a manufactured home park or subdivision for
which the construction of facilities for servicing the
lots on which the manufactured homes are to be
affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of
utilities, the construction of streets, and either final
site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is
completed on or after the effective date of
floodplain management regulations adopted by a
community.
“Off-site” means any areas outside of the proposed
development boundaries which may or may not be
connected to the development, either hydraulically
or otherwise.
“On-site” means the entire property that includes
the proposed development.
“Operator” means a person who owns, operates, or
maintains an underground facility to include
facilities below grade that would be underground if
piped. This does not include an owner of real
property where underground facilities are:
the owner’s property; or,
a public street adjacent to the owner’s property, a
right-of-way adjacent to the owner’s property, or a
public utility easement adjacent to the owner’s
property;
(a) used exclusively to furnish services to the
owner’s property; and
(b) maintained under the operation and control of
that owner.
History: 08/09
“Outfall” means the point, location, or structure
where wastewater or drainage discharges from a
stormwater pipe, ditch, or other conveyance to a
receiving body of water.
“Point Source” means any discernible, confined,
and discrete conveyance, including but not limited
to any pipe, ditch, channel, tunnel, conduit, well,
discrete fissure, container, rolling stock,
concentrated animal feeding operation, or vessel or
other floating craft, from which pollutants are or
may be discharged.
“Plat” means a map or representation of a
subdivision showing the division of a tract or parcel
of land into lots, blocks, streets, or other divisions
and dedications.
“Pollutant” means generally, any substance
introduced into the environment that adversely
affects the usefulness of a resource. Pollutants may
include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes,
and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; nonhazardous
liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes;
refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or
abandoned objects, and accumulations, so that same
may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables;
pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous
substances and wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and
pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal
wastes; wastes and residues that result from
constructing a building or structure; and noxious or
offensive matter of any kind.
“Receiving Waters” means bodies of water or
surface water systems receiving water from
upstream constructed (or natural) systems.
“Recreational Vehicle” means a vehicle which is:
(1) built on a single chassis;
(2) 400 square feet or less when measured at the
largest horizontal projections;
(3) designed to be self-propelled or permanently
towable by a light duty truck; and,
(4) designed primarily not for use as a permanent
dwelling but as temporary living quarters for
recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
“Retention” means the holding of runoff in a basin
without release except by means of evaporation,
infiltration, or emergency bypass.
“Riparian” means a relatively narrow strip of land
that borders a natural course of water.
“Riprap” means a combination of large stone,
cobbles and boulders used to line channels, stabilize
banks, reduce runoff velocities, or filter out
sediment.
“Run-on” means stormwater surface flow or other
surface flow, which enters property other than that
where it originated.
“Runoff” means that part of precipitation,
snowmelt, or irrigation water that runs off the land
into streams or other surface water. It can carry
pollutants from the air and land into the receiving
waters.
“Sedimentation” means the process of depositing
soil particles, clays, sands, or other sediments that
were picked up by runoff.
“Sewerage Collection System” means consists of
main lines, manholes, and pumping stations, where
applicable, that are owned by the City and
contained in dedicated rights-of-way, easements, or
City owned property. The sewerage collection
system does not include sewer laterals.
“Sewer Lateral Cleanout” means a point of
access where a sewer lateral can be serviced.
History: 08/09
“Sewer Main Lines” means main lines are located
in the public right-of-way or easements and are
used for the conveyance of sewer from multiple
laterals.
“Sewer Laterals” means sewer laterals are lines
that connect onto the sewerage collection system
and connect to residential units, apartment
complexes, multiple occupancy buildings,
commercial buildings, commercial complexes, etc.
The sewer lateral ends at the connection to the
sewerage collection system.
“Sheet Flow” means runoff which flows over the
ground surface as a thin, even layer, not
concentrated in a channel.
“Source Control” A practice or structural measure
to prevent pollutants from entering stormwater
runoff or other environmental media.
“Stabilization” means the proper placing, grading
and/or covering of soil, rock, or earth to ensure its
resistance to erosion, sliding, or other movement.
“Start of Construction” means the date the
building permit is issued, including substantial
improvement, (for other than new construction or
substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier
Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), provided the
actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction,
rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other
improvement was within 180 days of the permit
date. The actual start means either the first
placement of permanent construction of a structure
on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the
installation of piles, the construction of columns, or
any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the
placement of a manufactured home on a foundation.
Permanent construction does not include land prep
aeration, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor
does it include the installation of streets and/or
walkways; nor does it include excavation for
basement, footings, piers or foundations or the
erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the
installation on the property of accessory buildings,
such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling
units or not part of the main structure. For a
substantial improvement, the actual start of
construction means the first alteration of any wall,
ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building,
whether or not that alteration affects the external
dimensions of the building.
“Structure” means a walled and roofed building,
including a gas or liquid storage tank that is
principally above ground, as well as a manufactured
home.
“Storm Drain” means an underground pipe or
open ditch used to convey stormwater.
“Storm Drain Inlet” means a slotted opening
leading to or open pipe entering the underground
pipe system.
“Stormwater” means rainfall runoff, snow melt
runoff, and drainage. It excludes infiltration.
“Stormwater Management Program” means a
document which describes the Best Management
Practices and activities to be implemented by a
person or business to identify sources of pollution
or contamination at a site and the actions to
eliminate or reduce pollutant discharges to
stormwater, stormwater conveyance systems, and/or
receiving waters.
“Substantial Damage” means damage of any
origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
restoring the structure to it’s before damaged
condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the
market value of the structure before the damage
occurred.
“Substantial Improvement” means any
reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other
improvement of a structure, the cost of which
equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of
the structure before "start of construction" of the
improvement. This includes structures which have
incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the
actual repair work performed. The term does not,
however, include either:
(1) Any project for improvement of a structure to
correct existing violations of state or local health,
sanitary, or safety code specifications, which have
been identified by the local code enforcement
official and which are the minimum necessary
conditions; or,
(2) Any alteration of a "historic structure” provided
that the alteration will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a "historic structure."
“SWPPP (Stormwater Pollution Prevention
Plan)” means a plan for stormwater discharge that
includes erosion prevention measures and sediment
controls that, when implemented, will minimize the
potential for pollutants to leave the site.
“Stormwater System (Municipal Separate
Stormwater System, MS4)” means a municipally
owned and operated stormwater collection system
consisting of the following: curb & gutter, drainage
swales, piping, ditches, canals, detention basins,
inlet boxes, land drain system, field drain systems
or any other system used to convey stormwater that
discharges into canals, ditches, streams, rivers, or
lakes not owned and operated by that municipality.
“Swale” means an elongated depression in the land
surface that is at least seasonally wet, is usually
heavily vegetated, and is normally without flowing
water. Swales direct stormwater flows into
primarily drainage channels and allow some of the
stormwater to infiltrate into the ground surface.
“Treatment Control BMP” means a BMP that is
intended to remove pollutants from stormwater.
“Underground Facility” means personal property
that is buried or placed below ground level or below
grade and that would be buried if piped for use in
the storage or conveyance of any of the following:
(1) water;
(2) Sewage, including sewer laterals;
(3) Communications, including electronic,
photonic, telephonic, or telegraphic
communications;
(4) Television, cable television, or other
telecommunication signals, including transmission
to subscribers of video or other programming;
(5) Electric power;
(6) Oil, gas, or other fluid and gaseous substances;
(7) Steam;
(8) Slurry; or,
(9) Dangerous materials or products.
History: 08/09
“UPDES (Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination
System)” means permit granted under the NPDES
to the State of Utah.
“UPDES Permit” means the authorization, or
license, or equivalent control document issued by
the State of Utah to implement the requirements of
the UPDES program.
“User” means any person, including those located
outside the jurisdictional limits of Clinton City, who
contributes causes or permits the contribution or
discharge of stormwater, wastewater, irrigation
water into any of the City systems within the City’s
boundaries, including persons who contribute such
from mobile sources.
“Variance” means a grant of relief to a person
from the requirement of this Title when specific
enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship.
A variance, therefore, permits construction or
development in a manner otherwise prohibited by
this Title. (For full requirements dealing with flood
zones see Section 60.6 of the National Flood
Insurance Program regulations.)
“Violation” means the failure of a structure or
other development to be fully compliant with this
Title. A structure or other development without the
elevation certificate, other certifications, or other
evidence of compliance required in this Title is
presumed to be in violation until such time as that
documentation is provided.
“Waters of the State” means surface waters and
ground waters within the boundaries of the State of
Utah and subject to its jurisdiction.
“Water Surface Elevation” means the height, in
relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum
(NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified),
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in
the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
“Waters of the United States” means surface
watercourses and water bodies as defined in 40
CFR § 122.2. including all natural waterways and
definite channels and depressions in the earth that
may carry water, even though such waterways may
only carry water during rains and storms and may
not carry stormwater at and during all times and
seasons.
“Wetlands” means an area that is regularly
saturated by surface or ground water and
subsequently characterized by a prevalence of
vegetation that is adapted for life in saturated soil
conditions. Examples include: swamps, bogs,
marshes, and estuaries.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
Chapter 7. Administration
23-7-1 Responsibility of Administration
23-7-2 Office of Primary Responsibility
23-7-3 Supervisor of the Public Works
Divisions
23-7-4 Duties of the Supervisor
23-7-5 Regulations
23-7-6 Excavator Access
23-7-7 Installation and Location of Sewer
Lateral Cleanouts
23-7-8 Policies
23-7-9 Establishment of Land Use Permit
23-7-10 Application Review Fees
23-7-11 Applications for Installation Permit
23-7-12 When Permits Shall not be Issued
23-7-13 Repealed
23-7-14 Extension of Mains Within the City
23-7-15 Ownership of Extension
23-7-16 Non-Liability for Damages
23-7-17 Ultimate Responsibility
23-7-18 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
23-7-19 Interpretation
23-7-20 Division to Have Free Access
23-7-21 Utility-Creation and Setup
23-7-22 Establishment of Fees
23-7-23 Billing
23-7-24 Appeal of Decision, Rates, Fees and
Rebates
23-7-25 Supply of Services to Persons
Outside City Limits
23-7-26 Ownership and Maintenance of
Connecting Main Lines and Laterals
23-7-27 As Built Plans
23-7-28 Root Poisoning
23-7-29 Severability
23-7-1 Responsibility of Administration. The
City Manager shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this Title. Any powers
granted or duties imposed upon the City may be
delegated, in writing, by the City Manager to
persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest
of or in the employ of the City.
23-7-2 Office of Primary Responsibility. The
Public Works Department is the Office of Primary
Responsibility for review and proposing changes to
this Title. The Public Works Director may call on
the Community Development Department and City
Engineer for assistance in reviewing this Title.
23-7-3 Supervisor of the Public Works
Divisions. The Public Works Director, with the
advice and consent of the City Manager, shall
appoint a competent person to act as the Supervisor
of the systems outlined in this Title (Supervisor).
23-7-4 Duties of the Supervisor. The Public
Works Director shall prescribe the Supervisor’s
duties, and direct the manner and frequency of
reporting on the City’s systems outlined in this
Title.
23-7-5 Regulations. The City Council shall have
power and retains the right to adopt regulations
controlling the manner and circumstances under
which the systems established by this Title may be
used, in addition to the regulatory provisions set
forth expressly in this Title. Such regulations may
include, but are not limited to, the manner in which
excavations shall be made, connections or repairs,
service lines which may necessitate excavations on
or near and under sidewalks and the public ways,
the manner in which excavations shall be backfilled
and the type of materials that may be used for the
purpose.
23-7-6 Excavator Access. An excavator may
enter or access an owner’s property or dwelling to
locate a sewer lateral with the owner’s permission.
History: 08/09
23-7-7 Installation and Location of Sewer
Lateral Cleanouts.
(1) An operator or person installing or replacing a
sewer lateral cleanout shall install or replace the
sewer lateral cleanout in a manner so that the lateral
can be located, including:
(a) House sheets; or
(b) Electronic markers.
(2) An operator or person installing a sewer lateral
cleanout shall notify the City of the sewer lateral
cleanout location for record keeping purposes.
(3) An excavator shall request information
pertaining to a sewer lateral cleanout location from
the City a minimum of 48 hours prior to any
excavation.
History: 08/09;
23-7-8 Policies. The Public Works and
Community Development Directors may adopt
policies, consistent with this Title and any
resolutions passed by the City Council, to assist in
the application, administration and interpretation of
this Title and systems established in this Title.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
23-7-9 Establishment of Land Use Permit.
(1) A Land Use Permit shall be required to ensure
conformance with the provisions of this Title.
(2) Land Use Permits are to be reviewed and
approved in accordance with Title 26 of the Clinton
City Code.
23-7-10 Application Review Fees. The fee for
review of any Land Use Development application
shall be paid to the City prior to the issuance of any
development activity on the property or issuance of
any building permit. The fee structure shall be
established from time to time by the City Council
and published in the Consolidated Fee Schedule.
23-7-11 Applications for Installation Permit.
Applications for a permit or for connections to any
connecting systems established in this Title or other
alteration, laying or repairing of lines connected
directly or indirectly thereto must be made in
writing by a licensed contractor, his authorized
representatives, or by the owner of the premises.
Application shall describe the manner and
circumstances surrounding such installation or
alteration. If, in the judgment of the supervisor, the
carrying out of such connection, repair, or
installation, will cause no injury to the street in
which the system sought to be connected with is
located, or that such installation, improvement or
repair will not be prejudicial to the interest of the
persons whose property has been or may thereafter
be connected with the system and that the
connection in all things shall conform to the code
and standards of the City, then the application to
connect with the systems shall be granted subject to
the provisions of this Title. All the connections or
installations shall be to line and grades designated
by the project engineer and approved by the
Supervisor.
23-7-12 When Permits Shall not be Issued.
(1) Permits to connect with the systems established
in this Title shall not be issued unless the structures
on the property comply with the applicable building
codes.
(2) No structure or land shall hereafter be located,
altered, or have its use changed without full
compliance with the terms of this Title and other
applicable regulations.
23-7-13 Repealed.
History: 10/10
23-7-14 Extension of Mains Within the City.
(1) Any person or persons, including any
subdivider/developer, desiring to have one or more
of the systems established in this Title extended
within the City must advance the whole expense of
such extension. Developers may request to enter
into a payback agreement with the City during the
development approval process as outlined Title 26.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to install,
construct, maintain, or connect onto a system
established in this Title, in an existing or future
public right-of-way or easement, unless they are a
licensed contractor in the state of Utah. Licensed
contractors shall be required to construct, install, or
repair all laterals within the public right-of-way or
easements.
23-7-15 Ownership of Extension. After final
acceptance, any extension of mains shall be deemed
the property of the City, unless a private system has
been approved by the City.
23-7-16 Non-Liability for Damages. The City
shall not be liable for any damage to a service user
by reason of stoppage or interruption of one or
more of the systems established in this Title caused
by fires, scarcity of water, accidents to the
system(s), or their mains, or as the result of
maintenance and extension operations, or from any
other unavoidable cause.
23-7-17 Ultimate Responsibility. The standards
set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this
Title are minimum standards; therefore this Title
does not intend nor imply that compliance by any
person will ensure that there will be no
contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized
discharge of pollutants nor does it insure
compliance with all county, state, or federal
requirements. It is the responsibility of the Land
Use Permit holder to insure the intent of this Title is
complied with.
23-7-18 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
This Title is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or
impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed
restrictions. However, where this Title and another
ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction
conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more
stringent restrictions shall prevail.
23-7-19 Interpretation. In the interpretation and
application of this Title, all provisions shall be;
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing
body; and,
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other
powers granted under State statutes.
23-7-20 Division to Have Free Access. The
Supervisor and his representatives shall at all
ordinary hours have free access to places supplied
with one or more of the systems established by this
Title for the purpose of examining the apparatus,
ascertaining flows, and the manner of use.
23-7-21 Utility-Creation and Setup.
(1) Creation – The City Council hereby creates and
establishes a sewerage collection utility and
stormwater utility as part of the City’s overall
utilities. These utilities shall plan, design,
construct, maintain, administer and operate the
applicable system.
(2) Enterprise Fund - The City Council hereby
establishes a sewerage collection utility and
stormwater utility enterprise fund to handle all
income, expenses and other financial transactions
related to these utilities. All utility service charges
collected for the sewerage collection and
stormwater utilities shall be deposited in the
appropriate enterprise fund. Money in the
appropriate utility enterprise fund shall not be
commingled with or transferred to other City funds.
However, these utilities may pay other City funds
for services and expenses directly attributable to the
appropriate utility. The enterprise funds shall be
operated according to State law and City policy.
(3) Facilities and Assets - The sewerage collection
and stormwater systems shall operate independently
of City operations funded by the general fund.
These utilities shall have the same relationship to
the City as other City utilities, such as the water
utility. Upon creation of the utility, all of the City’s
sewerage collection and stormwater facilities and
assets (other than streets and other facilities and
assets designated by the City Manager) shall be
transferred to the applicable utility in consideration
for the utility’s agreement to take primary
responsibility for planning, designing, constructing,
maintaining, administering and operating the City’s
utility’s system.
(4) Administration – The sewerage collection and
stormwater utilities shall be administered by the
City Manager.
23-7-22 Establishment of Fees. The City Council,
from time to time, may establish enact rules and
rates, by resolution, for services associated with the
systems established in this Title to include but not
be limited to inspections, billing, guaranteeing, and
collecting charges.
23-7-23 Billing. Fees for the systems established
in this Title shall be included on the City’s regular
monthly utility bill for any given property. If there
is no regular utility bill for the property the
appropriate utility fee(s) shall be charged to the
owner of the property. The fee(s) shall be deemed a
civil debt owed to the City by the person or entity
paying for the City utility services provided to the
property. All properties contributing to or utilizing
the utility(ies) shall be charged the fee, regardless
of whether or not the owner or occupant of the
property requests the utility service. Failure to pay
any utility fee may result in termination of water
service.
23-7-24 Appeal of Decision, Rates, Fees and
Rebates.
(1) Any person or entity that believes that this Title
was interpreted or applied erroneously by a
requirement of the City staff may appeal to the City
Manager.
(2) The City Manager may hear complaints and
make corrections of any assessments, established in
this Title, deemed to be illegal, unequal, or unjust.
(3) The City Manager may temporarily, if he sees
fit, adjust, assess, or rebate all or any part of a fee
established in this Title, related to the systems
established in this Title, of any indigent person.
(4) Appeals shall be submitted to the City Manager,
in writing, explaining the circumstances that justify
the request along with any fees established as set in
§ 23-7-10.
(5) The City Manager will respond to the appellant
within 30 days of receiving an appeal.
23-7-25 Supply of Services to Persons Outside
City Limits.
(1) The City may furnish service from its systems to
persons outside its corporate limits.
(2) Applications for service outside the corporate
limits shall be submitted, in writing, to the
Community Development Department, reviewed by
the Community Development Director, the City
Engineer and Public Works Director and acted upon
by the City Council based upon the
recommendations from this review.
(3) Any person located outside the City limits
desiring to be supplied with services from the City
collection systems and being willing to contract
with a Utah licensed contractor, approved by the
City, to extend the systems to his property,
including extending the systems from their present
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
location to the City limits, may make application to
the City, the application must contain the following;
(a) A description of the proposed extension;
(b) A map showing the location thereof and a set of
engineered drawings meeting the City standards;
(c) Fees sufficient to compensate the City for
reviewing the plans, whether or not the plans are
approved, fee amounts are to be set by the City
Council, from time to time, and published in the
Consolidated Fee Schedule.
(d) An escrow agreement as described in the
Subdivision Ordinance to guarantee the
improvements.
(e) An acknowledgment that the City is granting the
petition to supply only such services to petitioner
which, from time to time, the City Council deems
beyond the requirements of system users within the
City limits; and,
(f) An acknowledgment that such extension shall be
the property of and subject to the control of the
City.
(4) The City Council and the person or persons
seeking such extension may enter into an agreement
providing, in detail, the terms under which others
may utilize the extension in the future and the terms
under which all or any portion of the cost of
installing such extension may be paid back by
future users.
23-7-26 Ownership and Maintenance of
Connecting Main Lines and Laterals.
(1) Unless designated in writing by the City, all
system main lines in the public right-of-way or
established easements shall be owned and
maintained by the City.
(2) Residential Laterals: All residential system
laterals shall be maintained from the connection at
the main line to the building by the property owner.
(3) Commercial Complexes and Commercial
Building Laterals: All laterals to commercial
buildings and/or inside commercial building
complexes shall be owned and maintained by the
property owners.
23-7-27 As Built Plans. All applicants are
required to submit actual "as built" plans for any
collection systems constructed within the City when
construction is completed. The plan must show the
final design specifications for all of the system’s
elements and must be certified by a professional
engineer. The plan is to indicate the location of all
laterals being connected to the systems. A final
inspection by the Public Works Department is
required before the release of any performance
securities can occur.
23-7-28 Root Poisoning. During the course of
maintenance of its systems, the City may employ
the use of poisons, gases and chemicals without
liability for the death or damage of any trees or
shrubs during the course of its normal work or
maintenance of its systems, provided the same was
done with ordinary care.
History: 3/82, 9/84
23-7-29 Severability. The provisions of this Title
are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this
Title or the application thereof to any person,
establishment, or circumstances shall be held
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions or application of this Title.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
Chapter 8. Sewerage System
23-8-1 Sewer Division and System
23-8-2 Sewerage Collection Utility Fee
Imposed
23-8-3 Pipes to be Kept in Good Repair
23-8-4 Quality of Service Pipe
23-8-5 Use of City Sewerage Collection System
Mandatory
23-8-1 Sewer Division and System.
(1) The City sewer division is hereby created to
administer the operation and maintenance of the
sewerage collection system of the City.
(i) The sewerage collection system shall consist of
property, equipment, rights, contractual or
otherwise, possessed by the City to the utilization of
mains, outfall lines, treatment plants of other
governmental agencies by means of which the City
is empowered to provide sewer services of
whatever character to its inhabitants.
23-8-2 Sewerage Collection Utility Fee
Imposed.
(1) In addition to fees established in § 23-7-22
above, the City Council may establish special rates
and conditions for users of the sewerage collection
system:
(a) At amounts resulting in lesser or greater
discharges or of unusual characteristics; or,
(b) Making use thereof under exceptional
circumstances upon such terms and conditions that
they may deem proper; or,
(c) Connecting into the system from outside the
City; and,
(d) The City Council may take into consideration
the requirements and rates of other needs and
demands of other Districts or utilities in arriving at
special rates.
(2) Each developed parcel connected to the
sewerage collection system within the City shall be
charged a sewerage collection utility fee.
(3) Fees shall be established based upon water
usage and fees assessed by the North Davis Sewer
District.
(4) All fees will be set from time to time by the
Council and established by resolution in the
Consolidated Fee Schedule.
23-8-3 Pipes to be Kept in Good Repair.
(1) All users of the sewerage collection system shall
keep their lateral pipes and connections and other
apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at
their own expense.
(2) All users shall maintain the clean-out located on
the exterior of the house so that it is above grade,
readily accessible, and has an approved cap to
prevent infiltration form the surrounding area.
(3) No person shall be allowed to dig into the street
for the purpose of laying, removing, or repairing
any service pipe without first applying for and
receiving a permit from the Public Works
Department. City Public Works projects are
exempt from the permit requirement.
History: 10/10
23-8-4 Quality of Service Pipe.
(1) All service and other pipes used in conjunction
with the sewer services of the City shall be of such
material, quality, and specifications as the City
Council may, from time to time by resolution,
provide, and shall be installed at such distances
below ground as may be specified by regulations
relating to the sewer division. All work, alterations,
or extensions affecting sewer pipes shall be subject
to the acceptance of the Supervisor. Connections
with sewer mains shall not be made without first
obtaining a permit from the Community
Development Department.
(2) No person shall be allowed to conduct sewer
pipes across lots or under future building pads to
adjoining premises or building without first
applying for and receiving a permit from the
Community Development Department. Actions of
this type will require property rights to be honored
and that easements be established for construction
and maintenance access.
23-8-5 Use of City Sewerage Collection System
Mandatory. It shall be unlawful for the owner or
any other person occupying or having charge of any
premises within the City limits which are situated
within 300 feet of a sewer main to dispose of
sewage by any means other than by use of the City
sewerage collection system. It shall be unlawful to
construct or to continue the use of any other sewage
disposal system such as a privy, vault, cesspool or
septic tank on such property.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
Chapter 9. Fats, Oils & Grease Control
23-9-1 Food Service Establishment Permit
Requirement
23-9-2 Variance from Grease Interceptor
Requirements
23-9-3 Wastewater Discharge Limitations
23-9-4 Grease Interceptor Requirements
23-9-5 Grease Trap Requirements
23-9-6 Sand, Soil, and Oil Interceptors
23-9-1 Food Service Establishment Permit
Requirement. All discharging food service
establishments discharging fats, oil or grease to the
Clinton City sewerage collection system are subject
to the following requirements:
(1) Grease Interceptor Requirements: All
discharging food service establishments are
required to install, operate, and maintain an
approved type and adequately sized grease
interceptor necessary to maintain compliance with
the objectives of this Title. All grease interceptors
must meet the requirements of the International
Plumbing Code.
(2) Implementation:
(a) All new food service establishment facilities are
subject to grease interceptor requirements. All such
facilities must obtain prior approval from the Public
Works Director for grease interceptor sizing prior to
submitting plans for a building permit. All grease
interceptors shall be readily and easily accessible
for cleaning and inspection. Existing food service
establishments with planned modification in
plumbing improvements will be required to include
plans to comply with the grease interceptor
requirements. These facilities must obtain approval
from the Public Works Director for grease
interceptor sizing prior to submitting plans for a
building permit.
(b) All existing food service establishments will be
notified of their obligation to install a grease
interceptor within the specified period set forth in
the notification letter by the Public Works Director.
23-9-2 Variance from Grease Interceptor
Requirements.
(1) Grease interceptors required under this Title
shall be installed unless the Public Works Director
authorizes the installation of an indoor grease trap
or other alternative pretreatment technology and
determines that the installation of a grease
interceptor would not be feasible due to space
constraints or other considerations. The food
service establishment bears the burden of
demonstrating that the installation of a grease
interceptor is not feasible.
(2) If an establishment believes the installation of a
grease interceptor is infeasible, because of
documented space constraints, the request for an
alternate grease removal device shall contain the
following information:
(a) Location of sewer main and easement in relation
to available exterior space outside building.
(b) Existing plumbing at or in a site that uses
common plumbing for all services at that site.
(c) Alternative pretreatment technology includes,
but is not limited to, devices that are used to trap,
separate and hold grease from wastewater and
prevent it from being discharged into the sewerage
collection system. All alternative pretreatment
technology must be appropriately sized and
approved by the Public Works Director.
23-9-3 Wastewater Discharge Limitations. No
User shall allow wastewater discharge
concentration from a grease interceptor, grease trap
or alternative pretreatment technology to exceed
100 MgPL (milligrams per liter), as identified by
EPA test method 1664 revision A and its
amendments as may be amended from time to time.
23-9-4 Grease Interceptor Requirements.
(1) Grease interceptor sizing and installation shall
conform to the current edition of the International
Plumbing Code.
(2) Grease interceptors shall be constructed in
accordance with design approved by the Public
Works Director and shall have a minimum of two
compartments with fittings designed for grease
retention.
(3) A grease interceptor shall be installed at a
location where it shall be easily accessible for
inspection, cleaning, and removal of intercepted
grease. The grease interceptor may not be installed
in any part of the building where food is handled.
Location of the grease interceptor must meet the
approval of the Public Works Director.
(4) The food service establishment shall ensure that
all such grease interceptors shall be serviced and
emptied of accumulated waste content as required
in order to maintain Minimum Design Capability or
effective volume. These devices should be
inspected at least monthly. Users who are required
to maintain a grease interceptor shall:
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
(a) Provide for a minimum hydraulic retention time
in accordance with the International Plumbing
Code.
(b) Remove any accumulated grease cap and sludge
pocket as required. Grease interceptors shall be kept
free of inorganic solid materials such as grit, rocks,
gravel, sand, eating utensils, cigarettes, shells,
towels, rags, etc., which could settle into this pocket
and thereby reduce the effective volume of the
device.
(5) All waste removed from each grease interceptor
must be disposed of at a facility approved to receive
such waste in accordance with the provisions of this
program. In no way shall the pumpage be returned
to any private or public portion of the City’s
sewerage collection system.
(6) The User shall maintain a written record of
inspection and maintenance for five years. All such
records will be made available for on-site
inspections by representatives of the City during all
operating hours.
(7) Sanitary wastes are not allowed to be connected
to sewer laterals intended for grease interceptor
service.
(8) Access manholes, with a minimum diameter of
24 inches, shall be provided over each grease
interceptor chamber and sanitary tee. The access
manholes shall extend at least to finished grade and
be designed and maintained to prevent water inflow
or infiltration. The manholes shall also have readily
removable covers to facilitate inspection, grease
removal, and wastewater sampling activities.
23-9-5 Grease Trap Requirements.
(1) Upon approval by the Public Works Director, a
grease trap complying with the provisions of this
section must be installed in the waste line leading
from sinks, drains, and other fixtures or equipment
in food service establishments where grease may be
introduced into the drainage or sewage systems.
(2) The sizing and installation of grease traps shall
conform to the International Plumbing Code.
(3) No grease trap shall be installed which has a
stated rate flow of more than fifty-five (55) gallons
per minute, nor less than twenty (20) gallons per
minute, except when specially approved by the
Public Works Director.
(4) Grease traps shall be maintained in efficient
operating conditions by periodic removal of the
accumulated grease. No collected grease shall be
introduced into any drainage piping, or public or
private sewer.
(5) Food waste disposal units or dishwashers shall
be connected to and discharge into a grease
interceptor or grease trap.
(6) Wastewater in excess of one hundred-forty
(140) F/ (60 C) shall not be discharged into a grease
trap.
23-9-6 Sand, Soil, and Oil Interceptors. All car
washes, truck washes, garages, service stations, car
and truck maintenance facilities, fabricators, utility
equipment shops and other facilities as determined
by the Public Works Director that have sources of
sand, soil and oil shall install effective sand, soil
and oil traps, interceptors and/or oil/water
separators. These systems shall be sized to
effectively remove sand, soil and oil at the expected
flow rates and temperatures not in excess of one
hundred-forty (140) F. These systems shall be at the
user’s expense, cleaned or pumped on a regular
basis to prevent impact upon the sewerage
collection system. Users whose systems are deemed
to be ineffective by the Public Works Director shall
be asked to change the cleaning frequency or to
increase the size or the system. Oil/water separator
installations shall be required at facilities that
accumulate petroleum oils and greases and at
facilities deemed necessary by the Public Works
Director.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
Chapter 10. North Davis Sewer District
Wastewater Control
23-10-1 Adoption of Code by Reference - Rules
and Regulations
23-10-2 Definitions
23-10-3 Monitoring and Enforcement
23-10-4 Assessment of Penalties Against
Violating Industrial Users
23-10-5 Abatement of Nuisance
23-10-1 Adoption of Code by Reference - Rules
and Regulations. The "North Davis Sewer District
Wastewater Control Ordinance Rules and
Regulations," are adopted, as updated, for the
purpose of prescribing requirements, standards, and
criteria for pretreatment of industrial wastewaters
and industrial sewage and all other waters requiring
pretreatment prior to being inducted into the sewage
collection facilities of the City and the sewage
collection facilities and treatment plant of the North
Davis Sewer District. The rules and regulations
pertaining to the collection and treatment of sewage
and the "Wastewater Control Ordinance--Rules and
Regulations" are hereby adopted, save and except
such portions as are hereinafter deleted, modified,
or amended, of which code a copy has been and
now is filed in the office of the recorder, and the
same is hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as
if set out at length herein.
23-10-2 Definitions. Wherever the words "City,"
"district," "manager," or similar terms referring to
the North Davis Sewer District or its personnel
shall be used, and the context of such usage would
so indicate, such terminology shall refer to the City
and/or its comparable personnel functioning within
City government.
23-10-3 Monitoring and Enforcement. The
North Davis Sewer District, by and through its
authorized and designated officers, agents, servants
and employees, is authorized and designated to
monitor and enforce compliance with this chapter
and the "North Davis Sewer District Wastewater
Control Ordinance--Rules and Regulations,"
adopted by this chapter and is authorized to inspect
premises, books, records of users, and do all other
things necessary which it deems legal and proper,
unless otherwise directed by the City, in accordance
with law and the terms and provisions of the North
Davis Sewer District "Wastewater Control
Ordinance--Rules and Regulations".
23-10-4 Assessment of Penalties Against
Violating Industrial Users. In the event any
industrial user violates any of the terms and
provisions of the "North Davis Sewer District
Wastewater Control Ordinance--Rules and
Regulations," resulting in a fine or penalty being
assessed against the City and/or the North Davis
Sewer District by the Environmental Protection
Agency or any other state or federal agency, the
violating industrial user shall be responsible for
payment of such penalty or fine to the City and/or
the North Davis Sewer District in the same amount
of such fine or penalty levied against the City or the
North Davis Sewer District.
23-10-5 Abatement of Nuisance. Any violation of
this Title or other action not in compliance with the
requirements set forth here the responsible party,
owner or lessee shall, at his own expense, correct
the offending condition upon notice by the City as
established in 10-11-4 of the Utah State Code
Annotated. If the owner or lessee fails to comply
with this Section within the time set in the notice
from the City, the Code Enforcement Officer shall
so report to the Manager and the Manager may
instruct the Code Enforcement Officer to abate the
nuisance as a hazardous or inconvenient condition
in the manner provided by law.
History: 10/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
Chapter 11. Stormwater System
23-11-1 Stormwater Division and System
23-11-2 Discharges
23-11-3 Construction Sites
23-11-4 Waivers for Providing Stormwater
Management
23-11-5 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP)
23-11-6 As Built Plans
23-11-7 Post Construction
23-11-8 Basic Stormwater Management Design
Criteria
23-11-9 Conveyance Issues
23-11-10 Footing and Foundation Subdrains –
Land Drain
23-11-11 Landscaping Plans Required
23-11-12 Maintenance Agreements
23-11-13 Stormwater Utility Fee Imposed
23-11-14 Storm Water Detention
23-11-1 Stormwater Division and System.
(1) The City stormwater division is hereby created
to administer the operation and maintenance of the
stormwater system of the City.
(2) The stormwater system shall consist of property,
equipment, rights, contractual or otherwise,
possessed by the City to the utilization of mains,
outfall lines, treatment plants of other governmental
agencies by means of which the City is empowered
to provide sewer services of whatever character to
its inhabitants.
(3) Policies – The Public Works Director may adopt
policies, consistent with this Title and any
resolutions passed by the City Council, to assist in
the application, administration and interpretation of
this Title and any resolutions related to the
stormwater utility.
23-11-2 Discharges.
(1) The following discharges are allowed to flow
into the stormwater system:
(a) Water line flushing or other potable water
sources (if dechlorinated to less than two PPM
chlorine);
(b) Landscape irrigation or lawn watering;
(c) Rising ground water;
(d) Ground water infiltration to stormwater;
(e) Uncontaminated pumped ground water;
(f) Foundation or footing drains (including active
groundwater dewatering systems);
(g) Basement or crawl space sump pumps;
(h) Springs;
(i) Non-commercial washing of vehicles;
(j) Natural riparian habitat or wet-land flows;
(k) Swimming pools (if dechlorinated – typically to
less than two PPM chlorine);
(l) Fire fighting activities;
(m) Discharges specified in writing by the Public
Works Director as being necessary to protect public
health and safety;
(n) City public works maintenance procedures; and,
(o) Irrigation runoff water as approved by the
Public Works Director.
(2) Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but
requires a verbal notification to the Public Works
Department prior to the time of the test.
(3) Connections established prior to this Title not
listed above shall be considered illicit connections,
without limitation, regardless of whether the
connection was permissible under law or practices
applicable or prevailing at the time of connection.
This prohibition also expressly includes, without
limitation, connections of sanitary sewer lines to the
stormwater collection system.
23-11-3 Construction Sites.
(1) No person shall be granted a Land Use Permit
for land-disturbing activity without an approved
SWPPP and submitting proof to the Public Works
Department that the applicable UPDES permits
have been acquired.
(2) No Land Use Permit is required for the
following activities.
(a) Emergency activity that is immediately
necessary for the protection of life, property, or
natural resources.
(b) Existing nursery and agricultural operations
conducted as a permitted main or accessory use.
(c) Home garden for family food production and/or
pleasure.
(3) Each application shall bear the name and
address of the owner or developer of the site, and of
any consulting firm retained by the applicant
together with the name of the applicant’s principal
contact at such firm and shall be accompanied by a
filing fee.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
(4) The applicant will be required to establish an
escrow to cover all costs of improvements,
landscaping, erosion & sediment control measures,
SWPPP, maintenance of improvements for such
period as specified by the City, and engineering and
inspections costs to cover the cost of failure or
repair of improvements installed on the site.
Escrow shall be established as outlined in the
Subdivision Ordinance in a format acceptable to the
City.
23-11-4 Waivers for Providing Stormwater
Management. Every applicant shall provide for
stormwater management as required by this Title,
unless the State of Utah gives a waiver through the
UPDES program.
23-11-5 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan
(SWPPP).
(1) A SWPPP shall be required with all Land Use
Permit applications and will include sufficient
information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations,
etc) to evaluate the environmental characteristics of
the project site, the potential impacts of all
proposed development on the site, both present and
future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness
and acceptability of the measures proposed for
managing stormwater generated at the project site.
(2) The intent of this conceptual planning process is
to determine the type of stormwater management
measures necessary for the proposed project, and to
ensure adequate planning for management of
stormwater runoff from future development. The
Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan shall be
prepared in accordance with the guidelines set forth
by the EPA, the Utah Division of Environmental
Quality, and Clinton City’s Ordinances.
(3) For development or redevelopment occurring on
a previously developed site, an applicant shall be
required to include within the stormwater concept
plan measures for controlling existing stormwater
runoff discharges from the site in accordance with
the standards of this Title to the maximum extent
practicable.
23-11-6 As Built Plans. All applicants are
required to submit actual "as built" plans for any
stormwater management practices located on-site
after final construction is completed. The plan must
show the final design specifications for all
stormwater management facilities and must be
certified by a professional engineer. A final
inspection by the Public Works Department is
required before the release of any performance
securities can occur.
23-11-7 Post Construction. Unless judged by the
City to be exempt or granted a waiver, the
following performance criteria shall be addressed
for stormwater management at all sites:
(1) All site designs shall establish stormwater
management practices to control the peak flow rates
of stormwater discharge associated with specified
design storms and reduce the generation of
stormwater. These practices should seek to utilize
pervious areas for stormwater treatment and to
infiltrate stormwater runoff from driveways,
sidewalks, rooftops, parking lots, and landscaped
areas to the maximum extent practical to provide
treatment for both water quality and quantity.
(2) All stormwater runoff generated from new
development shall not discharge untreated
stormwater directly into a jurisdictional wetland or
local water body without adequate treatment.
Where such discharges are proposed, the impact of
the proposal on wetland functional values shall be
assessed using a method acceptable to the City. In
no case shall the impact on functional values be any
less than allowed by the Army Corp of Engineers
(ACE) or the Department of Environmental Quality
(DEQ) responsible for natural resources.
(3) Prior to design, applicants are required to
consult with the City to determine if they are
subject to additional stormwater design
requirements.
23-11-8 Basic Stormwater Management Design
Criteria.
(1) Stormwater management practices for a site
shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of
the site. Among the factors that should be
considered:
(a) Topography
(b) Maximum Drainage Area
(c) Depth to Water Table
(d) Soils
(e) Slopes
(f) Terrain
(g) Flow Rate
(h) Location in relation to environmentally sensitive
features or ultra-urban areas.
(i) Vegetation, both predevelopment and postdevelopment.
23-11-9 Conveyance Issues. All stormwater
management practices shall be designed to convey
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
stormwater to allow for the removal of pollutants
and reduction in flow velocities. This shall include,
but not be limited to:
(1) Maximizing of flow paths from inflow points to
outflow points;
(2) Protection of inlet and outfall structures;
(3) Elimination of erosive flow velocities;
(4) Providing of underdrain systems, where
applicable.
23-11-10 Footing and Foundation Subdrains –
Land Drain. Throughout the City there are high
water tables where the depth from the surface varies
depending upon many factors, significantly the soil
and annual weather conditions.
(1) It is the responsibility of the builder, property
owner, and/or resident:
(a) To protect their property form the hazards of
high ground water;
(b) To control and properly disperse/direct all
surface and ground water on private property;
(c) To insure that all surface water is directed into
established public utility and drainage easements.
(2) Surface drains, landscape drains, rain gutters,
and other drains containing solid or liquid materials,
other than ground water, shall not be connected to
the Land Drain without specific written permission
of the City.
(3) Footing and foundation subdrains shall be
installed as established in the International
Residential Code and the City typical footing and
foundation subdrain detail available at the
Community Development Department.
(4) It is each land owner’s responsibility to insure
that public utility and drainage easements are
maintained for proper flow and not blocked by
changes in grade, landscape features, concrete pads,
accessory buildings or other factor.
23-11-11 Landscaping Plans Required.
(1) All Land Use Permits will be evaluated to
determine if the storm water management plans
have a final stabilization plan.
(2) All owners with property within the City are
required to control run-off from roofs, downspouts,
concrete slabs, and other impervious surfaces or
excess water from landscape maintenance from
flowing onto neighboring properties.
23-11-12 Maintenance Agreements.
(1) All stormwater systems and management
practices shall have an enforceable operation and
maintenance agreement to ensure the system
functions as designed.
(2) The agreement will include any and all
maintenance easements required to access and
inspect the system, best management practices for
the system, and required maintenance, as necessary,
to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater
systems.
(3) The agreement shall include provisions allowing
for access and inspections on a reasonable basis, by
the City.
(4) The agreement shall establish a legally binding
covenant specifying the parties responsible for the
proper maintenance of all stormwater systems.
(5) This agreement shall be shall be secured prior to
issuance of any Land Use Permits.
23-11-13 Stormwater Utility Fee Imposed. Each
developed parcel of real property in the City shall
be charged a stormwater utility fee.
(1) ESU - The fee shall be based on the number of
equivalent service units (ESU’s) contained in the
parcel. The City Council finds that the ESU is the
most equitable and practical measurement for
determining the amount that each parcel contributes
to, benefits from, and otherwise uses the stormwater
utility. The Clinton City Council, based upon a
study completed by an independent engineer may
by resolution amend the impervious surface area
that equals one ESU.
(2) Calculation – The City Council finds that each
single-family residential parcel contributes
approximately the same amount of stormwater
runoff; therefore, each developed single-family
residential parcel shall pay a base rate of one (1)
ESU. All non-single family residential parcels shall
pay a multiple of this base rate, expressed in ESU’s,
according to the measured impervious area on the
parcel. The City Council may adopt separate rates
for planned residential developments,
condominiums and other uses that are not easily
handled under the standard rate schedule.
(3) Charge per ESU – The amount charged for each
ESU shall be established from time to time by
resolution of the City Council and published in the
Consolidated Fee Schedule.
(4) Exemptions and Credits – The City Council
may establish exemptions and credits to the
stormwater utility fee by resolution.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
23-11-14 Storm Water Detention. All
development with the exception of residential
homes are required to provide onsite detention and
are to conform to the guidelines used in the City’s
storm drain master plan.
(1) The allowed release rate from the onsite
detention basins is 0.2 cfs/acre. The area is to be
determined from the plat and/or site plan. Flows in
excess of the allowed release rate are to be
detained.
(2) The storm that is to be used for detention pond
design shall be as defined in the Storm Drain
Master Plan.
(3) All detention ponds are to be designed with an
emergency overflow that will direct water back into
the streets or adjacent waterway and will not cause
flooding to adjacent property owners.
(4) Due to the existing high groundwater table and
soil conditions that are not conducive to infiltrating
water into the ground, retention basins are not
allowed with out written approval from the Public
Works Director. A geotechnical analysis with
percolation tests will be required for consideration
of a retention basin.
(5) Underground detention will be allowed if the
storage system is completely enclosed and can be
shown that water will not infiltrate from the
detention system into the ground. The underground
system must be solid pipes. No membranes,
fabrics, half pipe systems, perforated pipe systems,
etc. will be allowed. These non-solid pipe systems
fall under the provisions for a retention basin.
Recommendations and guidelines for maintenance
and cleaning of the underground detention system
must also be included in the design and
incorporated into the maintenance agreement.
(6) All detention ponds shall be landscaped and the
landscaping is to be approved by the Planning
Commission. Landscaping must be done in a
manner to prevent erosion.
(7) The bottom of the detention ponds are to be dry
when not in use. This requires that nuisance water
from sprinkler, groundwater, etc. be carried through
the pond by the means of concrete channels, low
flow pipes, etc.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
Chapter 12. Flood Damage Prevention
23-12-1 Findings of Fact
23-12-2 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses
23-12-3 Lands to which this Chapter Applies
23-12-4 Basis for Establishing the Areas of
Special Flood Hazard
23-12-5 Disclaimer of Liability
23-12-6 Designation of the Floodplain
Administrator
23-12-7 Duties and Responsibilities of the
Floodplain Administrator
23-12-8 Permit Procedures
23-12-9 Variance Procedures
23-12-10 General Standards
23-12-11 Standards for Subdivision Proposals
23-12-1 Findings of Fact.
(1) The flood hazard areas of Utah are subject to
periodic inundation, which results in loss of life and
property, health and safety hazards, disruption of
commerce and governmental services, and
extraordinary public expenditures for flood
protection and relief, all of which adversely affect
the public health, safety and general welfare.
(2) These flood loses are created by the cumulative
effect of obstructions in floodplains which cause an
increase in flood heights and velocities, and by the
occupancy of flood hazards areas by uses
vulnerable to floods and hazardous to other lands
because they are inadequately elevated, flood
proofed or otherwise protected from flood damage.
23-12-2 Methods of Reducing Flood Losses.
(1) In order to accomplish its purposes, this Title
uses the following methods to reduce flood losses:
(a) Restrict or prohibit uses that are dangerous to
health, safety or property in times of flood, or cause
excessive increases in flood heights or velocities;
(b) Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including
facilities, which serve such uses, be protected
against flood damage at the time of initial
construction;
(c) Control the alteration of natural floodplains,
stream channels, and natural protective barriers,
which are involved in the accommodation of flood
waters;
(d) Control filling, grading, dredging and other
development, which may increase flood damage;
(e) Prevent or regulate the construction of flood
barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters
or which may increase flood hazards to other lands.
23-12-3 Lands to which this Chapter Applies.
This Chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood
hazard within the jurisdiction of Clinton City.
23-12-4 Basis for Establishing the Areas of
Special Flood Hazard. Since areas of special
flood hazard have not been identified, water surface
elevations have not been provided, nor has
sufficient data identifying the floodway or coastal
high hazard area been provided by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the
community shall obtain, review, and reasonably
utilize data available from other Federal, State or
other sources.
23-12-5 Disclaimer of Liability. The degree of
protection required by this Title is considered
reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on
scientific and engineering considerations. On rare
occasions greater floods can and will occur and
flood heights may be increased by man-made or
natural causes. This Title does not imply that land
outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses
permitted within such areas will be free from
flooding or flood damages. This Title shall not
create liability on the part of the City or any official
or employee thereof for any flood damages that
result from reliance on this Title or any
administrative decision lawfully made there under.
23-12-6 Designation of the Floodplain
Administrator. The Community Development
Director, or his designated representative, is hereby
appointed the Floodplain Administrator to
administer and implement the provisions of this
Title and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR
(National Flood Insurance Program Regulations)
pertaining to floodplain management.
23-12-7 Duties and Responsibilities of the
Floodplain Administrator. Duties and
responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator
shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
(1) Maintain and hold open for public inspection all
records pertaining to the provisions of this Title.
(2) Reviews permit application to determine
whether proposed construction or other
development, including the placement of
manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from
flooding.
(3) Review, approve or deny all applications for
Land Use Permits required by adoption of this Title.
(4) Review permits for proposed development to
assure that all necessary permits have been obtained
from those Federal, State or local governmental
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal
Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972,
33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is
required.
(5) Where interpretation is needed as to the exact
location of the boundaries of the areas of special
flood hazards (for example, where there appears to
be a conflict between a mapped boundary and
actual field conditions) the Floodplain
Administrator shall make the necessary
interpretation.
23-12-8 Permit Procedures. Application for a
Land Use Permit shall be presented to the
Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by
him and may include, but not be limited to, plans
(multiple copies) drawn to scale showing the
location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed
landscape alterations, existing and proposed
structures, including the placement of structures,
and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas
of special flood hazard.
(1) Additionally, the following information is
required:
(a) Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the
lowest floor (including basement) of all new and
substantially improved structures;
(b) Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which
any nonresidential structure shall be flood proofed;
(c) A certificate from a registered professional
engineer or architect that the nonresidential flood
proofed structure shall meet the flood proofing
criteria;
(d) Description of the extent to which any
watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or
relocated as a result of proposed development; and,
(e) Maintain a record of all such information.
(2) Approval or denial of a Land Use Permit by the
Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of
the provisions of this Title and the following
relevant factors:
(a) The danger to life and property due to flooding
or erosion damage;
(b) The susceptibility of the proposed facility and
its contents to flood damage and the effect of such
damage on the individual owner;
(c) The danger that materials may be swept onto
other lands to the injury of others;
(d) The compatibility of the proposed use with
existing and anticipated development;
(e) The safety of access to the property in times of
flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
(f) The costs of providing governmental services
during and after flood conditions including
maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and
public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas,
electrical and water systems;
(g) The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of
rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and
the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at
the site;
(h) The availability of alternative locations, not
subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the
proposed use; and,
(i) The relationship of the proposed use to the
comprehensive plan for that area.
23-12-9 Variance Procedures.
(1) The Clinton City Planning Commission will act
as the Appeal Board and shall hear and render
judgment on requests for variances from the
requirements of this Title.
(2) The Appeal Board shall hear and render
judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there
is an error in any requirement, decision, or
determination made by the Floodplain
Administrator in the enforcement or administration
of this Title.
(3) Any person or persons aggrieved by the
decision of the Appeal Board may appeal such
decision to District Court. All appeals actions are
to be heard in Farmington Second District Court.
(4) The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a
record of all actions involving an appeal and shall
report variances to the Federal Emergency
Management Agency upon request.
(5) Variances may be issued for the reconstruction,
rehabilitation or restoration of structures listed on
the National Register of Historic Places or the State
Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the
procedures set forth in the remainder of this Title.
(6) Variances may be issued for new construction
and substantial improvements to be erected on a lot
of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and
surrounded by lots with existing structures
constructed below the base flood level, providing
the relevant factors have been fully considered. As
the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the
technical justification required for issuing the
variance increases.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
(7) Upon consideration of the factors noted above
and the intent of this Title, the Appeal Board may
attach such conditions to the granting of variances
as it deems necessary to further the purpose and
objectives of this Title.
(8) Variances shall not be issued within any
designated floodway if any increase in flood levels
during the base flood discharge would result.
(9) Variances may be issued for the repair or
rehabilitation of historic structures upon a
determination that the proposed repair or
rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's
continued designation as a historic structure and the
variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the
historic character and design of the structure.
(10) Prerequisites for granting variances:
(a) Variances shall only be issued upon a
determination that the variance is the minimum
necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford
relief.
(b) Variances shall only be issued upon:
(i) Showing a good and sufficient cause;
(ii) A determination that failure to grant the
variance would result in exceptional hardship to the
applicant; and,
(iii) A determination that the granting of a variance
will not result in increased flood heights, additional
threats to public safety, extraordinary public
expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or
victimization of the public, or conflict with existing
local laws or ordinances.
(c) Any application to which a variance is granted
shall be given written notice that the structure will
be permitted to be built with the lowest floor
elevation below the base flood elevation, and that
the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate
with the increased risk resulting from the reduced
lowest floor elevation.
(d) Variances may be issued by the City for new
construction and substantial improvements and for
other development necessary for the conduct of a
functionally dependent use provided that:
(i) The criteria outlined this Title are met; and,
(ii) The structure or other development is protected
by methods that minimize flood damages during the
base flood and create no additional threats to public
safety.
23-12-10 General Standards. In all areas of
special flood hazards the following provisions are
required for all new construction and substantial
improvements.
(1) All new construction or substantial
improvements shall be designed (or modified) and
adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse
or lateral movement of the structure resulting from
hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the
effects of buoyancy;
(2) All new construction or substantial
improvements shall be constructed by methods and
practices that minimize flood damage;
(3) All new construction or substantial
improvements shall be constructed with materials
resistant to flood damage;
(4) All new construction or substantial
improvements shall be constructed with electrical,
heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning
equipment and other service facilities that are
designed and/or located so as to prevent water from
entering or accumulating within the components
during conditions of flooding;
(5) All new and replacement water supply systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the system;
(6) New and replacement sanitary sewage systems
shall be designed to minimize or eliminate
infiltration of flood waters into the system and
discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,
(7) On-site waste disposal systems shall be located
to avoid impairment to them or contamination from
them during flooding.
23-12-11 Standards for Subdivision Proposals.
(1) All subdivision proposals including the
placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall be consistent with this Title.
(2) All proposals for the development of
subdivisions including the placement of
manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall
meet Development Land Use Permit requirements.
(3) All subdivision proposals including the
placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided
to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
(4) All subdivision proposals including the
placement of manufactured home parks and
subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities
such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems
located and constructed to minimize or eliminate
flood damage.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
Chapter 13. Flood Irrigation Systems
23-13-1 Statement of Ownership
23-13-2 Definition
23-13-3 Irrigation Owners and Users Affected
23-13-4 Reporting Irrigation Ditch Ownership,
Users, Locations, and Types
23-13-5 Required Schedule for Furnishing the
Requested Information
23-13-6 Responsibility to Locate System
23-13-7 Notification of Development
23-13-8 Development Standards
23-13-9 Fees
23-13-10 Liability
23-13-11 Rules for Distribution and Use of Water
23-13-12 Use of the City Stormwater System
23-13-1 Statement of Ownership. This chapter
deals with the flood irrigation systems (hereafter
referred to as System) located within Clinton City.
These Systems are neither owned nor operated by
the City and are not under the control of the City.
There are multiple System companies and multiple
users associated with the irrigation companies
within the City. All of the irrigation companies and
users gain their water from the Davis & Weber
Counties Canal Company. These irrigation
companies operate and own the Systems and are
fully responsible for them and the water that flows
within them. The users own and operate their own
branches from the company owned delivery
System(s) and are fully responsible for them and the
water that flows within them.
23-13-2 Definition. Irrigation System (System):
The irrigation system consists of all pipelines,
boxes, grates, head gates, ditches, canals, storage
ponds, reservoirs and other facilities under the
control of the owners and users of the nonpressurized
infrastructure.
23-13-3 Irrigation Owners and Users Affected.
All owners and users of non-pressurized irrigation
ditches, canals, pipelines, storage ponds, or
reservoirs are governed by this Chapter.
23-13-4 Reporting Irrigation Ditch Ownership,
Users, Locations, and Types. All owners and/or
users of irrigation ditches, canals, or pipelines and
any other and all persons having rights to transport
water by easement or by any other rights as
conferred by law shall furnish the City the
following information:
(1) Location map of the ditch, canal, or pipeline
showing the point of beginning, the route it
traverses through the City and the point of
termination.
(2) Indicate the locations where the ditch, canal, or
pipeline is on an easement for that purpose; on land
owned by deed or title by the irrigation company;
on lands where no recorded right-of-way exists.
(3) Indicate the name (if any) of the ditch, canal, or
pipeline.
(4) Indicate the owners of the ditch, canal, or
pipeline and the responsible party or parties for
maintaining and/or operating the ditch, canal, or
pipeline.
(5) Indicate the source or turn in point of the water
for the ditch, canal, or pipeline by name of the
supplying ditch, canal, pipeline, or stream.
(6) Indicate the locations where water is turned out
to other ditches, canals, or pipelines along with the
name of the owners or users of same and the
quantity of water that may be turned out.
(7) Indicate the purpose of the ditch, canal, or
pipeline indicating whether the ditch, canal, or
pipeline is a primary supply, lateral ditch, waste
ditch, return ditch, or any and all other purposes not
specifically mentioned herein.
(8) Indicate any section of the ditch, canal, or
pipeline that is being maintained by a party
different from the owner or responsible party as
listed above.
(9) The map that is submitted shall be drawn to
scale at a scale not to exceed one inch equals five
hundred feet (1" = 500').
23-13-5 Required Schedule for Furnishing the
Requested Information.
(1) The initial deadline for submitting the required
information will be 30 days from the date of notice.
(2) Reports shall be submitted on an annual basis
indicating any changes in the information on file.
23-13-6 Responsibility to Locate System. All
owners and users of the System are responsible for
locating their System whenever requested through
the “Blue Stakes” program or by other means.
23-13-7 Notification of Development.
(1) Whenever the City is notified of any
development that is in the immediate vicinity of a
portion of a System that has been reported as set
forth in §23-7-9 it will notify the petitioner of the
contact information on record and attempt to notify
the owners of the System or the responsible party or
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
parties for maintaining and/or operating the System
as reported in §23-7-9.
(2) Whenever the owners of the System or the
responsible party or parties for maintaining and/or
operating the System desire to work within the
right-of-way of any street within the City they shall
comply with the requirements of a Land Use Permit
and obtain a road cut permit if needed.
23-13-8 Development Standards.
(1) Any time a development is proposed within the
City, the City will require that the developer pipe
the System if it is required to remain within the
development to meet the requirements of the owner
or operator of the System.
(2) The minimum standard for all improvements to
a System being accomplished by a developer shall
be the requirements of the Clinton City
Development Standards.
(3) Whenever an owner or operator of a System
plans on making improvements to the System that is
located within the public right-of-way the
improvements shall meet the requirements of the
Clinton City Development Standards.
23-13-9 Fees. The City Council may establish fees
associated with permits and inspections that apply
to System operators. Fees will be adopted by
resolution from time to time and published in the
Clinton City Consolidated Fee Schedule.
23-13-10 Liability. Each System owner or
operator shall obtain liability insurance as
established in Utah State Code § 17B-1-113, and as
may be amended.
23-13-11 Rules for Distribution and Use of
Water. Each System owner, operator, or board
shall establish equitable rules for the distribution
and use of water among the owners and users of
land within the System.
23-13-12 Use of the City Stormwater System.
(1) Through agreements with the City and by
establishment of implied easement there are
locations within the City where tail water from the
System enters into the City stormwater system.
Wherever this occurs the waters that enter into the
stormwater system become the property and
responsibility of the City.
(2) There are locations within the City where users
of water from the System take the water out of the
stormwater system. These are historical rights held
by the users agreed upon between the users and
City. The users are responsible to maintain their
turn out and tail water pick-up systems. The right
of use shall remain as long as the systems are
needed and maintained.
(3) The point of entry and exit, of irrigation water
entering and leaving the stormwater system, is the
point where the lateral line joins the main line too
include the connection. Laterals extending from the
land or tailwater ditches to the stormwater main are
the responsibility of the owner or operator irrigating
the property. Laterals and the connection extending
from the stormwater main to the land or ditch being
serviced by the irrigation water are the
responsibility of the owner or operator irrigating the
property.
(4) Headgates used to divert water from the
stormwater system are the responsibility of the
owner or operator of the system receiving the water.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
Chapter 14. Enforcement-Prohibited
Actions-Penalties
23-14-1 Inspector
23-14-2 Duties of Inspector
23-14-3 Compliance and Reinspection
23-14-4 Life Threatening
23-14-5 Work Without a Permit
23-14-6 Use Without Payment Prohibited
23-14-7 Destruction-Obstructive Materials-
Contamination-Illicit Discharges
23-14-8 Prohibitions
23-14-9 Removal of Prohibited Items
23-14-10 Unauthorized Users
23-14-11 Stop Work Order or Revocation of
Permits
23-14-12 City Right to Make Repairs
23-14-13 Penalty
23-14-1 Inspector.
(1) The position of Authorized City Inspector
(Inspector) is hereby created for the purpose of
administering the provisions of this Title and the
powers delegated to it by laws and statutes relating
to the sewer and stormwater systems in the City,
subject to such control, assignment and review as
the City Manager may from time to time direct.
(2) The City Manager may appoint an Authorized
City Inspector and Assistant Inspectors as needed.
The powers and duties of the assistants shall be the
same as those of the Authorized City Inspector
unless otherwise specified by the City Manager.
23-14-2 Duties of Inspector.
(1) The Inspector conducts inspections for
compliance with the requirements of this Title.
(2) Whenever the Inspector finds that a person has
violated a prohibition or failed to meet a
requirement of this Title, the Inspector may order
compliance, by written notice of violation, to the
responsible person. Such notice may require,
without limitation:
(a) The performance of monitoring, analyses, and
reporting;
(i) The elimination of illicit connections or
discharges;
(ii) That violating discharges, practices, or
operations shall cease and desist;
(iii) The abatement or remediation of pollution or
contamination hazards and the restoration of any
affected property;
(iv) Payment of a fine to cover administrative and
remediation costs; and,
(v) The implementation of source control or
treatment BMP’s.
(3) The Inspector is hereby authorized and directed
to:
(a) Perform all functions necessary to enforce the
provisions of this code;
(b) Inspect or cause to be inspected, as often as
needed, all sites or places for the purpose of
determining whether they are in compliance with all
provisions of this code as outlined in this chapter;
and,
(c) Inspect grease interceptors; grease traps; and
sand, soil, and oil interceptors at least quarterly and
keep a record of all inspections for a minimum of
five years.
(4) If the Inspector determines that any of the Land
Use Permits are in violation of City, county, state,
or federal codes on any property within the limits of
Clinton City or if the impact of any conditions
listed in this chapter exist outside of this City due to
operations within the City the Inspector shall:
(a) Ascertain the names of the owner, the owner’s
representative or occupant of the property where the
conditions exist, together with a description of the
property;
(b) Ascertain the names of the persons conducting
operations on the property, in violation of this code
and/or the Land Use Permit, and associated
information related to the permit, if issued;
(c) Issue a citation to the owner, owner’s
representative, occupant, or persons conducting
operations on the property identifying the
conditions violating this chapter and/or the Land
Use Permit and give notice that they must be
corrected within the time determined by the
inspector; and,
(5) The citation shall:
(a) Require the person to whom it is issued to
correct the violation within the time period
indicated on the citation, the correction period, and
that corrective action begin immediately;
(b) Contain a statement of the nature of the
violation;
(c) State that failure to comply with this request
shall result in the citation being forwarded to the
Clinton Justice Court;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
(d) Inform the person to whom it is issued to appear
in the Justice Court of Clinton, no earlier than five
(5) days or later than fourteen (14) days following
the end of the correction period, (defined in § 23-
14-3(2)(a)). This shall be known as the appearance
date.
(e) Inform the person to whom the citation is issued
of the Compliance and Reinspection procedures and
that if compliance is accomplished within the
correction period, and is fully remedied as outlined
in § 23-14-3(1), the citation will be signed off by
the Inspector and must be returned by the cited
person to the Justice Court of Clinton by or before
the appearance date.
(f) Inform the person that in the event a criminal
prosecution is pursued, the prosecution shall be for
a Class C Misdemeanor and that each day can be
classified a reoccurrence of the offence.
23-14-3 Compliance and Reinspection. In the
event the person complies with the notice of the
Inspector within the correction period, the person
shall notify the Inspector a minimum of 48 hours
(not including weekends or holidays) prior to the
end of the correction period. A date and time for
reinspection prior to the appearance date shall be
assigned and the Inspector shall again inspect the
property.
(1) If the property is in compliance with this
chapter, the Inspector shall sign off compliance on
the cited person's copy of the citation. The person
receiving the citation must take the signed citation
to the Clinton Justice Court on or before the
appearance date indicated on the citation, in order
to have the charges dismissed. Failure to perform
this step will result in prosecution by the Court.
(2) In the event the person in violation has not
received a reinspection indicating compliance with
this chapter prior to the end of the correction
period, the citation will be referred directly to the
Clinton City Prosecutor.
(a) Unless life threatening, as set in § 23-14-4,
required compliance shall not be less than ten (10)
days nor greater than twenty (20) days and shall be
known as the correction period. The time given to
remedy the violation shall begin to run on the day
following the day on which the citation is issued.
(3) In the event that the violation listed on the
citation is not corrected within the appropriate time
period, whether it is the normal or immediate
correction time period, the City Manager may order
the Public Works Director to abate or procure the
abatement of the violation. Should the City abate
the violation, the cited person shall still face
criminal prosecution and shall be required to appear
before the Justice Court of Clinton on or before the
designated appearance date. The actual expenses
and reasonable administrative fees for the City
abating the violation shall be collected from the
person, firm or corporation in violation of this
chapter, by the Justice Court of Clinton and be
added to any fine and penalties set by that court.
23-14-4 Life Threatening. In the event that the
violation is an immediate threat to the public health,
environment, safety or welfare, the Inspector may
require immediate corrective action. If the violation
is not corrected and reinspection requested within
the time set by the inspector, the citation will be
referred directly to the Clinton City Prosecutor.
23-14-5 Work Without a Permit. It shall be
unlawful for any person to engage in the laying,
repairing, altering or connecting to any services
established in this Title directly or indirectly
without first having received a Land Use Permit
from the Community Development Department.
23-14-6 Use Without Payment Prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any person by himself, family,
servants, or agents to utilize the systems established
in this Title without first paying for them unless it is
done pursuant to proper application or resolution.
23-14-7 Destruction-Obstructive Materials-
Contamination-Illicit Discharges. When
considering the systems established in this Title it
shall be unlawful:
(1) For any person to destroy, injure, deface, impair
or interfere with the operation of any part, pipe,
fixtures, appliances, or appurtenance or to cast
anything into any reservoir, tank, inlets, manholes
or other accesses into the systems.
(2) For any person to place, induce, empty or
discharge into the systems or any source of water
supplying the systems, any garbage, refuse, soil or
other similar matter, or any substance or thing
likely to obstruct the systems.
(3) For any person to place, induce, empty or
discharge into the systems, or any source of water
supplying the systems, any matter or substance,
solid or liquid, which shall cause the contamination
of the water of the City's systems or which may
result in deleterious or harmful effects to human
health other than the waste products for which the
systems are provided.
(4) For any person to fail to maintain any control
structure or lack thereof, that provides access into
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
one of the systems established in this Title, on their
property, that results in a stoppage. The owner or
operator shall be required to refund the labor,
equipment, materials, and any overhead costs to the
City including any fines incurred due to any
overflow, from a system established in this Title,
due directly to the stoppage or damage occurred
because of the stoppage.
(5) Detrimental or Dangerous Materials. Ashes,
cinders or rags; flammable, poisonous or explosive
liquids or gases; oil, grease or any other insoluble
material capable of obstructing, damaging or
overloading any part of the systems established in
this Title, or capable of interfering with the normal
operation of the systems, shall not be deposited, by
any means, into such systems.
(6) Industrial Wastes. Waste products from
manufacturing or industrial operations shall not be
introduced into the systems established in this Title
until it has been determined by the Supervisor and
North Davis Sewer District, when applicable, that
the introduction thereof will not damage the
system(s) or interfere with the functioning of the
sewage treatment plant.
(7) Drainage Waters and Destructive Materials. It
shall be unlawful for any person to connect with a
public sanitary sewer any drain or pipe which
discharges rainwater, cellar or surface water, acids,
alkalies, lye or other injurious liquids, or the
contents of any spring, flowing well, creek, ditch,
or other water courses. No boiler or heating plant
shall be directly connected to the sanitary sewer.
The overflow from boilers or heating plants, when
cooled to a temperature not to exceed 120 degrees
Fahrenheit, will be allowed to run into a sump, the
sump to be connected to the sewer. The discharge
of the contents of waste pipes from water filters,
gas engines, air compressors, vacuum or dry
cleaners, garages, wash racks, stores or warehouses
containing inflammable substance, buildings for the
stabling or keeping of horses, cows and other
animals, and all similar establishments shall not be
made into or connected with a sanitary sewer,
unless such contents are discharged into settling
tanks properly trapped and vented, the tanks to be
of a construction approved by the Supervisor and to
be at all times subject to his inspection and approval
or condemnation. Upon condemnation by the
Supervisor, the sewage from the tanks shall not be
allowed to flow into sewer until satisfactory
alterations have been made and the construction
approved by the Supervisor.
(8) Control of Runoff from Property. All owners
with property within the corporate limits of the City
are required to control run-off from roofs,
downspouts, concrete slabs, and other impervious
surfaces or excess water from landscape
maintenance from flowing onto neighboring
properties.
History: 6/96
23-14-8 Prohibitions. It is unlawful for any person
to:
(1) Connect onto or modify any of the City’s
systems established in this Title without written
permission from the City.
(2) Track mud or sediment onto public streets by
any vehicles or other means. Provisions shall be
made at all construction sites to either clean the
streets or clean the vehicles or both before vehicles
leave the site.
(3) Washout concrete trucks at any sites other than
preapproved designated areas. Dumping of excess
concrete shall not be allowed anywhere within the
City.
(4) Stockpile construction or yard improvement
materials or debris in the street or in the gutter
unless being stored on a pallet or in a self contained
storage unit that has been preapproved by the
Public Works Department with the advice and
consent of the Clinton Police Department. This
includes but is not limited to ramps being
constructed for temporary access across the existing
curb and gutter; stockpiling of topsoil or other fill
material; stockpiling of sand, gravel, landscape
rock, bark, mulch or any other material that may be
considered a source of pollution in the stormwater
system.
(5) Any approved on street storage shall comply
with:
(a) Barricade requirements as established in the
manual of Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
(b) Not be located in front of or within five (5) feet
of any public or private driveway.
(c) Not be located within thirty (30) feet of an
intersection.
(d) Not be located as to constitute a fire hazard or
an obstruction to a fire fighting vehicle or
equipment.
(e) Not to be located to block any crosswalks or
sidewalks.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
(f) Not to be located within fifteen (15) feet of a fire
hydrant.
(g) Not to be located so as to block a U.S. postal
box or any other type of mail box.
(6) Tamper with, relocate, remove, block or
otherwise impede from the intended function any
portion of a flood irrigation system as defined in
Chapter 13.
(7) Clean out any portion of a flood irrigation
system and leave the cleanings on any public rightof-
way or property not belonging to the owner or
operator of the flood irrigation system without the
written permission of the property owner.
(8) Fail or refuse to meet the requirements of any
maintenance agreement, whether it is the normal or
immediate time period, after reasonable notice.
23-14-9 Removal of Prohibited Items. Items
located within a street per this section shall be
removed within twenty (24) hours upon direction of
the Public Works Inspector or other authorized
agent.
23-14-10 Unauthorized Users. It shall be
unlawful for any user, connected to a service
established in this Title, to permit any person from
other premises or any unauthorized persons to use
or obtain services regularly from his premises
facilities, either outside or inside his premises.
23-14-11 Stop Work Order or Revocation of
Permits.
(1) If the situation warrants the inspector may issue
a Stop Work Order to the owner, owner’s
representative, occupant, or persons conducting
operations on the property. The stop work order
shall identifying the conditions violating this
chapter and/or the Land Use Permit and give notice
that all operations on the site must stop
immediately, and not continue until the offence is
resolved. The inspector may require that work be
continued to alleviate public safety concerns.
(2) In the event that any person holding a Land Use
Permit violates the terms of the permit or
implements site development in such a manner as to
adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of
persons residing or working in the neighborhood or
at the development site so as to be detrimental to
the public welfare or injurious to property or
improvements in the neighborhood, the Authorized
City Inspector may suspend or revoke the site
development permit and start corrective action as
established in this Title.
(3) A Land Use Permit becomes null and void if
work or construction authorized is not commenced
within 180 days, or if construction or work is
suspended or abandoned for a period of 180 days at
any time after work is commenced.
(4) For the purpose of this section the evidence of
continued work shall be the documentation of
inspections by the inspector and the 180 day period
for proof of work being accomplished shall start
over the date of the documented inspection.
23-14-12 City Right to Make Repairs.
(1) If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the
requirements of the Land Use Permit or inspector,
whether it is the normal or immediate correction
time period, after reasonable notice, the City
Manager may order the Public Works Director to
abate or procure the abatement of the violation.
(2) After proper notice, the City may assess the
owner(s) of the facility for:
(a) The cost of repair work;
(b) Any penalties; and,
(c) Appropriate administrative charges.
(3) Owners of the property shall be invoiced for the
work. If the owner(s) do not reimburse the City the
cost(s) associated with the work shall be recouped
through a lien on the property and may be placed on
the tax bill and collected as ordinary taxes by the
county.
(4) Repairs may be as extensive as removing all
improvements and returning the land to as near the
state that existed prior to commencement of work as
possible.
23-14-13 Penalty.
(1) No structure or land shall hereafter be
constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered
without full compliance with the terms of this Title
and other applicable regulations.
(2) Any person, firm or corporation who violates
any of the provisions of this Title, or fails to comply
with any of its requirements or who shall violate or
fail to comply with any order made hereunder,
(including violations of conditions and safeguards
established in connection with conditions) shall be
deemed guilty of a class C misdemeanor for each
and every such violation or noncompliance,
respectively and subject to punishment therefore as
provided by law upon conviction. Each day during
which any violation of any of the provisions of this
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 23 Sewerage, Stormwater, and
Flood Irrigation Systems
Title is committed, continued, or permitted, shall
constitute a separate offense.
(3) The charging of a criminal offense, conviction
and imposition of sentence shall not in any way
preclude the City from pursuing civil remedies.
(4) Nothing herein contained shall prevent Clinton
City from taking such other lawful action as is
necessary to prevent or remedy any violation.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
TITLE 24. SIGNS AND
ADVERTISING DEVICES
Chapter 1. Purpose and Scope
Chapter 2. Definitions
Chapter 3. General Provisions
Chapter 4. Regulation of On-Premise Signs
by Zone
Chapter 5. Nonconforming Signs
Chapter 6. Construction Specifications
Chapter 7. Billboards
Chapter 8. Administration and Enforcement
Chapter 9. Violations
Chapter 1. Purpose and Scope
24-1-1 Purpose
24-1-2 Scope
24-1-3 Interpretation
24-1-1 Purpose. The purpose of this title shall be
to coordinate the type, placement, and physical
dimensions of signs within the different land use
zones; to recognize the commercial communication
requirements of all sectors of the business
community; to encourage the innovative use of
design; to promote both renovation and proper
maintenance; to allow for special circumstances;
and to guarantee equal treatment under the law
through accurate record keeping and consistent
enforcement.
(a) These shall be accomplished by regulation of
the display, erection, use, and maintenance of signs.
The use of signs is regulated according to zone. The
placement and physical dimensions of signs are
regulated primarily by type and length of street
frontage. No sign shall be permitted as a main or
accessory use except in accordance with the
provisions of this title.
(b) It is also the intention and purpose of this
chapter to promote short and long term civic beauty
and order by establishing standards and regulations
for sign design, location, size, type, compatibility,
and aesthetics. By doing so it is hoped this
ordinance will help to create streetscapes that are
functional and attractive to both residents of
Clinton City as well as visitors.
24-1-2 Scope.
(a) This title shall not relate to building design. Nor
shall the title regulate official traffic or government
signs; the copy and message of signs; product
dispensers; scoreboards on athletic fields; flags of
any nation, government, noncommercial
organization; gravestones; barber poles;
commemorative plaques; the display of street
numbers; or any display or construction not defined
herein as a sign.
(b) It is not the intent of this ordinance to regulate
the content of public speech. The regulations of
this chapter are intended to apply to both onpremise
and off-premise signs, but do not apply to
hand-held placards and other similar devices
traditionally used for public protest and the exercise
of free speech. Any non-commercial message may
be substituted for any commercial message
permitted under this ordinance.
24-1-3 Interpretation. In interpreting and
applying the provisions of this chapter, the sign
regulations contained herein are declared to be the
maximum allowable for the purposes set forth. If
the Community Development Director determines
that an application needs further interpretation, he
may request Planning Commission review of the
proposal. If the applicant wishes to propose or
retain a sign that exceeds ordinance standards, he
may apply to the Board of Adjustment for a
variance or special exception.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
Chapter 2. Definitions
24-2-1 Definitions
24-2-1 Definitions.
The following definitions shall be observed and
applied:
(i) A-Frame Sign. A sign temporary in nature,
double-faced, constructed of dimensional lumber,
two separate panels attached at the top and
designed to stand without other structural support
on four legs. EXCEPTION - similar type signs used
by the real estate industry do not fall into this
category.
(ii) Abandoned Sign. A sign which no longer
identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor,
service, owner, product, or activity, and/or for
which no legal owner can be found. This definition
includes all signs exceeding the time limitations
outlined in this ordinance.
(iii) Animated Sign. Any sign which uses physical
movement or rotation
(iv) Area. (See "Sign, Area of")
(v) Awning. A shelter projecting from and
supported by the exterior wall of a building
constructed of nonrigid materials on a supporting
framework (compare "Marquee").
(vi) Awning Sign. A sign painted on, printed on,
or attached flat against the surface of an awning.
(vii) Banner Sign. A sign made of fabric or any
nonrigid material with no enclosing framework.
(viii) Berm. A small hill or wall of dirt or sand,
landscaped, that separates two areas.
(ix) Billboard. (see "Off-Premise Sign")
(x) Changeable Copy Sign (Automatic). A sign
on which the copy changes automatically on a
lampbank or through mechanical means, e.g.,
electrical or electronic time and temperature units.
(xi) Changeable Copy Sign (Manual). A sign on
which copy is changed manually in the field, e.g.,
readerboards with changeable letters.
(xii) City. Unless the context clearly discloses a
contrary intent, the word "City" shall mean the City
of Clinton.
(xiii) Clearance (of a sign). The smallest vertical
distance between the grade of the adjacent street or
street curb and the lowest point of any sign,
including framework and embellishments,
extending over that grade.
(xiv) Construction Sign. A temporary sign
identifying an architect, contractor, subcontractor,
and/or material supplier participating in
construction on the property on which the sign is
located.
(xv) Copy. The wording on a sign surface in either
permanent or removable letterform.
(xvi) Department. The Clinton City Community
Development Department.
(xvii) Directional/Information Sign. An onpremise
sign giving directions, instructions, or
facility information and which may contain the
name or logo of an establishment but no advertising
copy, e.g., parking or exit and entrance signs.
(xviii) Director. The Community Development
Director or his designated representative.
(xix) Double-Faced Sign. A sign with two faces.
(xx) Electrical Sign. A sign or sign structure in
which electrical wiring, connections, or fixtures are
used.
(xxi) Electronic Message Center (EMC). (see
"Changeable Copy Sign, Automatic")
(xxii) Facade. The entire building front including
the parapet.
(xxiii) Face of Sign. The area of a sign on which
the copy is placed.
(xxiv) Festoons. A string of ribbons, tinsel, small
flags, or pinwheels.
(xxv) Flashing Sign. A sign which contains an
intermittent or sequential flashing light source used
primarily to attract attention. Does not include
changeable copy signs, animated signs, or signs
which, through reflection or other means, create an
illusion of flashing of intermittent light (compare
"Animated Sign," "Changeable Copy Sign").
(xxvi) Freestanding Sign. A permanent sign
supported upon the ground by poles or braces and
not attached to any building.
(xxvii) Frontage. The length of the property line
of any one premise along a public right-of-way on
which it borders.
(xxviii) Frontage, Building. The length of an
outside building wall on a public right-of-way.
(xxix) Government Sign. Any temporary or
permanent sign erected and maintained by the city,
county, state, or federal government for traffic
direction or for designation of or direction to any
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
school, hospital, historical site, or public service,
property, or facility.
(xxx) Height (of a sign). The vertical distance
measured from the highest point of the sign,
excluding decorative embellishments, to the grade
of the adjacent street or the surface grade beneath
the sign, whichever is less (compare "Clearance")
(xxxi) Identification Sign. A sign whose copy is
limited to the name and address of a building,
institution, or person and/or to the activity or
occupation being identified.
(xxxii) Illegal Sign. A sign which does not meet
the requirements of this ordinance and which has
not received legal nonconforming status.
(xxxiii) Illuminated Sign Cabinet. Constructed
with durable material, extrusion or returns for the
sides, the sign cabinet houses High Output Lamps
which illuminate the face covering the top on the
sign box. Face are available in several forms: Flat
Face, Flat Pan Face (the graphics are raised on the
face), Coped Push-Thru Face (routed aluminum
face with dimensional plex letter), or a Flex Face
(flexible fabric with digitally printed Graphics).
History 4/14
(xxxiv) Illuminated Sign. A sign with an artificial
light source incorporated internally or externally for
the purpose of illuminating the sign.
(xxxv) Incidental Sign. A small sign, emblem, or
decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or
services available on the premises, e.g., a credit
card sign or a sign indicating hours of business.
(xxxvi) Lot. A parcel of land legally defined on a
subdivision map recorded with the assessment
department or land registry office, or a parcel of
land defined by a legal record of survey map.
(xxxvii) Maintenance. For the purposes of this
ordinance, the cleaning, painting, repair, or
replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner
that does not alter the basic copy, design, or
structure of the sign.
(xxxviii) Mansard. A sloped roof or roof-like
facade architecturally comparable to a building
wall.
(xxxix) Marquee. A permanent roof-like structure
or canopy of rigid materials supported by and
extending from the face of a building (compare
"Awning").
(xl) Marquee Sign. Any sign attached to or
supported by a marquee structure.
(xli) Nameplate. A non-electric on-premise
identification sign giving only the name, address,
and/or occupation of an occupant or group of
occupants.
(xlii) Nonconforming Sign. (1) A sign which was
erected legally but which does not comply with
subsequently enacted sign restrictions and
regulations. (2) A sign which does not conform to
the sign code requirements but for which a special
permit has been issued.
(xliii) Occupancy. The portion of a building or
premises owned, leased, rented, or otherwise
occupied for a given use.
(xliv) Off-Premise Sign. A sign structure
advertising an establishment, merchandise, service,
or entertainment, which is not sold, produced,
manufactured, or furnished at the property on
which the sign is located, e.g., "billboards" or
"outdoor advertising."
(xlv) On-Premise Sign. A sign which pertains to
the use of the premises on which it is located.
(xlvi) Owner. A person recorded as the on official
records. For the purposes of this title, the owner of
property on which a sign is located is presumed to
be the owner of the sign unless facts to the contrary
are officially recorded or otherwise brought to the
attention of the Director, e.g., a sign leased from a
sign company.
(xlvii) Painted Wall Sign. Any sign which is
applied with paint or similar substance on the face
of a wall.
(xlviii) Parapet. The extension of a false front or
wall above a roofline.
(xlix) Person. For the purposes of this ordinance,
any individual, corporation, association, firm,
partnership, or similarly defined interest.
(l) Pole Cover. Covers enclosing or decorating
poles or other structural supports of a sign.
(li) Political Sign. For the purposes of this
ordinance, a temporary sign used in connection
with a local, county, state, or national election or
referendum.
(lii) Portable Sign. Any sign designed to be
moved easily and not permanently affixed to the
ground or to a structure or building including but
not limited to handheld signs.
(liii) Premises. A parcel of land with its
appurtenances and buildings which, because of its
unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest
conveyable unit of real estate.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
(liv) Projecting Sign. A sign, other than a flat wall
sign, which is attached to and projects more than
eighteen (18) inches from a building wall or other
structure not specifically designed to support the
sign.
(lv) Real Estate Sign. A temporary sign
advertising the real estate upon which the sign is
located as being for rent, lease, or sale.
(lvi) Roofline. The top edge of a roof or building
parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any
cupolas, pylons, chimneys, or minor projections.
(lvii) Roof Sign. Any sign erected over or on the
roof of a building (compare "Mansard," "Wall
Signs")
(lviii) Rotating Sign. A sign in which the sign
itself or any portion of the sign moves in a
revolving or similar manner. The motion does not
refer to methods of changing copy.
(lix) Sign. Any device, structure, fixture, or
placard using graphics, symbols, and/or written
copy designed specifically for the purpose of
advertising or identifying any establishment,
product, goods, or services.
(lx) Sign, Area of:
(1) Freestanding: The area of a freestanding sign
shall have only one face (the largest one) of any
double- or multi-faced sign counted in calculating
its area. The area of the sign shall be measured as
follows if the sign is composed of one or two
individual cabinets:
(a) The area around and enclosing the perimeter of
each cabinet or module shall be summed and then
totaled to determine total area. The perimeter of
measurable area shall not include embellishments
the as pole covers, framing, decorative roofing, etc.,
provided that there is not written advertising copy
on the embellishments.
(b) If the sign is composed of more than two sign
cabinets or modules, the area enclosing the entire
perimeter of all cabinets and/or modules within a
single, continuous geometric figure shall be the
area of the sign. Pole covers and other
embellishments shall not be included in the area of
measurement if they do not bear advertising copy.
(2) Wall Signs: The area shall be within a single,
continuous perimeter composed of any straight-line
geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits
of the advertising message and recognizable logo.
If the sign is composed of individual letters or
symbols using the wall as the background with no
added decoration, the total sign area shall be
calculated based upon a continuous perimeter
composed of any straight-line geometric figure
which encloses the extreme limits of the advertising
message.
Snipe Sign. A temporary sign or poster affixed to a
tree, fence, etc.
Subdivision Identification Sign. A freestanding
or wall sign identifying a recognized subdivision,
condominium complex, or residential development.
Temporary Sign. A sign not constructed or
intended for long-term use.
Under-Canopy Sign. A sign suspended beneath a
canopy, ceiling, roof, or marquee.
Use. The purpose, for which a building, lot, sign or
structure is intended, designed, occupied, or
maintained.
Wall, Secondary. Any wall not having frontage
on a public right-of-way and directly visible from a
public right-of-way.
Wall Sign. A sign attached parallel to and
extending not more than eighteen (18) inches from
the wall of a building. This definition includes
painted, individual letter, and cabinet signs, and
signs on a mansard.
Window Sign. A sign installed inside a window
and intended to be viewed from the outside.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
Chapter 3. General Provisions
24-3-1 Signs Prohibited
24-3-2 Permit Required
24-3-3 Moving, Relocating or Altering of
Signs
24-3-4 Maintenance
24-3-5 Lighting
24-3-6 Abandoned Signs
24-3-7 Conflict
24-3-1 Signs Prohibited.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect,
place, or maintain a sign in the City of Clinton
except in accordance with the provisions of this
title. The following types of signs are prohibited
in all districts:
(a) Abandoned signs as specified in this title.
(b) Advertising signs for products or sales except
as outlined in this title.
(c) Animated signs.
(d) Bus bench signs.
(e) Flashing signs.
(f) Flood zone. No sign shall be permitted within
any designated one hundred-year flood area.
(g) Intensely lighted signs. No sign shall be
permitted which because of its intensity of light
constitutes a nuisance or hazard to vehicular
traffic, pedestrians or adjacent properties.
(h) Projecting signs.
(i) Roof signs.
(j) Spotlights directed into the night sky except as
part of an approved promotional period for
temporary signs.
(k) Statuary bearing the likeness or suggestion of
any product or logo.
(l) Graffiti
(m) Portable signs. unless otherwise specifically
permitted by this Title.
(n) Parking of advertising vehicles prohibited.
No person shall park any vehicle or trailer on a
public right-of-way or public property or on
private property so as to be visible from a public
right-of-way which has attached thereto or located
thereon any sign or advertising device for the
basic purpose of providing advertisement of
products or directing people to a business or
activity located on the same or other location.
This section is not intended to apply to vehicles or a
trailer parked at the owner’s or representative’s
residence or where the vehicle is driven daily to and
from the business location.
History 4/14
(o) Public areas. No sign, handbill or poster,
advertisement or notice of any kind or sort, whether
political or otherwise, shall be fastened, placed,
posted, painted or attached in any way in or upon any
curbstone, lamp post, telephone pole, telegraph pole,
electric light or power pole, hydrant, bridge, tree,
rock, sidewalk or street, except when the sign is
owned and erected by a public agency or erected by
permission of an authorized public agency or
required by law.
(p) Signs imitating or resembling official traffic or
government signs or signals.
(q) Sound, odor or visible matter. No advertising
sign or device shall be permitted which emits audible
sound, odor or visible matter.
(r) Traffic hazards. No sign shall be permitted at the
intersection of any street in the a manner as to
obstruct free and clear vision of motor vehicle
operators or at any location where by reason of its
position, shape or color it may interfere with or be
confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal or
device or which makes use of a work, symbol,
phrase, shape or color in the a manner as to interfere
with, mislead or confuse traffic.
(s) Hot or cold air balloons, or inflatables.
History 4/14
(t) Festoons.
(u) Off-Premise Sign.
(2) Hand-bills, signs-public places and objects:
(a) Except as otherwise stipulated, no person shall
paint, mark or write on, or post or otherwise affix,
any hand-bill or sign to or upon any sidewalk,
crosswalk, curb, curbstone, parkstrip, street lamp
post, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or guard, railroad
trestle, electric light or power or telephone or
telegraph or trolley wire pole, or wire appurtenance
thereof or upon any lighting system, public bridge,
drinking fountain, life saving equipment, street sign
or traffic sign.
(b) Any handbill or sign found posted upon any
public property contrary to the provisions of this
section may be removed by the Police Department,
the Public Works Department, the Parks and
Recreation Department, or the Department. The
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
person responsible for any the illegal posting shall
be liable for the cost incurred in the removal
thereof and the City is authorized to effect the
collection of the cost.
(c) Nothing in this section shall apply to the
installation of a metal plaque or plate or
individual letters or figures in a sidewalk
commemorating an historical, cultural, or artistic
event, location, or personality for which the
Department of Public Works has granted a written
permit.
(d) Nothing in this section shall apply to the
painting of house numbers upon curbs.
24-3-2 Permit Required.
(1) Unless otherwise provided by this ordinance,
all signs shall require permits and payment of fees
as described in § 24-8-3 below of this title. No
permit is required for the maintenance of a sign or
for a change of copy on painted, printed, or
changeable copy signs.
(2) Illegal signs. No person shall erect or
maintain or permit to be erected or maintained on
any premises owned or controlled by him any
sign which does not comply with the provisions
of this title.
(3) All necessary construction and engineering
specifications must be submitted to satisfy the
applicable building and construction code. The
Department may also require, at its discretion,
additional engineering information if there is a
concern for the health or safety of the general
public.
(4) Issuance: The Department shall issue a permit
only to a sign contractor properly licensed in the
state of Utah, for the erection, alteration or
relocation of a sign within the City when an
application therefore has been properly made and
the sign complies with all appropriate laws and
regulations of the City.
(5) Suspension or Revocation: The Department
may at any time, in writing, suspend or revoke a
permit issued under the provisions of this title
whenever the permit is issued on the basis of a
material omission or misstatement of fact, or in
violation of any ordinance or any of the
provisions of this title.
(6) Effect of issuance: No permit for a sign
issued hereunder shall be deemed to constitute
permission or authorization to maintain a public
or private nuisance nor shall any permit issued
hereunder constitute a defense in an action to
abate a nuisance or for damages resulting from a
nuisance.
(7) Indemnification of City: As a condition to the
issuance of a building permit for a sign. All persons
engaged in the alteration, relocation or maintenance
of signs over a public right-of-way or other sign work
in, over or immediately adjacent to a public right-ofway
or public property shall agree to hold harmless
and indemnify the City, its officers, agents and
employees, from any and all claims of negligence
resulting from the erection, alteration, relocation,
maintenance or other sign work.
24-3-3 Moving, Relocating or Altering of Signs.
(1) No existing sign may be moved or relocated to
any other parcel, building, structure or portion
thereof, unless the sign complies with all other
provisions of this title, or is altered so as to comply.
No existing sign may be moved or relocated on the
same parcel, building, structure or portion thereof,
unless the sign also complies with all other
provisions of this title, or is altered so as to comply.
(2) No existing sign may be altered unless the sign,
after alteration thereof, complies with all other
provisions of this title. Alteration shall be deemed to
include a change of message or sign legend, or
portion thereof, except where the change is a normal
increment of the sign function common to signs such
as a theater marquee, reader board, bulletin board,
EMC or other similar sign.
24-3-4 Maintenance. All signs shall be properly
maintained. Exposed surfaces shall be clean and
painted if paint is required. Defective parts shall be
replaced. The Director shall have the right under §
24-9-1 below to order the repair or removal of any
sign which is defective, damaged, or substantially
deteriorated.
24-3-5 Lighting. Unless otherwise specified by
this title, all signs may be illuminated. However, all
signs shall be designed, located, shielded, and
directed so as to prevent the casting of glare or direct
light from artificial illumination upon adjacent
publicly dedicated roadways and surrounding
property. Any use of a revolving beacon light is
prohibited.
24-3-6 Abandoned Signs. Any on-premise sign
located on property which is vacated by an occupant
shall be deemed to have been abandoned.
(1) All abandoned temporary and permanent on
premise signs shall be removed within fourteen (14)
days of the termination of occupancy.
(2) The structure of all detached on-premise signs
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
shall be removed within forty-five (45) calendar
days of written notice of abandonment is given to
the owner, person having control, or person
receiving benefit of the structure.
(3) Appeal. Any person who has been ordered to
remove an abandoned sign may appeal the
decision of the Director as outlined in § 24-9-3
below of this Title.
24-3-7 Conflict.
(1) If any portion of this title is found to be in conflict
with any other provision of any zoning, building, fire,
safety, or health ordinance of the city code, the
provision which establishes the higher standard shall
prevail.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
Chapter 4. Regulation of On-Premise
Signs by Zone
24-4-1 Signs Not Requiring Permits
24-4-2 Signs that Require a Permit
24-4-3 Temporary Signs
24-4-4 Flags/Banners Requiring Approval
24-4-5 Bus Bench Signs
24-4-1 Signs Not Requiring Permits. The
following types of signs are exempted from
permit requirements but must be in conformance
with all other requirements of this title:
(1) Changing Copy. The changing of the
message on a permitted sign that has an approved
marquee, reader board, electronic message center,
or other replaceable copy area.
(2) Civic and philanthropic signs. Signs not
exceeding one hundred (100) square feet in area
pertaining to drives or events of civic,
philanthropic, educational or religious
organizations, provided that the signs are posted
not more than five (5) days before the event and
are removed no more than one (1) day after the
event. These signs may be erected within a public
right-of-way upon approval of the Community
Development Director.
(3) Commercial and Industrial Zones. It is
recognized that temporary signs announcing the
location, availability, or development of property
are necessary. Because these are allowed without
a permit, restraint is advised.
(a) On-Premise Development Identification
Signs. Signs announcing or identifying the future
development of commercial or industrial property
are allowed one (1) per public or private street
frontage. The sign(s) may not be erected before
the proposed development has been submitted for
site plan review. They must be removed before
final inspection or before permanent signs are
installed. Signs may not exceed thirty-two (32)
square feet in area or eight (8) feet in height.
Individual pads or parcels within centers are
allowed their own sign, but it may not exceed
sixteen (16) square feet or six (6) feet in height.
Signs may not block signs of established
facilities.
(b) On-Premise Real Estate Signs.
(i) One on-premise real estate sign advertising the
sale or lease of property per street frontage is
allowed for any commercial or industrial planned
center; building or lot. Signs may not exceed
thirty-two (32) square feet in area or eight (8) feet in
height. Individual pads or parcels within centers are
allowed their own sign, but it may not exceed sixteen
(16) square feet or six (6) feet in height. Signs may
not block signs of established facilities.
(ii) One on-premise sign advertising the availability
of commercial or industrial space, for lease or sale,
for space within a multi-tenant building or for a pad
within the same center is allowed. The sign must be
securely attached to the vacancy in question. It may
not exceed twenty-four (24) square feet in area.
(4) Community Signs. Community signs require
review by the Department and/or other pertinent City
department, for compliance with the following
criteria:
(a) No sign(s) shall be permitted which is unsafe for
vehicular or pedestrian traffic, is inappropriate with
respect to location, size, time or duration of display,
or is maintained in a deteriorated condition.
(b) The sign(s):
(i) Must be made of durable, weather resistant,
material;
(ii) Must use logos or symbols instead of copy where
possible, where copy would cause a distraction to
vehicular traffic; and
(iii) May be located at various gateway areas to the
City, along major streets and important intersections
adjacent to non-residential properties as approved by
the Community Development Director.
(c) The signs shall be uniform in size for each
individual display and shall be no larger than four (4)
feet wide and ten (10) feet tall for signs attached to
light or utility poles. Signs attached to building may
be larger but must be appropriate in scale and
location as approved by the Community
Development Director.
(d) The signs may not be attached to another
temporary sign or a permanent traffic or business
sign.
(e) The signs may be part of a "rotating permanent
feature" of the City or community for the events as:
(i) Clinton Fun Days
(ii) Holidays
(iii) Cultural and/or arts events
(iv) Change in seasons
(v) General community promotion; i.e., business,
with the prohibition of commercial endorsement or
name on any the sign.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
(f) The signs for any single purpose or event may
not be displayed for more than thirty (30) days.
However, the Community Development Director
may approve community purpose signs for longterm
purposes subject to review on a ninety (90)
day basis.
(5) Construction signs. In any commercial or
manufacturing zone, one unlighted sign per
development not to exceed sixty-four (64) square
feet in area, may be placed on the lot or attached
to the outside of a building during its construction
period. Signs shall be restricted to a height of no
greater than ten (10) feet. Construction signs
shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from
property lines and out of all clear view areas. The
sign shall identify only the project, its developer,
architects, engineers, designers, contractors or
other persons or groups participating in the
project.
(6) Directional/informational signs. Signs which
provide direction or instruction and located
entirely on the property to which they pertain and
do not exceed four (4) square feet in area, the as
signs identifying rest rooms, public telephones,
walkways, or signs providing direction the as
parking lot entrance and exit signs and those of
similar nature. Directional signs are to be limited
to instruction or direction only and are not to have
any form of commercial advertising on them
other than a company logo.
(7) Flags. The flags, emblems, or insignias of any
nation or political subdivision.
(8) Holiday or special events decorations.
(9) Home occupation signs. Within any zone one
home occupation sign is allowed per dwelling.
Home occupation signs are not to exceed two (2)
square feet in area and must be attached to the
home.
(10) House numbers and name plates. House
numbers and name plates not exceeding two (2)
square feet in area for each residential building.
(11) Incidental sign.
(12) Interior signs. Signs located within the
interior of any building or stadium (if the signs
are facing towards the interior of the stadium) or
within an enclosed lobby or court of any building,
and signs for and located within the inner or outer
lobby, court of entrance of any theater.
(13) Memorial signs or tablets. Memorial signs or
tablets, names of buildings, and dates of building
erection when cut into the surface or facade of a
building.
(14) No Trespassing and No Dumping signs.
(a) In any commercial or manufacturing zone
trespassing/dumping signs are allowed. In a
commercial or manufacturing zone any number of
signs not exceeding six (6) square feet each and
placed a minimum of fifty (50) feet apart, may be
attached to a structure, fence or may be free standing.
In no case shall a trespassing/dumping sign be placed
at a height greater than eight (8) feet above the
finished grade immediately below the sign. No
permit shall be required for this type of sign.
(15) In residential zones any number of
trespassing/dumping signs not exceeding three (3)
square feet each and placed a minimum of fifty (50)
feet apart, may be attached to a structure, fence, or
may be free standing. In no case shall a
trespassing/dumping sign be placed at a height
greater than six (6) feet above the finished grade
immediately below the sign. No permit shall be
required for these types of signs.
(16) One attached nameplate per occupancy, not to
exceed two (2) square feet in sign area.
(17) Political and Campaign Signs shall meet the
following requirements:
(a) Posting on public right-of-way. It shall be
unlawful for any person to post a campaign sign in a
public right-of-way.
(b) Prior to posting of any campaign signs the
candidate, a representative of the candidate or
representative of the campaign shall provide to the
Code Enforcement Officer the name and number of a
contact person for the candidate or campaign.
(c) Posting time limits. It shall be unlawful for any
person to post a campaign sign more than sixty (60)
days prior to the Primary Election, and it shall be
unlawful to fail to remove a campaign sign within
five (5) days after the election. However, candidates
that advance from a Primary Election to the General
Election may leave their signs in place until the
General Election. In elections where no Primary
Election is required, campaign signs may be posted
the day after the date the Primary Election would
have occurred.
History 5/12, 10/15
(d) Limitation of number of campaign signs on a lot.
No limit is established.
(e) Limitation of size of campaign signs. On any lot
in any zone the maximum size of any one sign shall
not be greater than sixteen (16) square feet. The
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
maximum height of the sign may not exceed six
(6) feet.
(f) Removal of illegal campaign signs. The Code
Enforcement Officer or authorized agents are
authorized to remove any campaign sign found
posted within the corporate limits of the City
when the sign is in violation of the provisions of
this section. For the purpose of removing
campaign signs, the Code Enforcement Officer or
his authorized agents are empowered to take all
steps necessary to remove the unauthorized sign
including but not limited to enlisting the aid or
assistance of any other department of the City and
to secure legal process to the end that all the signs
shall be expeditiously removed from any property
where posted.
(g) Notice. Upon discovery, the Code
Enforcement Officer or authorized agents shall
immediately notify by telephone the candidate,
committee or person responsible for the posting
of any sign in violation of this section, indicating
the location of the sign and that the sign must be
removed immediately. If the address or phone
number of the person responsible for the violating
sign is not known the sign shall be removed under
the provisions as set forth in § (f) above.
(h) Storage and return. If after the notice has
been given under § (g) above, any campaign sign
has not been removed, the Code Enforcement
Officer or authorized agents shall remove the
campaign sign and keep a record of the location
from which the sign was removed. He/she shall
store the sign in a safe location for at least thirty
(30) days or until after the election whichever
occurs first.
(i) Visual clearance triangle. No campaign signs
shall be located in the visual clearance triangle
located on corner lots. The visual clearance
triangle is the triangular area at the corner
performed by measuring a distance of forty (40)
feet along both lot lines back from the point of
intersection of the lines. Signs located within the
visual clearance triangle may be removed under
§(f) above without prior notice as required by §
(g) above if determined to be a safety hazard.
(j) Public Property. Political and campaign signs
shall not be placed on public property.
(k) Illegal signs, public nuisance. Campaign
signs in violation of this section are hereby
declared to be public nuisances, and may be
abated as the by the City.
History 5/04; 08/07, 7/09
(18) Public notices. Official notices posted by public
officers or employees in the performance of their
duties.
(19) Public necessity signs. Public necessity signs for
control of traffic and other regulatory purposes, street
signs, danger signs, railroad crossing signs, and signs
of public service companies indicating danger and
aids to service or safety.
(20) Residential Zones. It is recognized that
temporary signs announcing the location, availability,
or development of property are necessary. Restraint
is advised. The following shall apply:
(a) On-Premise Development Identification Signs.
(i) Individual Lots. One sign announcing the name of
the construction/development company is allowed.
Area of the sign may not exceed sixteen (16) square
feet or six (6) feet in height. The sign may not be
erected more than five (5) days prior to the beginning
of construction for which a valid building permit has
been issued. It must be removed before final
occupancy.
(ii) Subdivisions or Planned Unit Developments. One
development promotional sign may be placed on the
premises of each development having five (5) or
more lots or approved unit sites in any residential
zone. The size of the sign shall be no greater than
sixty-four (64) square feet with a maximum height of
ten (10) feet. The signs shall be removed within five
(5) years of the issuance of the first building permit
in the project or if the lots are sold out before five (5)
years immediately upon sale of the last lot.
(b) On-Premise Real Estate Signs.
(i) Signs advertising the sale, rent, or lease of
property shall be limited to one real estate sign on
each lot. Each sign shall not exceed four (4) square
feet in size and four (4) feet in height.
(ii) One real estate sign per street frontage is allowed
for any multi-use residential or professional office
building or lot intended for sale, rent or lease and
may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet in area or
eight (8) feet in height. If the parcel is over two (2)
acres in size, the sign may not exceed sixty-four (64)
square feet.
(iii) Model home signs shall not exceed sixteen (16)
square feet in area nor exceed six (6) feet in height
and shall be placed entirely upon the premises of the
model.
(iv) Model home signs shall not be located within the
sight triangle as defined by the Zoning Ordinance and
shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the
property line.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
(c) Temporary/Open House Real Estate Signs.
Open house signs not to exceed six (6) square feet
in area and four (4) feet in height, advertising real
estate open for inspection may be placed on
private property in the vicinity of the property
open for inspection. Individual placing the signs
shall obtain written permission from the property
owner. They shall not be placed in the parkstrip.
They shall not be attached to trees, poles or street
signs, etc. Open house signs shall be displayed
only during those hours/day(s) which the house is
open for actual inspection.
(21) Symbols or insignias. Religious symbols,
commemorative plaques of recognized historical
agencies, provided that no the symbol, plaque, or
identification emblem shall exceed ten (10)
square feet in area.
(22) Temporary directional signs. In any zone, a
sign giving direction to a specific location for any
public or private event may be placed under the
following conditions:
(a) No more than one of the signs may be placed
on a parcel of property.
(b) No the signs shall be placed on public
property of any kind.
(c) The signs must have a setback of one (1) foot
from any sidewalk or street right-of-way line,
whichever is greater.
(d) Permission must be granted by the landowner.
Written consent of the owner or person entitled to
possession of the property or their authorized
representatives shall be obtained.
(e) The signs shall be removed within twenty-four
(24) hours of the completion of the event.
(f) The signs shall not exceed three (3) feet in
height, or when placed into a clear view area, two
(2) feet in height.
(g) The signs shall not exceed six (6) square feet
in sign area measured on one sign face
individually, or eighteen (18) square feet
collectively.
(23) Window Signs. Window signs which are
painted on or temporarily affixed to the window
surface shall cover no more than 25% of any
single window or 25% of the entire surface area
of a group of windows and shall not be so affixed
as to block clear view of exits or entrances or to
create a safety hazard. This applies also to inside
illuminated signs (e.g., neon, etc.) which are
within eight (8) inches of the window surface.
History 5/04, 7/09
24-4-2 Signs that Require a Permit.
(1) Purpose: The streetscape is the combination of
vehicles, buildings, signs, landscaping, roads, utility
poles, etc., that dominant the view of the driver or
pedestrian. The streetscape tells residents and visitors
how the City as a whole feels about the environment,
safety, aesthetics, and its sense of order, among other
things. A useful, attractive, and safe streetscape is
one that necessarily regulates the size, location, and
design of business signs. Because a proliferation of
poorly designed, oversized, and inappropriately
located signs in commercial and industrial areas can
be detrimental to the achievement of effective, safe
and attractive streetscapes, it is important that the
permanent signs in these areas receive approval
(permits) from the City.
(2) Commercial and industrial uses are generally
more intensive than those found in residential zones.
Since these uses are designed by size, location, and
style to attract attention and provide services to the
public, they generally need signage to achieve that
end. Business signs of any kind in residential
neighborhoods can diminish the quality of life for
which those zones were specifically created.
However, there may be some residential uses which
merit a sign, though much smaller and subdued than
in commercial or industrial zones. Therefore, it is the
intent and purpose of this section to outline
regulations and design standards for signs in both
commercial/industrial and residential areas that will
allow the business to identify itself while allowing
Clinton City to create and maintain safe and
aesthetically pleasing streetscapes regardless of zone.
(3) Sign Theme Required: All multi-tenant
centers/buildings must submit a proposal for all onpremise
signs to the Planning Commission, as part of
the site plan review process, for design and
placement approval. In cases for parcels of land of
seven (7) acres or larger, and with frontage of three
hundred (300) feet or more, a proposal for the overall
design and placement of all on-premise signs shall be
submitted. The signs may vary from the regulations
set forth herein and shall be considered as part of the
site plan approval process; providing there are
findings established by the Planning Commission
stating that the proposed sign exceptions are not in
conflict with the purpose and intent of this Chapter
and are in architectural harmony with uses adjacent
to the development and with the understanding
existing signage may be required to be altered or
removed.
(4) On-Premise Freestanding Signs. The size and
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
height of freestanding signs are allowed as
follows:
(a) Planned centers or parcels less than ten (10)
acres. No freestanding signs allowed except as
allowed in 24-4-2(3) above. Only monument
signs are allowed.
(b) Ten (10) acres or more. The Planning
Commission, as part of the site plan approval
process, may approve one freestanding sign per
street frontage. No freestanding sign shall be
allowed for any planned center or parcel that has
less than three hundred (300) feet of street
frontage. Sign height may not exceed twenty-two
(22) feet. Signs must be at least two hundred
(200) feet from the corner.
(c) Electronic message centers are allowed,
however the device shall not exceed 50% of the
total sign area and the EMC shall meet the
requirements outlined in § (5)(b).
(5) Monument Signs. The following standards
shall apply:
(a) Monument Sign, Size
(i) Monument signs are allowed for any size
parcel provided that the parcel has thirty (30) feet
of street frontage. The sign area allowed is
determined by the following formula: thirty-two
(32) square feet plus one (1) square foot per 3.125
lineal feet of street frontage over fifty (50) feet,
maximum size is sixty (60) square feet. Parcels
with two street frontages are allowed a sign on
each street. However, the signs must be separated
by at least one hundred (100) feet as measured
diagonally across the property from center to
center of both signs or only one (l) sign will be
allowed. Signs within the visibility triangle may
be allowed with the permission of the Clinton
City Engineer.
(ii) Monument signs must have at least a one (1)
foot pedestal, and the height of the sign may not
exceed five (5) feet for a total of six (6) feet. The
height to the top of the sign may vary where the
sign is placed upon a landscape berm. The
combined height of the sign plus landscaped berm
may not exceed nine (9) feet as measured from
the top of the curb. The frontage of the property
must be bermed a minimum lineal distance equal
to one-half of the square footage of the sign for
this to occur. The area around sign base and any
berm shall be landscaped.
(iii) Electronic Message Centers (EMC) may be
allowed, however, the devices shall not exceed
50% of the gross total sign area calculated in § (i)
above and height limitations established in § (ii)
above.
(b) EMC Standards
(i) An EMC shall not be installed within 100 feet of
the property line of a property located in a residential
zone and an EMC within 150 feet of the property line
of a property located in a residential zone shall not
face the residential zone.
(ii) The brightness of an EMC shall be measured with
an illuminance meter set to measure footcandles
accurate to at least two decimals and tested within the
last 36 months. An ambient light measurement shall
be taken using a foot candle meter at some point
between the period of time between 30 minutes past
sunset and 30 minutes before sunrise with the EMC
to a blackscreen, and any other lighting associated
with the sign, turned off.
(iii) Immediately following the ambient light
measurement taken in the manner required in § (ii)
above an operating sign light measurement shall be
taken with the sign, and all associated sign lighting
turned on to full white copy.
(iv) All measurements shall be taken perpendicular to
the face of the EMC at the distance determined by the
total square footage of the EMC as set forth in Table
24-4-2(5).
(v) The difference between the ambient light
measurement and solid-message measurements using
the EMC Measurement Criteria shall not exceed
three-tenths 0.3 footcandles.
(vi) EMC’s shall display static images for not less
than two seconds before transitioning to another
static image. Transitions may utilize frame effects
but flashing signs are prohibited.
Table 24-4-2(5)
Area of Sign
sq. ft.
Measurement
Distance (ft.)
10 32
15 39
20 45
25 50
30 55
40 63
45 67
50 71
55 74
60 77
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
(vii) Video display methods are only permitted in
the Performance Zone. An animated sign or any
portion of a sign that uses video display method
shall have a minimum duration of two seconds
and a minimum of two seconds stationary time
before transitioning to another image.
(viii) The content of electronic message signs is
limited to on-site advertising only. However, this
does not apply to municipal signage providing
information to the public related to civic events.
(ix) All permitted EMCs shall be equipped with a
sensor or other device that automatically
determines the ambient illumination and
programmed to automatically dim according to
ambient light conditions, or that can be adjusted
to comply with the three-tenths (0.3) footcandle
measurements.
(x) The installer of an EMC shall provide a
statement of compliance, on a form provided by
the City, of a newly installed sign or sign that has
been altered or worked on, to the City, prior to
any final inspection by the City.
History 4/14
(c) Monument signs for Planned Commercial
Centers:
(i) Monument signs shall be similar in design.
(ii) Planned commercial centers with two (2) or
more street frontages are allowed one (1) sign on
each street frontage. The signs must be separated
by at least one hundred (100) feet as measured
diagonally across the property from center of
sign. In no case shall the approved monument
sign be placed closer than one hundred (100) feet
to any other sign (monument or
freestanding/pole) located on the same side of
street.
(iii) The area of the sign is determined by the
length of the frontage along which the sign is to
be placed, including the frontage of any
freestanding buildings included within the
planned commercial center. The sign area is
determined as provided in sub-paragraph 5.a
above.
(iv) In the case of the development of a planned
commercial center on multiple parcels of property
having common frontages, regardless of the
number of separately owned parcels or buildings
of separate occupancy within the planned
commercial center, the frontage shall be
considered to be the composite of the entire
commonly-used parcels or buildings and not the
frontage of each individual business or occupancy.
The over-all frontage shall be used to calculate
allowable sign area for the center identification sign
as provided in sub-paragraph one (1) above.
(v) In the event that a planned commercial center has
several freestanding buildings (single or multioccupant),
each permitted monument sign shall be
separated from each other by no less than one
hundred (100) feet.
(d) Freestanding Building within a Planned
Commercial Center:
(i) A freestanding building within an approved
planned commercial center may request a monument
sign provided that the freestanding building lot is
contiguous to a major arterial street and has at least
one hundred (100) feet of street frontage.
(ii) Freestanding buildings with two (2) or more
street frontages are allowed one (1) sign on each
frontage. The signs shall be separated by at least one
hundred (100) feet as measured diagonally across the
property from center of sign. In no case shall the
approved monument sign be placed closer than one
hundred (100) feet to any other sign (monument or
freestanding/pole) located on the same side of street.
(iii) The business or tenant occupying the
freestanding building shall be allowed a monument
sign upon determination of the Community
Development Director that the sign is not in conflict
with the purpose of this chapter and is in architectural
harmony with uses adjacent to the development.
(iv) The sign area is determined as provided in subparagraph
5.a above.
History 4/14
(e) Freestanding Building not Associated with a
Planned Commercial Center:
(i) A freestanding building not associated with a
Planned Commercial Center is allowed one
monument sign provided that the parcel has at least
one hundred (100) feet of street frontage.
(ii) In the case of the freestanding building having
two (2) or more frontages, they may place one (1)
sign on each street frontage provided that the signs
are separated by at least one hundred (100) feet as
measured diagonally from center of sign. In no case
shall the permitted monument sign be placed closer
than one hundred (100) feet to any other sign
(monument or freestanding/pole) located on the same
side of street.
(iii) The sign area and size are determined as
provided in § (5)(a) above.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
(6) Wall Signs. Wall signs should be the primary
form of identification for business uses in the
City. Each business is entitled to one wall sign if
the following criteria are met:
(a) The sign may not occupy more than 10% or
six hundred (600) square feet, which ever is less,
of the flat wall area. If a sloping facade or roof
exists, the sign may not exceed 10% or six
hundred (600) square feet, which ever is less, of
that area. A wall sign may not use a combination
of both flat and sloping areas in calculating the
10%. On a sloping roof the vertical projection is
used to calculate area not actual length of the
slope.
(b) The 10% area of the primary wall and the 5%
area of all secondary walls may be divided into
more than one sign under the following
requirements and restrictions:
Requirements:
(i) The sign package blends with the aesthetics of
the building and surrounding natural and
manmade environment.
(ii) The sign package color, style, size, scale and
proportion enhances the exterior of the building
and does not place too much bulk and external
distractions on the exterior of the building.
(iii) The numbers of signs are appropriate to the
scale of the building.
Restrictions:
(i) The maximum number of wall signs on any
given wall, including multi-tenant buildings, shall
be seven (7). For the purpose of this ordinance, a
sign will be considered a complete phrase and the
suggested layout of the sign package (i.e., the
individual words may either be lumped together
as one phrase to equal 1 sign, or spread out to be
many different signs, the as “1 Hour Photo”
would be considered one sign.)
(ii) The maximum number of multiple wall signs
on any given wall shall be limited to seven (7).
The maximum square footage shall be limited be
six hundred (600) square feet or 10% of the wall
(5% if a secondary wall), whichever is less.
(iii) Multi-tenant buildings may receive a
conditional use permit so that the building may
exceed the maximum number of signs to
accommodate the additional sign if the Planning
Commission judges the additional sign to be
consistent with the criteria set forth above.
(iv) Multiple wall signs shall utilize individual
lettering and logos only. No multiple cabinet signs or
combination of cabinet and individual lettering signs
shall be approved. It is encouraged that the use of
multiple materials and lettering styles, the as exposed
neon, different type styles, and use of logos in
conjunction with the lettering be implemented.
(b) Painted signs applied directly to any building
face, must have specific approval of the Community
Development Director.
(c) Wall signs with changeable copy, reader board, or
electronic message capability are not allowed.
(d) Buildings or businesses with exposure on the
side(s) and front may choose which wall to mount
their sign upon. Signs are allowed on the rear of the
building with Planning Commission approval.
(e) Owners of buildings that have small offices
inside, accessory and/or secondary to the main use
are required to create a building identification sign
instead of trying to obtain signage for every tenant.
This is especially true for buildings with two or more
levels.
(f) Wall signs on sloping roofs shall be erected so as
to appear as a sign applied to a similarly vertical wall
surface and finished in a manner that the visual
appearance from all sides is the that they appear to be
part of the building itself. All signs shall be installed
or erected in a manner that there is no visual support
structure the as guy wires or braces.
(g) No part of any wall sign or of the sign structure
shall project above or below the highest or lowest
part of the wall upon which the sign is mounted or
painted.
(h) No wall sign including any light box or structural
part shall project more than eighteen (18) inches from
the face of the building to which it is attached.
(i) Upon review and approval by the Planning
Commission, a business may request the placement
of a business identification sign upon a wall not
otherwise located above the named business. When
reviewing the requests, the Planning Commission
shall consider the following criteria:
(i) The proposed sign is in close proximity to the
identified business.
(ii) The proposed sign square footage is counted
against the allowable square footage for the wall
upon which it is mounted (i.e., if a business who
occupies the space permits another business to share
the wall for signage, the additional sign will be
included when calculating the permitted amount of
square footage for the primary business).
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
(iii) That the proposed sign comply with
established sign theme requirements for the
shopping center upon which the sign is located.
(7) Off-premise Billboard Signs. Off-premise
billboard signs are not permitted at any location
within Clinton City.
(8) Suspended Signs. Suspended signs used in
place of wall signs are allowed if the architecture
of the building or planned center lends itself to
that design and a sign theme is submitted and
approved by the Planning Commission. The
following shall apply:
(a) The Director must review any proposal for a
suspended sign or under-canopy sign for
compatibility with the building.
(b) Any sign may not exceed 15% of the flat wall
of the tenant space.
(c) No sign may project beyond the outside limit
of the arcade, marquee, or canopy or facade to
which they are attached.
(d) Any sign must have at least an eight (8) foot
clearance above the sidewalk or seven (7) feet
above any landscaped area.
(e) There must be a minimum horizontal distance
of five (5) feet on both sides between suspended
signs.
(9) Awning Signs. Awning signs are allowed
only under the following circumstances:
(a) The Director may approve any applicant for
an awning sign which fully complies with sign
standards.
(b) Awning signs in planned centers must be
designed to conform to an approved sign theme.
(c) No awning signs will be allowed on multitenant
buildings or in planned centers unless the
building or center has consistent treatment.
(d) Awning signs shall be limited to single story
buildings or to the first level only of multi-story
buildings.
(e) Awning signs must function as true awnings
by being placed over a doorway, window, or
walkway to protect from the elements.
(f) Awning signs are not allowed on or above
sloping or mansard roof.
(g) The area of awning signs shall be a maximum
of 10% of the primary wall upon which the sign is
mounted. Awning signs for secondary walls are
limited to 5% of the wall area.
(h) Area of copy/logo on awnings shall be limited to
40% of the awning. Illuminated signs on other sides
shall be permitted.
(i) Awning signs shall conform to all provisions of
the International Building Code governing such
structures.
(j) Illuminated (backlit), translucent, vinyl awnings
are not permitted. Translucent letters or accents sewn
into opaque canvas or acrylic awnings are permitted.
(k) Awning signs shall not project out from the wall
more than eight (8) feet, nor less than two (2) feet. In
the case of entrance canopies the awning may project
out from the building over a walkway and must lead
to a bona fide business entrance. Canopies will be
permitted if they are compatible with the architecture
of the building.
(l) Awning signs shall not project above the roof line,
defined as the highest part of the vertical wall.
(m) Awning signs shall maintain a minimum
clearance of seven (7) feet to the bottom of the
valance and eight (8) feet to the frame above the
sidewalk and comply with all other clearance
requirements.
(n) Awning signs shall be maintained in a clean, safe
and attractive condition. Failure to do so will result in
revocation of the sign permit.
(10) Canopies (Gas Stations). Signs for canopies
over gas islands are regulated as follows:
(a) Sign copy, corporate logos, etc. may be a
maximum of 10% of one face of the canopy.
(b) Up to 3 sides of the canopy may be used for
signs.
(c) The height to the top of the canopy may not
exceed twenty (20) feet from grade and no canopy
fascia may exceed four (4) feet in height.
(d) Individual letters, logos, or symbols may not
exceed four (4) feet in height or project out from the
surface of the canopy more than eighteen (18) inches
or project above or below the canopy face.
(e) Gas price signs are allowed on the monument sign
or below the canopy over the pumps. One double
faced sign for each type of fuel sold is allowed per
gas island with a maximum of 4 sets per station. Area
of the sign may not exceed four (4) square feet each.
(11) Menu Board: Menu boards locations for drive-in
restaurants are to be reviewed and approved by the
Planning Commission at site plan review. The
following shall apply to menu boards:
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
(a) Only two (2) menu boards are allowed per drive
through site and must be located behind the front
landscaped setback area.
(b) The Menu Board shall be located so that
lighting shall not have an adverse affect to traffic on
the public way. The rear and sides of menu boards
should be screened from the public way. The rear
of the menu board may be established as another
menu board however shall not be used as an
additional sign.
(c) Because there are many variables associated
with the size of a menu board the size of the menu
board may be limited by the Department based
upon location, visibility from the public way,
screening, lighting, proportionality with structures
on site and other structures in the area. The size
shall not cause a concern for safety of individuals or
vehicles.
(d) The Planning Commission shall give
consideration to aesthetics and screening from the
public right-of-way.
History 4/14, 8/14
(12) Subdivision Identification Signs.
(a) Two subdivision identification signs per entry
from a collector or sub-arterial or arterial street
per neighborhood, subdivision, or development,
not to exceed four (4) feet in height and twenty
(20) square feet in total sign area: OR
(b) A sign, masonry wall, landscaping and other
similar materials or features may be combined to
form a display for neighborhood or tract
identification. If the sign is to be a free-standing
structure it must be monument sign and must
comply with the provisions set forth in this
chapter. Any sign or display must be located so it
is not in the clear view area.
(13) Two identification signs per apartment or
condominium complex, not to exceed six (6) feet
in height and twenty-four (24) square feet in total
sign area.
(14) For permitted nonresidential uses, including
churches and synagogues, one freestanding sign,
not to exceed six (6) feet in height and forty-eight
(48) square feet in sign area and have a minimum
of a ten (10) foot setback from any public rightof-
way. One wall sign not to exceed twelve (12)
square feet in sign area.
24-4-3 Temporary Signs. Standards for
Temporary Signs. Temporary signs shall not be
placed in or over a public right-of-way, may not
flash, blink, spin, rotate, block traffic visibility,
constitute a vehicular or pedestrian traffic hazard, or
cause a public nuisance of any kind. They shall not
be attached to telephone poles, fences, or trees. They
must be firmly secured to the building. Temporary
signs may be attached to existing permanent signs
only for the grand opening period. Temporary signs
may cover or obscure an existing permanent sign
only if the business has changed hands or changed
names. No off-premise temporary signs are allowed
except those specifically noted and regulated for real
estate purposes or otherwise noted in the ordinance.
(1) Temporary Signs Requiring a Permit.
(a) Grand Opening Signs. Temporary signs
announcing the initial opening of a business, or the
relocation, or change of ownership of an existing
business may be allowed provided that the event shall
not continue for more than sixty (60) days and that
the permit is issued within the first year of operation.
There shall be no more than one (1) sign allowed per
business. Signage shall be secured to the building.
The sign must comply with general size and location
standards for signage in this Chapter and must be
removed at the end of the 60 day period. A temporary
sign permit is required.
(b) NOTE: "Now Open", "Grand Opening", "New
Location of....", "New Ownership," etc. are
appropriate messages for the signs.
(2) Special Promotion Periods. A business may apply
for three [3] special promotion periods during the
calendar year. Each period may not exceed seven (7)
days in length. The periods may be combined to run
consecutively. Signage shall be secured to the
building.
(3) NOTE: Special product, price, or service
advertising are appropriate during these periods.
(4) Going Out of Business/Bankruptcy Period. A
business may apply for a special permit in order to
facilitate the liquidation of inventory for a failing
business for a period not to exceed ninety (90)
calendar days. The permit will be allowed only once
for any business license. A temporary sign permit is
required. Signage shall be secured to the building.
(a) NOTE: Special product, price or service
advertising are appropriate during these periods.
(5) Temporary Signs Allowed Without a Permit.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
(a) Holiday Periods. A business may advertise a
special service, product or sale during the
following holiday periods without a permit:
(b) The placement of signs associated with
produce sales, where the produce is grown onsite,
is limited to the following: one (1) sign, four
(4) square feet in size, and secured on the
property where the produce is grown. Sign may
be on-premises during the harvest season for the
produce sold.
(6) Directional Signs for Subdivisions/Planned
Unit Developments. These signs do not need a
permit. However, written permission of the
property owner must be obtained and presented to
the Community Development Director before
they are erected.
(a) Three directional signs may be allowed for a
developer to guide traffic to the site and should
contain only the name, address, and direction of
the development. They are limited to sixteen (16)
square feet in area and eight (8) feet in height and
must be placed entirely upon private property with
the permission of the owner. Two additional sixteen
(16) square foot directional signs may be allowed by
the Director if a special need or unusual circumstance
can be demonstrated. They may not encroach upon
any public right-of-way and may not be located
within the sixty (60) foot traffic visibility triangle on
corners.
Holiday Period Permitted Display
Time
Presidents Day –
February
5 days
Easter – March or
April
5 days
Memorial Day –
May
5 days
July 4th 5 days
July 24th 5 days
Labor Day –
September
5 days
Thanksgiving –
November
7 days
Hanukkah,
Christmas, New
Years
23 days starting Dec.
15 and ending Jan 2.
NOTE: One banner sign is allowed during
these periods. The sign must be mounted
on the building. The sign must be
removed by the end of the first working
day after the holiday period ends.
(b) The signs shall be removed within 2 years of the
issuance of the first building permit in the project or
if the lots are sold out before 2 years immediately
upon sale of the last lot. An extension may be granted
by the Community Development Director if a
substantial number of the lots have not been sold at
the end of the 2-year period.
24-4-4 Flags/Banners Requiring Approval.
(1) In addition to the above mentioned requirements
businesses that are considered to have permanent
outdoor retail space may, with a special one time
permit issued by the Planning Commission, use flags
or banners on any number of parking area light poles
or on a single pole in conjunction with governmental
flags. The Planning Commission or Department staff
shall use the following criteria for
approval/revocation of additional flags and/or
banners:
(a) The applicant shall present to the Planning
Commission drawings, representations or other types
of visual aides to ensure that what is approved will
accomplish the intent of the Planning Commission.
(b) The applicant shall provide sizes and numbers of
all flags or banners.
(c) The proposal must be in harmony with
neighboring development in terms of size, color and
volume.
(d) The Department staff has the right to revoke this
permit if the applicant has misrepresented any aspect
of the proposal or the flags/banners become tattered,
discolored or the applicant has violated any
provisions of this code. Appeals of a determination
by the Department shall be heard by the Planning
Commission.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
Chapter 5. Nonconforming Signs
24-1-1 Nonconformity
24-5-1 Nonconformity.
(1) Regulation, Containment, and Elimination. In
order to minimize confusion and unfair
competitive disadvantage to businesses which are
required to satisfy the current sign ordinance
standards, the City intends to apply firm
regulation of existing nonconforming signs with a
view to their eventual elimination. This goal shall
be achieved by strictly construing limits on
change, expansion, alteration, or restoration of
abandoned signs.
(2) Within forty-five (45) calendar days after
vacation of a business, any on-site nonconforming
signs must be removed or brought into
compliance by the property owner. If removal
does not occur, Clinton City may have the entire
nonconforming sign (both face and structure)
removed through the processes specified in § 24-
9-2 below. An abandoned sign may not regain
any legal nonconforming status later, even if the
original business reoccupies the property.
(3) Existing signs which do not conform to the
specific provisions of this title may be eligible for
the designation "legal nonconforming" provided
that:
(a) The original business remains at that location;
and
(b) The Director determines that the signs were
constructed in accordance with the existing
ordinance at the time and have been properly
maintained and do not in any way endanger the
public.
(4) A nonconforming sign shall not be reconstructed,
raised, moved, placed, extended or enlarged unless
the sign is changed so as to conform to all provisions
of this title. On premise non-conforming signs which
are destroyed by natural causes i.e., earthquakes,
floods, winds etc., exceeding 60% of the signs true
value must be brought into conformance. Nonconforming
signs shall be allowed to have routine
maintenance including the repair or replacement of
the sign face by an existing business but shall not be
allowed to increase the height, size or the location
thereof. If a business applies for an increase of
square footage other than for temporary signs all
signs on the site shall be brought into conformance
with the provisions of this title.
(5) The following alterations are on existing
nonconforming signs are permittable:
(a) Face changes in nonconforming multi-tenant
signs: and,
(b) Face changes on nonconforming signs by an
existing business; and,
(c) Copy changes in nonconforming permanent signs
which were originally approved by the City with a
changeable copy feature.
(6) Appeal. Any person who has been ordered to
remove an abandoned sign or who has grievance with
the decision of the Director related to a
nonconforming sign may appeal the decision of the
Director as outlined in § 24-9-3 below.
History 4/14
(7)
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
Chapter 6. Construction Specifications
24-6-1 Inspection Required
24-6-2 Compliance with Building and
24-2 Electrical Codes
24-6-3 Anchoring
24-6-4 Additional Construction Specifications
24-6-5 Detached Signs
24-6-6 Moving Signs
24-6-7 Other Requirements
24-6-8 Measurement of Regulated Sign Area
24-6-1 Inspection Required.
(1) Required Inspections. A footing and final
inspection shall be required for all signs.
(2) Re-inspection. A re-inspection may be
accomplished of any sign for which a permit was
issued but which upon primary inspection was not
built in complete compliance with the regulations
of this chapter.
24-6-2 Compliance with Building and
Electrical Codes. All signs shall be constructed
in accordance with the requirements of the
Uniform Construction Coded adopted by the State
relating to design, structural members and
connections. All metal, wire cable supports,
footings and braces shall have engineering
provided by an engineer licensed in the state of
Utah. Signs shall also comply with the additional
construction standards as set forth in this code.
24-6-3 Anchoring.
(1) No sign shall be suspended by nonrigid
attachments that will allow the sign to swing in a
wind.
(2) All freestanding signs shall have selfsupporting
structures erected on or permanently
attached to concrete foundations.
(3) All temporary signs on display shall be
securely fastened to the building.
24-6-4 Additional Construction
Specifications.
(1) No signs shall be erected, constructed or
maintained so as to obstruct any fire escape,
required exit, window or door opening used as a
means of egress.
(2) No sign shall be attached in any form, shape,
or manner which will interfere with any opening
required for ventilation.
(3) Signs shall be located in a manner as to
maintain horizontal and vertical clearance of all
overhead electrical conductors in accordance with
National Electrical Code specifications, depending on
voltages concerned. However, in no instance shall a
sign be erected or constructed within eight (8) feet of
any electrical power line conductor, or service drop
or any communication line, conductor, or service
drop.
(4) No signs shall be erected, constructed, or
maintained so as to obstruct vision along any public
right-of-way.
24-6-5 Detached Signs.
(1) Number of panels. A detached sign may consist
of more than one sign panel provided all sign panels
are attached to one common integrated sign structure
and any additional panels must meet minimum
clearance as designated elsewhere in this Title. The
total area of all the panels shall not exceed the
maximum allowable sign area specified for a
detached sign on the parcel. Where a sign message
consists of separated or individual letters, modules, or
symbols, each portion of the sign message shall not
be considered as a one-sign panel. In these cases, a
single continuous perimeter completely surrounding
the sign message shall be utilized to determine its
sign area.
(2) Detached signs required setbacks. No detached
sign shall project over a public right-of-way.
Detached signs shall have a two (2) foot setback from
all property lines. The two (2) foot setback is
determined from the leading edge of the detached
sign. Where a detached sign has a two (2) foot or
more base width from ground level to a height of ten
(10) feet, the base of the sign shall be located a
minimum of ten (10) feet from any front property line
and shall not be located in any clear view area.
(3) Detached signs: Minimum clearance. A detached
sign shall have a minimum clearance of ten (10) feet
between the ground surface and the bottom of the
sign, provided that the Community Development
Director may reduce this clearance if the sign is not
illuminated with exposed neon tubing and is located
in an area not accessible to pedestrian or vehicular
traffic or if an acceptable site feature is constructed to
protect the pedestrian and vehicular traffic. The
minimum clearance shall not be reduced where a
traffic hazard may be created. In no case shall this
clearance be reduced to less than six (6) feet.
24-6-6 Moving Signs. No sign, rotating sign or
any portion thereof shall be permitted which rotates
more than eight (8) complete revolutions every sixty
(60) seconds.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
24-6-7 Other Requirements.
(1) All on-premise freestanding signs must have
the structural supports covered or concealed with
pole covers (pylon covers) at least thirty-six (36)
inches wide. The actual structural supports shall
not be exposed, and the covers must be
architecturally and aesthetically designed to
match the building.
(2) Foundations. All signs must be permanently
mounted on foundations and footings which
conform to the State adopted Construction Codes.
(3) Landscaping. All freestanding or monument
detached signs installed in Clinton City must be
incorporated into a landscape design or planter
box. Exceptions to this rule must be approved by
the Planning Commission. The Planning
Commission must also approve any permanent
removal of landscaping for the purpose of
situating a sign.
(4) Pedestal Required. All monument signs must
have at least a one (1) foot opaque pedestal
designed as part of the foundation which conceals
any pole support. The pedestal should run at least
50% of the horizontal length of the sign, and there
may not be any exposed space between the
pedestal and the ground or landscaped area. The
Planning Director may review and approve/deny
any variation to the pedestal base requirement.
(5) Lighting. The light from the illumination of
signs shall be carefully directed so that the light is
not obtrusive or a nuisance to adjacent properties
particularly residential areas.
(6) Building Identification. All buildings shall be
identified with a numbered or lettered street
address as outlined in Title 25, Chapter 14.
(a) Residential address numbers shall be at least
four (4) inches in height.
(b) Commercial and building address numbers
shall be at least six (6) inches in height or as
indicated during site plan approval depending on
height and size of building and distance from the
public way.
(c) Commercial unit addresses shall be a
minimum of four (4) inches in height.
24-6-8 Measurement of Regulated Sign Area.
(1) Wall Signs. Sign copy mounted or painted on
a background panel or area distinctly painted,
textured or constructed, as a background for the
sign copy shall be measured as that area contained
within the outside dimensions of the background
panel or surface. Any illuminated bands or
illuminated structures which contain sign copy,
corporate logos, etc. are by definition wall signs in
their entirety and may not exceed 15% of the wall
area. However, illuminated bands on canopies
covering gasoline pump islands shall be regulated per
this Chapter. For sign copy mounted as individual
letters and/or graphics against a wall or fascia of a
building or other structure that has not been painted,
textured or otherwise altered to provide a distinctive
background for the sign copy, the area shall be
defined as the area enclosed by the smallest six-sided
polygon that will enclose all sign area. For sign copy
on an illuminated sign or illuminated architectural
element of a building, the entire illuminated surface
or illuminated architectural element which contains
sign copy shall be counted as sign area.
(2) Monument Signs. The regulated area of a
monument sign shall include all parts of the sign or
structure that contains identification (words of
symbols) and information. The height of a ground
sign shall be the distance from the highest point of
the sign to the height of the street curb or sidewalk.
(3) Multiple Face Signs (including but not limited to
freestanding or monument signs).
(a) Single Panel. Measure the area of the single face
only.
(b) Double Panel. If the interior angle between the
top two faces is 45 degrees or less, the area to be
measured will be the area of one face only. If the
angle between the two sign faces is greater than 45
degrees, the sign area to be measured will be the sum
of the areas of the two faces.
(c) Three or More. The sign area shall be the sum of
the areas of the three or more faces.
(d) Freestanding Signs. The regulated area of a
freestanding sign shall include all parts of the sign or
structure that contains identification (words or
symbols) and information. The height of a
freestanding sign shall be the distance from the
highest point of the sign to the top of the curb or
sidewalk or crown of the street when there is no curb
or sidewalk.
(e) Non-planer Signs. For spherical, free-form,
sculptural, or other non-planer signs, the sign area
shall be the sum of the areas of the four vertical sides
of the smallest polyhedron that will encompass the
sign structure.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
Chapter 7. Billboards
24-7-1 Purpose and Intent
24-7-2 Cap on Number of Billboards
24-7-1 Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose
and intent of this chapter to limit the number of
billboards to the total number of existing
billboards. This chapter further provides for the
reasonable regulation of billboards with the intent
of limiting negative impacts, enhancing the
aesthetics of existing and new billboards and
implementing goals and policies promoting safety,
the protection of property values, aesthetics, the
maintenance of gateways, views and vistas that
enhance the city and further the applicable elements
of the city's General Plan.
24-7-2 Cap on Number of Billboards. The
number of billboards allowed in the city shall be
limited to the number of billboards that exist in the
city as of the date of this ordinance.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
Chapter 8. Administration and
Enforcement
24-8-1 Code Administration
24-8-2 Applications for Permits
24-8-3 Permit Fees
24-8-4 Issuance and Denial
24-8-5 Permit Conditions, Refunds and
Penalties
24-8-6 Inspection upon Completion
24-8-7 Variances
24-8-1 Code Administration.
(1) This code shall be administered by the
Department overseen by the Director. The
Department is authorized to process applications
for permits and variances and enforce and carry
out all provisions of this code, both in letter and
in spirit. The Director or his representative is
authorized to promulgate regulations and
procedures consistent with this function.
(2) The Director is empowered, upon presentation
of proper credentials, to enter or inspect any
building, structure, or premises in the city for the
purpose of inspection of a sign and its structural
and electrical connections to ensure compliance
with applicable codes and ordinances. These
inspections shall be carried out during business
hours unless an emergency exists.
24-8-2 Application for Permits.
(1) Application for a permit for the erection,
alteration, or relocation of a sign shall be made to
the Department upon a form provided by the
Department and shall include the following
information:
(a) Name and address of the owner of the sign.
(b) Street address or location of the property on
which the sign is to be located, along with the
name, phone number and address of the property
owner.
(c) Contractor information, to include license
number, phone number and address.
(d) Value of sign.
(e) The type of sign or sign structure as defined in
this title.
(f) For monument or freestanding sign:
(i) Number of acres and length of lineal frontage
of property.
(ii) A site plan showing the relationship of sign to
buildings, property lines, setback from public rightsof-
way, intersections, easements and driveways along
with the locations and square footage areas of all
existing signs on the same premises and adjacent
premises within one hundred (100) feet.
(iii) Engineered specifications and scale drawing
showing the materials, design, dimensions, structural
supports, method of attachment and electrical
components of the proposed sign.
(g) For temporary signs:
(i) Length of period of display, type of request.
(ii) Plot plan showing relationship of sign(s) to
buildings, property lines, setback from public rightsof-
way, intersections, easements and driveways.
(h) For wall signs:
(i) Scale drawings showing square foot dimensions of
both the building and the sign, sign composition, and
type of illumination.
(ii) A profile drawing of how the sign will appear
from the street/parking area and on the building.
(iii) Detail sign construction and engineered
attachment including electrical plan.
24-8-3 Permit Fees. All applications for permits
filed with the Department shall be accompanied by a
payment of the initial permit fee for each sign
according to a fee schedule set by resolution of the
Clinton City Council.
24-8-4 Issuance and Denial.
(1) Where site plan approval by the Planning
Commission is required and the signage is required
or included as part of the package an application for a
permit may not be submitted until the site plan is
approved.
(2) The Director shall issue a permit for the erection,
alteration, or relocation of a sign within thirty (30)
days of receipt of a valid application, provided that
the sign complies with all applicable laws and
regulations of the city. In all applications, where a
matter of interpretation arises, the more specific
definition or higher standard shall prevail.
(3) When a permit is denied by the Department, a
written notice to the applicant along with a brief
statement of the reasons for denial. The Director may
suspend or revoke an issued permit for any false
statement or misrepresentation of fact in the
application.
24-8-5 Permit Conditions, Refunds and
Penalties.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
(1) If no inspections have been made and no work
authorized by the permit has been performed, the
permit fee may be refunded to the applicant upon
request, provided that the permit is returned to the
Department within thirty (30) days of issuance.
An administrative fee, as set by Council and
published in the Clinton City Fee Schedule will
be deducted from any refund.
(2) If any sign is installed or placed on any
property prior to receipt of a permit, the specified
permit fee shall be doubled. However, payment of
the doubled fee shall not relieve any person of
any other requirements or penalties prescribed in
this title.
24-8-6 Inspection upon Completion.
(1) Any person installing, altering, or relocating a
sign for which a permit has been issued shall
notify the Department upon completion of the
work. The Director may require a final inspection,
including an electrical inspection and inspection
of footings on freestanding signs.
(2) The Director may require in writing upon
issuance of a permit that he be notified for
inspection prior to the installation of certain signs.
24-8-7 Variances. In obtaining a permit, the
applicant may apply to the Director for a variance
from certain requirements of this title. A variance
may be granted by the board of adjustment where the
literal application of the code would create a
particular hardship for the sign user and the following
criteria are met:
(1) There is something unique about the property and
a literal application of the code would not allow the
property to be used at its highest and best use as
zoned.
(2) The granting of the requested variance would not
be materially detrimental to the property owners in
the vicinity.
(3) Hardship caused the sign user under a literal
interpretation of the code is due to conditions unique
to that property and does not apply generally to the
city.
(4) The granting of the variance would not be
contrary to the general objectives of this code.
(5) In granting a variance, the board of adjustment
may attach additional requirements necessary to carry
out the spirit and purpose of this code in the public
interest.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
Chapter 9. Violations
24-9-1 Violations
24-9-2 Removal of Signs by the City
24-9-3 Appeals
24-9-1 Violations.
(1) Any sign not expressly allowed by this
ordinance is prohibited. The Community Director,
City Code Enforcement Officer or their authorized
representatives shall be vested with the duty of
enforcing the title.
(2) Any person, firm or corporation, whether as
principal, agent, employee or otherwise, violating,
causing or permitting the violation of the
provisions of this title shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and shall be punishable as provided
by law. In addition to a fine or jail sentence, the
violator may be ordered to abate the condition
which is a violation or the violator may have
his/her Clinton City business license suspended or
revoked. Any person, firm or corporation who
violates this title shall be deemed to be guilty of a
separate offense for each and every day during
which any portion of any violation of this title is
committed, continued or permitted by any person,
firm or corporation, and shall be punished as
provided in this title.
(3) When, in the opinion of the Director, a
violation exists, the Director or their
representative shall issue one or more of the
following notification procedures:
(a) For signs as outlined in § (8) the sign will be
removed and verbal notification will be given to
the apparent sign owner when possible.
(b) Verbal notice will be given to the property
owner requesting immediate removal of the sign
or requesting permission for the City to remove
the sign. If the sign is allowed to be removed and
did not belong to the property owner notice shall
be given as outlined in § (a) above.
(c) A written order to the alleged violator. The
order shall specify those sections of the code of
which the sign may be in violation and shall state
that the individual has six (6) days from the date
of the letter in which to correct the alleged
violation. Appeal to written order may be made as
outlined in § 24-9-3 below
(d) Citation issued by an appointed officer of the
City stating violation of this Title and ordering
appearance in Justice Court.
(4) If, upon inspection, the Director finds that a sign
is structurally, materially or electrically defective, or
in any way endangers the public, the Director shall
issue a written order to the owner of the sign and
occupant of the premises stating the nature of the
violation and requiring them to repair or remove the
sign within fifteen (15) days of the date of the order.
The Director may stipulate a shorter time period
depending upon the urgency of the situation.
(5) Notice of violations is deemed to have been
given when notice is mailed or given to the property
owner or occupant of the property upon which the
sign is located. Notice shall be mailed to the owner
of the property on which the sign is located as shown
on the Davis County Recorder’s web site. If known,
the notice may also be mailed or delivered to the
owner of the sign and the occupant of the property.
(6) Any person having an interest in the sign or the
property may appeal as outlined in § 24-9-3 below.
(7) In cases of emergency, the Director may cause
the immediate removal of a dangerous or defective
sign without notice. Signs removed in this manner
must present a hazard to public safety.
(8) If, a sign is placed within a public right-of-way,
utility poles, light poles, traffic signs, or on any City
owned property, (snipe signs) without a permit being
issued by the Department the City Code
Enforcement Officer, or his designee may remove
the sign without further notice to any implied owner
or business.
(9) Disposal of Signs: Fees. Any sign removed by
the enforcement officer pursuant to the provisions of
this title shall become the property of the City and
may be disposed of in any manner deemed
appropriate by the City. If a cost assessment is
adopted by resolution by the City Council and
published in the Clinton City Consolidated Fee
Schedule, costs shall be assessed to the property
owner or other responsible party and collected as
outlined in § 24-9-2 below.
24-9-2 Procedure for Recoup of City Funds.
(1) Removal of signs as outlined in § 24-9-1(8) will
be immediate and notification shall be as outlined in
§ 24-9-1(3)(a)and 24-9-1(3)(b) and if the notified
party wishes to redeem the sign a fee will be
imposed as set by Council, and published in the
Consolidated Fee Schedule. Signs will be retained
for the period of one week from the time of
notification.
(2) The Director may cause the removal of an illegal
sign, not falling into the category outlined in § (1)
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 24 Signs and Advertising Devices
above in cases of emergency, or for failure to
comply with this Title or a written order of
removal or repair. After removal or demolition of
the sign, a notice shall be mailed to the property
owner stating the nature of the work, the date on
which it was performed and demanding payment
of the costs as certified by the Director together
with an administrative fee as set by the City
Council and published in the Consolidated Fee
Schedule.
(3) If the amount specified in the notice is not paid
within thirty (30) days of the notice the City shall
file a tax lien with the Davis County Assessor’s
Office against the property for the costs outlined
in § (2) above.
(4) The owner of the property upon which the sign
is located shall be presumed to be the owner of all
signs thereon unless facts to the contrary are
brought to the attention of the Director, as in the
case of a leased sign.
(5) For purposes of removal, the definition of sign
shall include all sign embellishments and structures
designed specifically to support the sign.
24-9-3 Appeals.
(1) The Director’s decision may be appealed to the
City Council within fifteen (15) days of receipt of
the Director's response pertaining to:
(a) Denying a permit; or,
(b) Any variance not granted; or,
(c) In alleging a violation of this code.
(2) Any action being appealed shall be held in
abeyance pending the decision of the council or
board.
(3) If there is not an appeal filed within the fifteen
(15) day period or the City Council upholds the
determination of the Director the sign may be
removed in accordance with § 24-9-2
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
TITLE 25. STREETS, SIDEWALKS
AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. Repealed
Chapter 3. Repealed
Chapter 4. Repealed
Chapter 5. Repealed
Chapter 6. General Provisions
Chapter 7. Definitions
Chapter 8. Administration
Chapter 9. Permit
Chapter 10. Excavation
Chapter 11. Obstructing Streets and
Sidewalks
Chapter 12. Depositing of Water
Chapter 13. Driveway Construction
Chapter 14. Street and Address Numbering
Chapter 15. Street Trees
Chapter 16. Park Strip
Chapter 17. Newsracks (Moved to Title 15,
Chapter 18)
Chapter 18. Skateboards and Roller Skates
Chapter 19. Crosswalks
Chapter 20. Special Events
Chapter 21. Miscellaneous Provisions
Chapter 1. Repealed
Chapter 2. Repealed
Chapter 3. Repealed
Chapter 4. Repealed
Chapter 5. Repealed
Chapter 6. General Provisions
25-6-1 Statement of Purpose
25-6-2 Application
25-6-3 Adoption
25-6-4 Fees
25-6-5 Escrows
25-6-6 Warrantees
25-6-7 Penalty for Violations
25-6-1 Statement of Purpose. The purpose of this
Title is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the
Clinton City residents by establishing, and
controlling the systems outlined in this Title as well
as setting up procedures related to management, and
outside influences upon the systems. The objectives
of this Title are:
(1) To protect human life, health and the aesthetics of
the City;
(2) In the interest of public convenience, safety, and
welfare;
(3) To prohibit illicit damage and construction within
the established rights-of-ways of the City;
(4) To manage and control construction within the
established rights-of-ways of the City;
(5) To protect the environment;
(6) To effectively utilize public money for costly
public works and infrastructure projects;
(7) To successfully monitor new construction thus
minimizing the need for repair and maintenance work
associated with poor construction techniques;
(8) To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(9) To minimize damage to public facilities within
and around public easements, rights-of-ways, streets
and trails, water, sewer, storm and utilities, water, gas
mains, electric, telephone and cable lines, as well as
bridges located in and servicing the City;
(10) To insure the directed development of
infrastructure within the central business area of the
City thus promoting a stable environment for
commercial growth and revenue;
(11) To guide, regulate and control the design,
construction, use, and maintenance of any
development or other activity that results in
excavation within the City;
(12) To establish legal authority to carry out all
inspection, surveillance and monitoring procedures
necessary to ensure compliance with this Title; and,
(13) To establish guidelines that will assist in
developing a plan for capital improvements that is
proportional to the impacts created by growth and
development.
25-6-2 Application. This Title shall apply to all
easements, rights-of-way, streets, bridges, trails, and
improvements associated with the systems
established in this Title generated on any developed
and undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
an authorized enforcement agency.
25-6-3 Adoption. All rules established in this
Streets and Sidewalks Ordinance and regulations
related to easements, rights-of-ways, streets,
sidewalks, trails, and related items hereinafter set
forth are enacted and adopted and made a part of the
City Code. Rules, regulations, and schedules adopted
in connection therewith may be cited and designated
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
as the “Streets Code” by reference to the respective
Sections thereof.
25-6-4 Fees. The Clinton City Council shall set the
amount of fees required to facilitate the actions
outlined in this Title, from time to time, by resolution
and published in the Clinton City Consolidated Fee
Schedule. Consideration of fees shall include but
not be limited to those needed to cover the cost of
administration, inspections, reviews, publications,
and related issues.
25-6-5 Escrows. Escrows to cover the cost of
restoring streets, curb, sidewalk or other public
property to its original condition or to cover the cost
of improvements shall be as established in Chapter 4
of Title 26, together with the incidental expenses in
connection therewith.
25-6-6 Warrantees. The Clinton City Council
shall set the length of time and funds amount of any
warrantee required to facilitate the actions outlined in
this Title following the procedures outlined in § 25-6-
4.
25-6-7 Penalty for Violations. Any person
violating any of the provisions of the City streets
code is guilty of a Class "C" misdemeanor, unless
designated otherwise.
History; 3/82,9/84, 5/09, 03/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
Chapter 7. Definitions
25-7-1 Definitions
25-7-1 Definitions. Following are definitions as
they apply to this Title.
“City” means Clinton City.
“Community Development” means the Clinton City
Community Development Department.
“Community Development Director” means the
Director of the Clinton City Community
Development Department or his appointed
representative.
“Excavation” means any man-made change in
improved and unimproved real estate, including but
not limited to digging, boring, mining, dredging,
filling, grading, paving, or drilling operations.
“Inspector” means the Public Facilities Inspector
appointed by the Public Works Director or other
authorized representative of the City.
“Land Use Permit” or “Permit” means any Permit
issued by the City that authorizes the
applicant/recipient to conduct excavations,
construction or other activities within an easement,
right-of-way or street or in any area or development
that has improvements that are intended to be
accepted by the City or that will tie into a City
system.
“Manager” means the Clinton City Manager.
“Notice” means proper notification either in person
or mailed, if mailed the date of notice is three days
after the notice is mailed unless otherwise stated in
this Title.
“Officer” means the Code Enforcement Officer.
“Park Strip” or “Parkstrip” means that area
between the sidewalks and the curb of any street;
where there is no sidewalk, that area between the
edge of the roadway and the property line adjacent
thereto; land within the right-of-way for street and
utility related purposes; that portion of a street rightof-
way which is available for landscaping, and not
for curb, gutter, sidewalk or pavement. Park strip
also includes any area within a roadway which is not
open to vehicular travel.
“Person” means any individual, public or private
corporation, partnership, association, firm, trust,
estate, the state or any department, institution,
bureau, or agency thereof, any municipal corporation,
county, city, or other political subdivision of the
state, or any other legal entity whatsoever which is
recognized by the law as being subject to rights and
duties..
“Public Works” means the Clinton City Public
Works Department.
“Public Works Director” means the Director of the
Clinton City Public Works Department or his
appointed representative.
“Restoration Deposit” means a deposit paid to the
City in an amount calculated to restore the area where
a permit is issued to the condition or better condition
than before any work was accomplished.
"Right-of-Way" is any sidewalk, park strip, median
and street.
"Right-of-Way - Collector" the established right-ofway
for collector streets, as identified in the Clinton
City Transportation Master Plan, is four (4) rods wide
(66 feet), based upon records of the County Court
June 4, 1877, and reaffirmed by the County Records,
Book D, May 21, 1894.
"Roadway" means that portion of a street improved,
designed and ordinarily used for vehicular travel.
"Sidewalk" means any surface within a public rightof-
way provided for the exclusive use of pedestrians.
"Street" means that area dedicated to public use for
Public Street purposes and shall include, but not be
limited to, roadways, park strips and sidewalks.
“Working Hours” means normal work schedule and
working hours for the Clinton City Public Works
Department.
History; 3/82,9/84, 5/09, 03/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
Chapter 8. Administration
25-8-1 Regulations
25-8-2 Responsibility of Administration
25-8-3 Office of Primary Responsibility
25-8-4 The Public Works Director
25-8-5 Duties of the Street Supervisor
25-8-6 Policies
25-8-1 Regulations. The City Council shall have
power and retains the right to adopt regulations
controlling the manner and circumstances under
which the systems established by this Title may be
used, in addition to the regulatory provisions set forth
expressly in this Title. These regulations may
include, but are not limited to, the manner in which
excavations shall be made, connections or repairs to
service lines which may necessitate excavations on or
near and under sidewalks and the public ways, the
manner in which excavations shall be backfilled and
the type of materials that may be used.
25-8-2 Responsibility of Administration. The
Manager shall administer, implement, and enforce
the provisions of this Title. Any powers granted or
duties imposed upon the City may be delegated by
the Manager to persons acting in the beneficial
interest of or in the employ of the City.
25-8-3 Office of Primary Responsibility. The
Clinton City Public Works Department is the Office
of Primary Responsibility for review and proposing
changes to this Title. The Public Works Director
may call on other departments for assistance in
reviewing this Chapter.
25-8-4 The Public Works Director. The Public
Works Director shall appoint a person to act as the
Streets Supervisor over the systems outlined in this
Title.
25-8-5 Duties of the Street Supervisor. The
Public Works Director shall prescribe the
Supervisor’s duties, and direct the manner and
frequency of reporting on the City’s systems outlined
in this Title.
25-8-6 Policies. The Public Works and Community
Development Directors may adopt policies,
consistent with this Title and any resolutions passed
by the City Council, to assist in the application,
administration and interpretation of this Title and
systems established in this Title.
History; 03/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
Chapter 9. Permit
25-9-1 Permit Required
25-9-2 Permit – Cost – Deposit
25-9-3 Disposition of Permit Cost – Deposit
25-9-4 Permit – Application – Contents
25-9-5 Permit – Application - Drawings Required
When
25-9-6 As Built Drawings
25-9-7 Minimum Depth of Improvements
25-9-8 Permit – Engineer and Engineering
Required
25-9-9 Permit – Application - Legal Authority for
Excavation
25-9-10 Permit – Application -Work to Conform
to Application Description
25-9-11 Permit – Application - Approval
25-9-12 Permit - Issuance or Denial
25-9-13 Permit – Contents
25-9-14 Permit – Activation – Documentation Onsite
25-9-15 Permit – Expiration – Extension
25-9-16 Failure to Complete Work - City
Authority
25-9-17 Stop Work or Revocation of Permit
25-9-1 Permit Required. A Land Use Permit is
required for all of the following:
(1) Any excavation in or under the surface of any
public street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, or other public
place for the installation, repair or removal of any
pipe, conduit, duct, wire, cable, or tunnel, or for any
other purpose;
(2) Any alteration, cut, removal, replacement or
modification to the curb, gutter, or sidewalk within
any easement, street, or right-of-way; or,
(3) Any construction or modification of any driveway
entrance or exit connecting a street with private
property whether or not curb and sidewalk are
maintained. A building permit issued in conjunction
with an approved site plan indicating a driveway fills
this requirement.
(4) Any construction, modification, or repair, to the
City infrastructure within an easement, right-of-way
or street, or development that may be accepted by the
City, or any connection to a City system even though
it may be in compliance with Title 9, “Engineering
and Standard Specifications and Standard Drawings,”
as may be amended, or a set of “Approved for
Construction Drawings” issued by Community
Development.
(5) Any planting of Street, Park Strip or City
Required Trees unless the action is required as part of
a development approval process.
(6) Any removal of Street or City Required Trees
unless the action is required as part of a development
approval process.
25-9-2 Permit - Cost - Deposit. Applicants for the
Permit required by § 25-9-1 shall pay in conjunction
with any required permit fees, as established in § 25-
6-4, the following:
(1) A fee to cover administrative costs;
(2) A fee to cover inspection costs;
(3) A fee to cover any applicable seal coat costs; and,
(4) A restoration deposit based upon the impact that a
permit is anticipated to have upon City
improvements.
25-9-3 Disposition of Permit Cost – Deposit.
(1) If all required inspections have been called for
and accomplished and repairs and improvements are
accomplished, to the satisfaction of the Inspector, the
restoration deposit will be returned to the person
designated on the application within twenty (20) days
of passing final inspection.
(2) If inspections have not been performed or
restoration and improvements are not accomplished
as set by the permit requirements and this Title, to the
satisfaction of the Inspector, the Inspector shall take
one or more of the following actions:
(a) Require the applicant to take actions to have the
required inspections accomplished and/or
repair/replace the deficient improvements.
(b) If the applicant fails to comply with the
Inspector’s direction the restoration deposit shall be
seized as set in § 25-9-16 below. Applicant is
responsible for the cost of all reparations.
(3) Escrows for development shall be managed as
established in Chapter 4 of Title 26.
(4) Funds paid for permits that become void as set in
§ 25-9-15(1) due to lack of activation shall be
refunded less administrative costs and costs to cover
any inspections conducted by Public Works.
25-9-4 Permit - Application - Contents.
(1) The Permit to work within an easement, right-ofway
or street may be issued in conjunction with a
Permit dealing with other specific applications (i.e.
subdivision or site plan approval) or as a specific
Permit under this Chapter.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
(2) Public Works, before issuing a Permit required by
§ 25-9-1, shall require a written application, on forms
to be provided by the City, to be made and filed with
Public Works. In addition to other items that may be
required on the application the applicant may be
required to provide:
(a) The name and address of the person making the
application;
(b) The name, license number, and contact
information of the contractor doing the work;
(c) The location and area of the excavation intended
to be made;
(d) The purpose for which the excavation is to be
made and used;
(e) A traffic control plan describing traffic control
devices as required by the Manual of Uniform Traffic
Control Devices, as well as alternative pedestrian
routes when it is anticipated that sidewalks or trails
may be closed;
(f) A detour plan if required by Public Works
Director, approval of street closure is solely based
upon the needs of the City; and,
(g) Drawings, when required, as set forth by the City.
(3) Street tree permits shall have the information
indicated upon the permit as well as the width of the
park strip where the tree(s) are to be planted, the
species of trees being planted, and the distance from
street corners if applicable.
25-9-5 Permit - Application - Drawings Required
When.
(1) The application required by § 25-9-4 shall be
accompanied by a drawing(s) showing the location of
each proposed excavation and the dimensions thereof
and all other details as Public Works may require to
be shown upon the drawing.
(2) The filing of drawings may not be required for
repairs to existing sidewalk, curb, and gutter or curb
cuts, or where the City Standard Drawings will
provide adequate guidance.
(3) The filing of drawings shall not be required when
excavations are made for service connections or for
the location of trouble in conduits or pipes or making
repairs thereto.
(4) The Director will determine the number of copies
of drawings required. The number will depend upon
the operation requested and may require that the
application include an electronic set compatible with
the City computers.
25-9-6 As Built Drawings. As built drawings shall
be provided to the City by:
(1) Any person to have, lay, use or maintain any
pipelines in any street or other public place in the
City unless the person files, with Public Works, a
map showing the location of the pipelines in the
street or other public place. Maps shall contain a
legend showing the size, character and material used
in the construction of the pipelines.
(2) Any utility to lay, use or maintain any pipelines,
lines, poles, boxes, transformers or other accessory
for the use of the utility without obtaining a franchise
in accordance with Title 12, of this code, as may be
amended.
25-9-7 Minimum Depth of Improvements. It is
unlawful for any person or utility to install, or to
cause or allow to be installed, any service pipe or
main pipe, conduit, duct, wire, tunnel or other
structure, except manholes, water valve lids, culverts
and catch basins, in any public street or other public
place at a distance of less than thirty (30) inches
below the established grade of the gutter of the public
street, or less than thirty (30) inches below the
surface of any other public place unless otherwise
approved by the Public Works Director in writing.
25-9-8 Permit - Engineer and Engineering
Required. Engineering and engineered drawings,
produced by an engineer licensed in the State of
Utah, shall be required for all extensions, additions,
modifications, or work associated with a
development connecting to any City infrastructure.
25-9-9 Permit - Application - Legal Authority for
Excavation. The applicant for a Permit to make an
excavation shall show legal authority to occupy and
use, for the purposes mentioned in the application,
the streets, sidewalks or other public places wherein
excavations are proposed to be made.
25-9-10 Permit - Application - Work to Conform
to Application Description. It is unlawful for any
person to make, or to cause or allow to be made, any
excavation, or to install or maintain or to cause or
allow to be installed or maintained any tank, pipe,
conduit, duct or tunnel in or under the surface of any
public street, sidewalk or other public place at any
location other than that described in the application
and shown on the approved drawings filed by the
person as required by the provisions of this chapter.
25-9-11 Permit - Application - Approval.
(1) Permits will be submitted to and, if approved,
issued by Public Works.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
(2) When a Permit application, as required in § 25-9-
1 and meeting the requirements of this chapter, the
Permit shall be issued by Public Works.
(3) An issued Permit shall include an “Approved for
Construction” set of drawings, when applicable.
(4) Copies of an issued Permit will be filed in the
Public Works office as a public record while the
permit is active and for one year after the permit is
closed.
25-9-12 Permit - Issuance or Denial.
(1) Upon receiving an application, engineering and
drawings as required by § 25-9-4, the Public Works
Office will conduct an evaluation of the proposal and
forward copies to the City Engineer, and any other
departments or services that the Director feels are
required for additional evaluation and comment.
(2) The Streets Supervisor shall not approve any
Permit as required by § 25-9-1 for an area where a
Permit is still in force and effect, except Permits for
house connections.
(3) If there are any comments from the review of the
complete application they will be returned to the
applicant for incorporation into a revised application.
(4) Once the revised application is returned to the
City, by the applicant, and all corrections have been
made to the application and drawings and all fees and
deposits required by § 25-6-4 and this Chapter have
been paid or established, Public Works shall issue a
Permit to make the excavation and shall open and
keep an account thereof. However, Public Works
shall not issue the Permit unless the applicant has
legal authority to occupy and use, for the purposes
mentioned in the application, the streets, sidewalks or
other public places covered by the application.
25-9-13 Permit - Contents. The Permit issued
under the provisions of § 25-9-12 shall state fees and
deposits collected as set in § 25-9-2, the amount of
fees and bond and shall be a receipt of payment. It
shall also specify the information outlined in § 25-9-
4, the particular portion of the street or public place
to be excavated, the extent of the excavations, and to
whom any bond being held by the City is to be
returned. No Permit is transferable.
25-9-14 Permit – Activation – Documentation Onsite.
(1) The Permit holder shall call to activate a Permit a
minimum of forty-eight (48) hours prior to any work
being accomplished.
(2) A copy of the issued Permit shall be maintained at
the work site.
25-9-15 Permit - Expiration - Extension.
(1) Every Permit, unless otherwise stated in this § 25-
9-15, shall become void sixty (60) days from the date
of issuance of the Permit.
(2) Every Permit for installing laterals to single
family dwellings or for making repairs to laterals
shall become void thirty (30) days after the date of
the Permit.
(3) Permits issued in conjunction with subdivisions
and developments where an escrow is established per
Chapter 4, Title 26, Subdivisions, shall be governed
by that Title.
(4) The Inspector may grant an extension of time for
a period not exceeding thirty (30) days for the
performance of the work and the refilling of the
excavation whenever the Inspector determines that
there is good cause for an extension.
(5) The excavator shall restore roads to a safe and
passable condition within sixteen (16) hours unless
special permission is granted by the Inspector.
(6) All remaining repairs and restoration shall take
place within seven (7) calendar days from the date of
the activation of the permit.
(7) The excavator shall notify the City at least four
(4) hours prior to back-filling of any portion of the
excavation. All back-filling is to be compacted by
mechanical means in one (1) foot layers. Failure to
notify the City will result in contractor re-excavation
of the work to provide for proper inspection.
(8) The Permit shall become void and any security
forfeit unless all the work is done and the excavation
is refilled in the manner required by this chapter
within seven (7) days from the date of the start of
excavation.
(9) Nothing herein contained shall be deemed or
construed to allow a longer period of time unless
authorized as outlined in § 25-9-16.
(10) The Inspector may grant, in writing, extensions
to the time periods set in this section based upon
weather or unforeseen conditions within the
construction area.
25-9-16 Failure to Complete Work - City
Authority.
(1) If any person fails, refuses or neglects to complete
the requirements of any permit or direction of the
Inspector to refill and restore any excavation or work
required by a permit within the time required by §
25-9-15, or within the period of any extension of time
if any extension is granted, then the Inspector shall
cause the completion of the restoration in the manner
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
required by this chapter and the City shall retain the
restoration fees paid with the permit.
(2) In order to claim a restoration fee the Inspector
shall notify the applicant, in writing and require
corrective action be taken within the time period set
by the Inspector.
(3) When setting a time period for restoration of a
site the Inspector shall take into account the amount
of work that is needed to be accomplished and the
time periods set in § 25-9-15.
25-9-17 Stop Work or Revocation of Permit.
(1) Work undertaken by the permittee or their agents
may be stopped immediately and the permittee's
Permit may be revoked by oral or written order of the
Inspector when the Inspector determines that the
program of work or conditions outlined in the Permit
are not being complied with.
(2) Any Permits issued under the provisions of this
Title may be suspended or revoked by the Inspector
at any time it may become necessary to construct or
repair any sewer, water main or pipeline or conduit or
other public work of any kind along, in or through the
excavation constructed or maintained under the
authority of the Permit, and the City shall have the
right to use any portion of the excavation for the
construction and maintenance of any sewer, water
main, pipeline, conduit, or other public work or
improvement.
History; 03/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
Chapter 10. Excavation
25-10-1 Prior to Excavation
25-10-2 Methods of Filling Excavations
25-10-3 Replacement of Street Surface
25-10-4 Vehicular and Pedestrian Crossings
25-10-5 Storage of Excavated Materials
25-10-6 Access to Fire Hydrants, Valves,
Manholes and Headgates
25-10-7 Gutter and Inlet Maintenance
25-10-8 Barriers and Lights Required
25-10-9 Notice to Complete Work
25-10-10 Work Performed by City - Statement of
Amount Due to City
25-10-11 Work Performed by City - Street
Superintendent Authority
25-10-12 Refund of Moneys
25-10-13 Unlawful Activities
25-10-14 Excavation Shoring
25-10-15 Applicability of Chapter Provisions -
Work Done under State Law or City
Contract
25-10-16 Applicability of Chapter Provisions -
Work Done by City
25-10-17 Emergency Excavations
25-10-18 Rights of City Reserved
25-10-1 Prior to Excavation. Prior to any
excavation the Permit holder shall;
(1) Activate the permit as set in § 25-9-14.
(2) Notify the Clinton City Police and Fire
Departments as well as UTA and the School District,
when applicable, of any approved street closures and
detours and how long they will remain in effect.
(3) Notify each utility company, which may have
underground facilities in the area of the proposed
excavation. Minimum notice is to use the “Blue
Stakes” program. To contact flood irrigation
companies contact Davis and Weber County Canal
Company for contact information.
(4) Excavator shall erect and maintain sufficient
guards, signals, barricades, and lights in accordance
with the “Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices” and the plan provided with the Permit
application.
(5) The excavator shall make a daily check of the
excavation and area to ensure the proper placement
of warning devices. If notified by a representative of
Clinton City that a problem or hazard exists, the
applicant will take immediate action to remedy the
problem.
25-10-2 Methods of Filling Excavations.
Excavations shall be filled and finished as set in Title
9, Chapter 21, Street Excavations/Road Cuts, as
amended.
25-10-3 Replacement of Street Surface. The street
surface excavated or damaged shall be replaced to the
satisfaction of the Inspector and as set in Title 9,
Chapter 21, Street Excavations/Road Cuts, as
amended, prior to the release of any bond as provided
in § 25-9-2.
25-10-4 Vehicular and Pedestrian Crossings. It
shall be the duty of every person making any
excavation in any public street or other public place
to maintain safe crossings for vehicular traffic at all
street intersections and safe crossings for pedestrians
at intervals of not more than three hundred (300) feet.
If any excavation is made across any public street at
least one safe crossing shall be maintained at all
times for vehicles and pedestrians.
25-10-5 Storage of Excavated Materials.
(1) All materials excavated shall be laid compactly
along the side of the trench and kept trimmed up so
as to cause as little inconvenience as possible to
public travel.
(2) If the park strip is used for storage of materials or
equipment it shall be repaired to as good or better
condition prior to release of any bond or escrow.
(3) The sidewalk shall not be used for storage of
materials or equipment.
25-10-6 Access to Fire Hydrants, Valves,
Manholes and Headgates. During the course of
making excavations, free access must be provided to
all fire hydrants, water and secondary valves,
manholes and irrigation headgates unless permission
is obtained from the owners for temporary
inaccessibility. The Clinton City Fire Department is
classified the owner of all hydrants, Public Works for
all water valves, sewer and storm drain manholes and
all inlet boxes, Davis & Weber County Canal Co. for
secondary valves and specific irrigation companies
for headgates. Community Development can assist
with contact information for irrigation companies.
25-10-7 Gutter and Inlet Maintenance.
(1) All gutters shall be maintained free and
unobstructed for the full depth of the adjacent curb
and at least one (1) foot in width from the face of the
curb at the gutter line. Wherever a gutter crosses an
intersecting street, an adequate waterway shall be
provided and at all times maintained.
(2) All inlets down flow from the excavation shall be
free and unobstructed for the full depth of the inlet
and protected from infiltration of excavated material.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
(3) All Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan
requirements shall apply where applicable.
25-10-8 Barriers and Lights Required. It shall be
the duty of every person making any excavation in
any easement, right-of-way, street or other public
place to place and maintain barriers and lights as
required in the “Uniform Manual of Traffic Control
Devices” and the approved drawings submitted as
established in § 25-9-4. It is unlawful for any person
to fail, refuse or neglect to comply with any
requirement contained in this Section.
25-10-9 Notice to Complete Work. After an
excavation is commenced, the work shall be
prosecuted with due diligence so as not to obstruct
the street, other public place or travel more than is
actually necessary and within the guidelines
established in § 25-9-15. If the work is not expedited
or if the work does not, in the judgment of the
Inspector, comply with the terms of this chapter the
Inspector shall notify the person named in the Permit
in writing that the work is not being prosecuted in
accordance with this Title. The Notice shall require
the person, within three (3) days after the service of
the Notice, to proceed with the diligent prosecution
of, or properly complete the work as the case may be.
The Notice shall be written or printed, and shall be
served personally or by leaving the same at the
residence or place of business of the person. If the
person cannot be found and the place of business or
residence is unknown or is outside of the City, the
Notice may be served by certified mail addressed to
the person at the place of business or residence. If the
Notice is not complied with the Inspector shall do the
work as may be necessary to refill the excavation and
restore the street, or other public place, or part thereof
excavated, to as good a condition as the same was in
before the excavation was made.
25-10-10 Work Performed by City -
Statement of Amount Due to City. The Inspector
shall invoice, showing the amount due the City, every
person for any work performed by the City pursuant
to the provisions of this chapter. The invoice is to be
mailed to every person or to his agent for any and all
work performed. The amount due the City as shown
by any statement shall be paid on or before the due
date as indicated on the statement. The City shall
deduct the cost of any work done or repairs made by
the Inspector from any and all deposits then on hand
belonging to any person under the provisions of this
chapter. Administrative costs and reasonable legal
costs, as established in § 25-6-4 shall be in addition
to the cost of the work performed and are to be
included in the invoice or deduction from the bond.
25-10-11 Work Performed by City - Street
Superintendent Authority. The decision of the
Inspector as to the cost of any work done or repairs
made by him under his direction pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter shall be final and
conclusive as to the cost thereof.
25-10-12 Refund of Moneys. All moneys refunded
pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be
subject to payment upon demands, once the work
associated with the Permit is complete, audited and
paid in the same manner as other demands against the
City are audited and paid.
25-10-13 Unlawful Activities. It is unlawful for
any person:
(1) To make, or to cause or allow to be made, any
excavation in any unimproved public street or other
public place for the purpose of removing soil or
gravel, or to remove or to cause or allow to be
removed any soil or gravel, without first obtaining a
Permit in writing from Public Works.
(2) For any person to make, or cause or allow to be
made any fill in any unimproved public street or
other public place, for the purpose of placing, or
causing or allowing to be placed thereon, any soil or
gravel, without first obtaining a Permit in writing
from Public Works.
(3) For any person to make, or to cause or allow to be
made, any excavation under, or to remove, or to
cause or allow to be removed, dirt or other formation
from under that portion of any sidewalk lying
between the outer curbline and any point in the
sidewalk within the public right-of-way, or to
construct or cause or allow to be constructed any wall
or other structure within one (1) foot of any sidewalk.
25-10-14 Excavation Shoring. Any excavation
shall be so constructed and maintained as to afford
lateral, sub-lateral, adjacent and overhead support of
the surrounding embankments and structures
satisfactory to the Inspector. Before any Permit is
issued a detailed plan of the excavation showing the
proposed location thereof, and all appurtenances
thereto, shall be filed in Public Works. Drawings
may be required to be engineered at the discretion of
the Public Works Director.
25-10-15 Applicability of Chapter Provisions -
Work Done under State Law or City Contract.
Applicability of the provisions of this chapter to any
work done or to be done in, along or upon any public
street or other public place pursuant to any contract
authorized by the City Council shall be as established
in the contract. However, the provisions contained in
§ 25-10-4 through § 25-10-8 and § 25-10-2 and § 25-
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
10-3 shall apply to all work and excavations to be
made in any public right-of-way or easement even if
not stipulated in a contract.
25-10-16 Applicability of Chapter Provisions -
Work Done by City. The provisions of this chapter
shall not apply to excavations made by any
department, board or officer of the City in the
discharge of its or his official duties. This is not
intended to imply that City projects are not required
to comply with adopted standards or inspection
procedures.
25-10-17 Emergency Excavations. Nothing
contained in this chapter shall be construed to prevent
any person maintaining any pipe or conduit in any
public street or other public place by virtue of any
law, ordinance or Permit from making the excavation
as may be necessary for the preservation of life or
property when the necessity arises during hours the
offices of the City are closed; provided, that the
person making the excavation shall obtain a Permit
from Public Works within four (4) hours after the
offices of the City are first opened subsequent to the
making of the excavation.
25-10-18 Rights of City Reserved. Every Permit
for an excavation in or under the surface of any
public street or other public place shall be granted
subject to the right of the City or of any person
entitled thereto, to use that part of the street or other
public place for any purpose for which the street or
other public place may lawfully be used.
History; 03/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
Chapter 11. Obstructing Streets and
Sidewalks
25-11-1 Obstructions - Prohibited - Exception
25-11-2 Obstructions - Building Materials - Permit
Required
25-11-3 Obstructions - Building Materials - Rapid
Removal Required
25-11-4 Obstructions - Building Materials -
Lighting Required
25-11-5 Obstructions - Building Materials -
Removal after Completion of Building
25-11-6 Duties of Private Property
Owners/Occupants
25-11-7 City Participation in Repairs
25-11-8 Improper Use of Handicap Ramps in
Sidewalks
25-11-1 Obstructions - Prohibited - Exception.
(1) A person shall not obstruct or allow to be
obstructed any sidewalk, gutter, street or public place
in the City by placing, allowing to be placed or
maintaining thereon any rock, dirt, rubbish or other
substance, material or obstruction of any kind or
description, except as otherwise provided in this Title
and other ordinances of the City.
(2) A person shall not willfully and maliciously loiter
or stand in or upon any alley, highway, sidewalk,
crosswalk, off-street parking area, private or public,
or other private or public ways open for pedestrian or
automobile traffic or otherwise occupy any portion
thereof in such a manner as to obstruct or
unreasonably interfere with the free passage of
pedestrians or motorists.
(3) A person shall not interfere, obstruct, or willfully
and maliciously hinder a City authorized project for
which a permit is issued or other project being
conducted by the City.
25-11-2 Obstructions - Building Materials -
Permit Required.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to:
(a) Track mud or sediment onto public streets by any
vehicles or other means. Provisions shall be made at
all construction sites to either clean the streets or
clean the vehicles or both before vehicles leave the
site.
(b) Washout concrete trucks at any sites other than
preapproved designated areas. Dumping of excess
concrete shall not be allowed anywhere within the
City.
(c) Stockpile construction or yard improvement
materials or debris in the street or in the gutter unless
a permit has been issued by Public Works with the
advice and consent of the Clinton Police Department.
This includes but is not limited to ramps being
constructed for temporary access across the existing
curb and gutter; stockpiling of topsoil or other fill
material; stockpiling of sand, gravel, landscape rock,
bark, mulch or any other material that may be
considered a source of pollution in the storm water
system.
(2) All materials excavated shall be stored as
established in § 25-10-5.
(3) During winter months (November 15, through
March 15) it is unlawful for any person to obstruct
any street of the City by placing building materials of
any kind therein unless a Permit shall have been
obtained from Public Works. If a Permit is issued the
person obtaining the Permit shall be responsible for
removing all snow from the street side of any
materials, shall not obstruct any portion of the
sidewalk, and shall remove all snow from the
sidewalk fronting the buildings for which the
materials are intended.
25-11-3 Obstructions - Building Materials - Rapid
Removal Required. Any person placing materials
for building in the streets as provided by § 25-11-2
must proceed with the construction of the building or
site for which the material is intended as established
in the permit. If in the opinion of the Inspector there
is sufficient space on the construction site for the
materials being stored in the street the Inspector may
require some or all of the materials to be removed
from the street and placed on the site. The Inspector
shall set the timetable for relocation of the materials.
25-11-4 Obstructions - Building Materials -
Lighting Required. Any person placing or causing
to be placed any building materials or other
obstructions in City streets shall place two (2) Type II
Flashing Barricades adjacent to the material, one on
each end thereof, two (2) feet from the material and
arranged so as to keep lit from one-half an hour after
sunset until one-half an hour before sunrise of each
day. Barricades and warning devices shall be placed
as required in the Manual of Uniform Traffic Control
Devices.
25-11-5 Obstructions - Building Materials -
Removal after Completion of Building. Every
portion of the building material and the debris thereof
must be removed within three (3) days after the
completion of the building and the street placed and
left in as good condition as it was before the material
was placed therein. The Inspector shall have the final
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
say in determining the condition of the street upon
cleaning. Any Building Bonds established as part of
a Building Permit shall not be released until the
Inspector has signed off on the clean-up.
History; 03/10
25-11-6 Duties of Private Property
Owners/Occupants. The duties of any
owner/occupant of property abutting and fronting any
street or public right-of-way within the City are:
(1) To keep the public sidewalks immediately
abutting their property clear of snow for the full
width and length of the sidewalk. Snow is to be
removed within forty-eight (48) hours of a storm.
(2) To keep the curb and gutter clear of foreign
matter, to include but not to be limited to debris,
clippings, trash, and vegetation.
(3) Responsible for all sidewalk, park strip, curb, and
gutter areas of multiple fronting lots, lots located on
corners and property rearing on a street.
(4) Not to throw, pile, or place snow from the
sidewalk, driveways, or park strips into the street or
gutter.
(5) To keep an adequate sized area, in front of their
mail box, clear of snow to allow for mail delivery.
(6) To keep the public sidewalks immediately
abutting their property in good order and repair from
breaks, cracks, sunken or raised areas that could be
trip hazards.
History: 6/96, 12/08, 09/15
25-11-7 City Participation in Repairs. The City
may assist property owners with damaged sidewalks,
by sharing the costs of repair (50/50) on a first come
basis, as it is convenient for the City and as funds are
available for repairs. Written application for this City
cost participation must be made with the City Public
Works Department at least 10 days prior to the date
of work commencement.
History; 09/15
25-11-8 Improper use of Handicap Ramps in
Sidewalks. Handicap Ramps at intersections or
elsewhere specifically designed for access to
sidewalks and trails in accordance with the
Americans with Disability Act shall not be used as
vehicle access to a property, storage areas for
construction material, or other use that will render
these access points inaccessible or ineffective for
their intended use.
History; 03/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
Chapter 12. Depositing of Water
25-12-1 Overflow of Water on Streets and
Sidewalks
25-12-2 Control of Runoff from Property
25-12-1 Overflowing of Water on Streets and
Sidewalks. No person shall allow water to overflow
from any ditch or canal or from a well or as the result
of improper irrigation or other watering of property
upon the streets or sidewalks of the City.
History: 8/72
25-12-2 Control of Runoff from Property. All
owners with property within the City are required to
control run-off from roofs, downspouts, concrete
slabs, and other impervious surfaces or excess water
from landscape maintenance from flowing directly
onto neighboring properties.
History: 6/96
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
Chapter 13. Driveway Construction
25-13-1 Permit - Required
25-13-2 Permit - Approval or Denial
25-13-3 Permit - Temporary Driveway
25-13-4 Specifications and Requirements
25-13-5 Violations
25-13-6 Abatement of Nuisance
25-13-1 Permit - Required.
(1) A permit is required as outlined in § 25-9-1.
(2) Any person applying for a driveway permit shall
have a site plan approved by the Community
Development Department and submitted with the
permit application.
(3) All driveway construction will comply with the
requirements of Title 28, Chapter 4, as amended.
(4) For the purpose of this Chapter a building permit
with an approved site plan fills the requirement for a
permit.
25-13-2 Permit - Approval or Denial. If the
application complies with the requirements of Title
28, Chapter 4, as amended, and the requirements of
this chapter Public Works may issue the Permit.
25-13-3 Permit – Temporary Driveway. Any
Permit issued, under the provisions of this chapter, to
construct any driveway, entrance or exit, shall
provide that within ninety (90) days after the
termination of any use for which the Permit was
issued, the permittee, owner or lessee shall, at his
own expense, remove the driveway, entrance or exit
and restore to their original condition all sidewalks,
curbs and streets so damaged or displaced. If the
permittee, owner or lessee fails to comply with this
Section within ninety (90) days after the termination
of the use of the driveway entrance or exit, the Public
Works Director shall so report to the Manager and
the Manager may instruct the Public Works Director
to abate the nuisance as a hazardous or inconvenient
condition in the manner provided by law.
25-13-4 Specifications and Requirements.
Specifications and requirements for construction and
development are outlined in Title 9, Engineering and
Standard Specifications and Standard Drawings.
25-13-5 Violations. No person shall construct or
establish or cause or allow to be constructed or
established any driveway, entrance or exit connecting
a street with private property where curb and
sidewalks are maintained by the City without first
having obtained a Permit as required by this chapter.
25-13-6 Abatement of Nuisance. Any driveway
that is constructed without a Permit or not in
compliance with the requirements set forth here or in
the Engineering and Standard Specifications and
Standard Drawings the permittee, owner or lessee
shall, at his own expense, remove the driveway,
entrance or exit and restore to their original condition
all sidewalks, curbs and streets so damaged or
displaced. If the permittee, owner or lessee fails to
comply with this Section within ninety (90) days
after notice from the Inspector, the Public Works
Director shall so report to the Manager and the
Manager may instruct the Public Works Director to
abate the nuisance as a hazardous or inconvenient
condition in the manner provided by law.
History; 03/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
Chapter 14. Street and Address Numbering
25-14-1 Structure Numbering System
25-14-2 Street Numbering System
25-14-3 Structure Numbering Requirement
25-14-4 Figures Used for Numbers
25-14-5 Failure to Number a Building
25-14-6 Change of Address
25-14-7 Amount of Numbers in Blocks
25-14-8 Odd and Even Numbers Designated
25-14-9 Multiple Buildings on a Campus
25-14-10 Building with Multiple Tenants
25-14-11 Building Inspector Authority - Certificate
of Occupancy Issuance
25-14-12 Applicability of Chapter Provisions
25-14-1 Structure Numbering System. It shall be
the responsibility of the Community Development
Director, to assign structure addresses.
History; 03/10
25-14-2 Street Numbering System.
(1) Street numbers shall be designated by the
Community Development Director during the
subdivision or site plan approval process.
(2) Streets shall be numbered based upon the existing
North/West grid system and only given a name when
numbering is impractical due to multiple directions of
one street. However, even though a street may have
a proper name a street number shall be assigned at
intersections.
History; 03/10
25-14-3 Structure Numbering Requirement.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to erect an
occupiable structure or other structure, as defined by
the International Building Code, within the City
without numbering the structure with a number
designated by the Community Development Director.
(2) Designated structures shall have the approved
address numbers placed in an unobstructed,
conspicuous position that is plainly visible from the
street or road fronting the property. These numbers
shall contrast with their background and be visible
from a distance of 50-feet.
History; 7/79,9/84, 12/07, 03/10
25-14-4 Figures Used for Numbers.
(1) Address numbers shall be Arabic numbers or
capital alphabet letters.
(2) Numbers or letters shall be permanent, stationary,
durable and legible.
(3) Numbers shall be 4-inches high with a minimum
stroke width of 0.5-inches. Numbers or letters placed
on other than single family residential homes, higher
than 14 feet above grade, shall be a minimum of 6-
inches in height with a minimum stroke width of
0.75-inches or other dimensions as determined by the
Fire Marshal.
History; 7/79,9/84, 12/07, 03/10
25-14-5 Failure to Number a Building.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person having
authority over a designated structure to fail, for a
period longer than ten (10) days after notice, from the
City to do so, to number the building with the number
designated.
(2) If any person fails to comply with this Section
within the time indicated in § (1) above or § 25-14-6
below, the Manager may instruct the Code
Enforcement Officer to abate the nuisance as a
hazardous or inconvenient condition in the manner
provided by law.
History; 03/10
25-14-6 Change of Address.
(1) Requests for a change of address from building
owners shall be made in writing explaining the
reason for the desired change and filed with
Community Development. Changes will be approved
based upon the need and processed through the Davis
County Recorder. It is the applicant’s responsibility
to change the characters on the building within ten
(10) days of notice of the change being recorded at
the County Recorders Office. Applicant is
responsible for notifying the Post Office and other
interested parties
(2) Changes required by the City shall be processed
by Community Development. Property owners shall
be notified, in writing, explaining the need and shall
be provided with a copy of the recorded document
changing the address. The City shall notify the Post
Office and emergency services of the change. The
property owner shall change the characters on the
building within ten (10) days of notice of the change.
History: 7/79, 9/84, 12/07
25-14-7 Amount of Numbers in Blocks. 500
numbers, or the necessary part thereof, shall be
allotted to each one-half ( ½ ) mile block.
History: 7/79, 9/84, 12/07
25-14-8 Odd And Even Numbers Designated.
(1) One (1) number shall be assigned consecutively
and alternatively as to odd and even.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
(2) Even numbers shall be assigned to the north and
east sides of the street.
(3) Odd numbers shall be assigned to the south and
west of the streets.
(4) Structure addresses shall not end in a zero (0) or
five (5).
History: 7/79, 9/84, 12/07, 03/10
25-14-9 Multiple Buildings on a Campus.
(1) Commercial or similar developments with
multiple buildings on a site may be addressed
individually or by adding a alphabetic designator for
each building after the address number.
(2) Alphabetical designations will be established
during site plan review processing.
(3) Buildings will be marked as outlined in § 25-14-3
and §25-14-4
History; 03/10
25-14-10 Building with Multiple Tenants.
(1) Building with multiple tenants will be addressed
numerically or alphabetically following the pattern
outlined in § 25-14-8 and 25-14-9 in a way that
numbers or letters do not follow one another. Tenant
spaces will be addressed from left to right. Each
tenant bay will have a designation.
(2) Tenants occupying more than one bay in a
multiple tenant building will use the lowest
alphanumeric designation for the space being
occupied.
(3) Alphabetical designations will be established
during site plan review processing.
History: 7/79, 9/84, 12/08
25-14-11 Building Inspector Authority -
Certificate of Occupancy Issuance. The building
inspector is authorized to withhold a final inspection
or certificate of occupancy, for any type of Building
Permit issued, for any structure that does not have the
address properly displayed as established in this
statute.
History; 03/10
25-14-12 Applicability of Chapter Provisions.
The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all
buildings in the City, including those constructed
prior to the adoption of this statute.
History; 03/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
Chapter 15. Street Trees
25-15-1 Definitions
25-15-2 Duties of Community Development
Director
25-15-3 Duties of Public Works Director
25-15-4 Duties of Private Property
Owners/Occupants
25-15-5 Park Strip Trees
25-15-6 Tree Planting in Subdivisions
25-15-7 Protection of Trees
25-15-8 Interference with Community
Development or Public Works Director
25-15-9 Enforcement - Violation – Penalty –
Collection
25-15-1 Definitions. The following definitions shall
apply to this chapter.
“City Tree” means any tree which is located within
any public park or on any other City-owned property
with the exception of park strip trees that do not fall
under the definition of Street Tree or City Required
Tree.
“Compaction” means the compression of the soil,
structure or texture by any means that creates an
upper layer that is impermeable.
"Designated Street Tree List” means a list of
specific tree species which have been designated by
Community Development for City streets as the
species of trees to be planted within the City
easement of that street.
“Drip Line Area” means the suggested minimum
area within X distance from the trunk of a tree in a
typical location, measured from the perimeter of the
trunk of the tree at 54 inches above natural grade,
where X equals a distance ten (10) time the diameter
of the trunk at 54 inches above natural grade, or the
distance to the outermost edge of the tree canopy,
whichever is the lesser distance.
"Maintain" or "Maintenance” means and includes
root pruning, trimming, spraying, watering,
fertilizing, mulching, treating for disease or injury, or
any other similar act, which promotes growth, health,
beauty and life of any tree.
"Pruning", "Trimming" or "Thinning" means to
reduce the size of a tree using professionally accepted
standards, as established by the International Society
of Arboriculture (ISA), Tree Care Industry
Association (TCIA) or American National Standards
Institute (ANSI) Section A300, to control the height
and spread of a tree, lessen the wind resistance,
preserve its health and natural appearance, produce
fuller branching and shaping, aid in disease
prevention by allowing more light and air passage
within the branches, or make adjustments which will
increase its longevity in an urban environment.
"Street Tree" or "City Required Tree" means any
tree which is located within any park strip or
landscape area that was required as part of a
subdivision or development site plan, design, or
landscape approval.
"Topping," "Heading Back," "Stubbing" or
"Pollarding" means a severe type of pruning which
usually produces less desirable results than more
moderate pruning with respect to the tree's natural
form and which is generally hazardous to the overall
health and stability of the tree.
"Tree Policy Manual" means a document prepared
by Community Development which states policies
(approved by the City Council), procedures and other
relevant information regarding the selection, planting,
maintenance and removal of trees.
25-15-2 Duties of Community Development
Director. The Community Development Director
serves as the City Council’s tree advisor. The
Community Development Director shall:
(1) Study the problems and determine the needs of
the City in connection with its tree planting and
maintenance programs and hold discussions of treerelated
issues at public meetings.
(2) Hear and determine appeals from staff decisions
regarding street tree removal. The Community
Development Director may grant an appeal if he
finds that the staff decision would result in a burden
on the property owner that substantially outweighs
the benefit to the public. The Community
Development Director’s decision may be appealed to
the City Council if a written appeal, setting forth the
grounds, is filed with the City Recorder within ten
(10) days of the Community Development Director’s
decision. If no timely appeal is filed, the decision
shall be final.
(3) To draft a tree policy manual that states policies
and procedures concerning the selection, planting,
maintenance and removal of trees in public places to
promote a viable urban forest.
25-15-3 Duties of Public Works Director. The
Public Works Director or his designee shall:
(1) Establish and revise the designated street tree list.
(2) Designate a particular place within the City
easement or on any City-owned property where a
City Tree will be planted.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
(3) To grant or deny the issuance of Permits in
accordance with the terms of this chapter.
(4) Maintain an inventory of City Trees.
25-15-4 Duties of Private Property
Owners/Occupants. The duties of any
owner/occupant of private property whose property
has a Street Tree or City Required Tree on the
property or in the park strip fronting its property are
as follows:
(1) To accept, protect and provide adequate water to
any Street Tree or City Required Tree planted in the
park strip or on their property;
(2) To remove any vines from Street Trees planted in
the park strip;
(3) To remove all fallen leaves and other deadfall
from any tree planted in their property or adjacent
park strip, and to properly dispose of the leaves in an
appropriate waste receptacle. Deadfall will be taken
to Public Works for chipping and recycling.
25-15-5 Park Strip Trees. No tree shall be planted
within a park strip other than the species outlined in
the approved list. No tree shall be planted in a park
strip, except by the City, until a tree Permit has been
issued for it as provided in § 25-9-1(5) of this
chapter.
25-15-6 Tree Planting in Subdivisions. Any
developer of land shall install trees in accordance
with the requirements of the development approval
process and the provisions of this chapter and any
related resolutions.
25-15-7 Protection of Trees.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to injure, damage,
carve, transplant, root prune or remove any City Tree,
Street Tree or City Required Tree without a Permit as
established in § 25-9-1(5).
(2) It is unlawful for any person to attach, cause to be
attached or keep attached to any City Tree, Street
Tree or City Required Tree, or to the guard or stake
of a City Tree, Street Tree or City Required Tree, any
rope, wire nails, tacks, staples, advertising posters,
decorations, ornaments, flags, toys, swings, lights or
any other contrivance whatsoever without first
obtaining a Permit as established in § 25-9-1(5).
(3) It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow any
poison or other substance harmful to tree life to lie,
leak, pour, flow or drip upon or into the soil within
the drip line of any City Tree, Street Tree or City
Required Tree; or set fire or allow any fire to burn
when the fire or heat thereof will injure any portion
of any City Tree, Street Tree or City Required Tree;
or to operate any equipment, or mechanical weeding
devices, in a manner as to cause damage to a City
Tree, Street Tree or City Required Tree in any way.
(4) No person shall injure any City Tree, Street Tree
or City Required Tree located within a park strip or
public right-of-way adjoining their private property
by neglecting to provide the necessary amount of
water, as determined by the Tree Policy Manual and
the terms of this chapter, required for a tree's
continued good health and viability.
(5) During the construction, repair, alteration,
moving or removal of any building, structure of any
other type of construction in the City, no person in
control of the work shall leave any City Tree, Street
Tree, City Required Tree, shrub or plant in the
vicinity of the activity without sufficient guards or
protectors as identified in the tree policy manual to
prevent injury to the tree, shrub or plant in
connection with the construction, repair, alteration,
moving or removal. The costs of any protection shall
be borne by the person responsible for the
improvement.
25-15-8 Interference with Community
Development or Public Works Director. No
person shall hinder, prevent, delay or interfere with a
Department Director or any of his or her agents while
engaged in carrying out the execution or enforcement
of this chapter. Provided, however, that nothing in
this Section shall be construed as an attempt to inhibit
the pursuit of any remedy, legal or equitable, in any
court of competent jurisdiction for the protection of
property rights by the owner of any property within
the City.
25-15-9 Enforcement - Violation – Penalty -
Collection.
(1) Enforcement of this chapter shall be in
accordance with Title 18, Chapter 18-1.
(2) Any violation of this chapter shall be a Class C
misdemeanor.
(3) For violation of this chapter the cited person shall
face criminal prosecution and shall be required to
appear before the Justice Court of Clinton.
(4) In the event that the violation listed on the citation
is not corrected within the appropriate time period,
whether it be the normal or immediate correction
time period, the Manager may:
(a) Order the Public Works Director to abate the
violation; or,
(b) Order the Enforcement Officer to contract with an
independent agent to abate the violation.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
(5) Should the City abate the violation, the actual
expenses and the appointed administrative fee for the
City abating the violation shall be collected from the
person by the Justice Court of Clinton and be added
to any fine and penalties set by that court.
(6) The City may elect to refer the matter of payment
to the County Treasurer for inclusion in the tax notice
of the property owner as established in Utah State
Code §10-11-3.
History; 03/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
Chapter 16. Park Strip
25-16-1 Placement of Concrete
25-16-2 Permission Required for Excavation
25-16-3 Criteria for Denial of Permits
25-16-4 Structures in Park Strip
25-16-5 Height Limitations on Park Strip
Vegetation
25-16-6 Vegetation not to Obscure Water Meter
25-16-7 Shrubbery Obstructing Intersection
Visibility - Removal Required
25-16-8 Duties of Private Property
Owners/Occupants
25-16-1 Placement of Concrete. Placement of
concrete in parking strips shall only be allowed in
accordance with the Clinton City Zoning Ordinance
for landscaping requirements.
25-16-2 Permission Required for Excavation. No
person shall excavate within the public right-of-way
any ditches, tunnels, trenches or irrigation lines
without first obtaining a Permit.
25-16-3 Criteria for Denial of Permits. Permits
shall not be granted if it is determined that the
activity would compromise the health of a City Tree,
would interfere with utilities, (sewer, water or land
drain laterals) or the access to utilities, or would
impede safe pedestrian or vehicular access.
25-16-4 Structures in Park Strip.
(1) Persons shall place no structure, other than a
mailbox, within the right-of-way. Exception: Items
associated with public utilities as set in franchise
agreement.
(2) No basketball standards, recreation structures or
other similar items that may entice children or others
to play or gather within the right-of-way or cause
balls or other items to be thrown into the right-of-way
shall be constructed or placed within or adjacent to
the right-of-way.
25-16-5 Height Limitations on Park Strip
Vegetation. It is unlawful for any person to have in
any public park strip of any right-of-way any plant
material that is more than twenty-four (24) inches
above the sidewalk level, and no growth shall be
allowed to obstruct any portion of an adjoining
sidewalk or curb; provided, however, that the
limitations contained in this Section shall not apply to
street trees which may exceed the height limitation of
twenty-four (24) inches, and which may branch over
the sidewalk at a minimum height of eight (8) feet
and street at a minimum height of twelve (12) feet,
both measured from the top back of curb.
25-16-6 Vegetation not to Obscure Water Meter.
It is unlawful for any person to allow vegetation to
grow over or obscure the water meter lid or box.
Additionally, it is their responsibility to insure that
water meter lids and boxes are accessible for
maintenance and inspection by Public Works.
25-16-7 Shrubbery Obstructing Intersection
Visibility - Removal Required. Whenever a City
Officer finds that any hedge, shrubbery or tree
growing within the public right-of-way obstructs the
view of any intersection, traffic upon the streets
approaching the intersection, or traffic signs he or she
may cause the hedge, shrubbery or tree to be
removed or reduced in size.
25-16-8 Duties of Private Property
Owners/Occupants. Except in those specific areas
where the City has formally accepted maintenance
through a development agreement or another
instrument, the duties of any owner/occupant of
private property whose property has a park strip on
its street and related purposes are as follows:
(1) To maintain and water vegetation planted in the
park strip area to no more than 24-inches; provided
however, this Section shall not apply to Street Trees
or City Required Trees; and,
(2) To maintain and replace any trees, that were
installed as part of a subdivision approval, design or
City project, that may die; and,
(3) To remove all vegetation, garbage, and debris
from any sidewalk, or trail in the right-of-way.
History; 03/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
Chapter 17. Newsracks
Moved to Title 15, Chapter 18
History: 10/10
Chapter 18. Skateboards and
Roller Skates
25-18-1 Definitions
25-18-2 Skateboards and Roller Skates Prohibited
in Places Where Posted
25-18-3 Posting Procedure
25-18-4 Designated Areas
25-18-5 Skateboarding or Roller Skating as
Nuisance
25-18-6 Violation as Infraction
25-18-1 Definitions. For purposes of this chapter
only, the following definitions shall apply:
"Roller Skates" means any footwear or device
which may be attached to the foot or footwear to
which wheels are attached and the wheels may be
used by the wearer in moving, including in-line
skates known as roller blades. The definition of these
terms shall include a single roller skate, or parts
thereof, used by the wearer in moving.
"Skateboard" or "Skateboards” includes any
board of any material which has wheels attached to it
where the wheels may be used for movement or
propulsion.
"Official Sign" means a sign which meets the
specifications set by the Clinton City Police
Department and which prohibits operating
skateboards or roller skates on the property.
25-18-2 Skateboards and Roller Skates Prohibited
in Places Where Posted. It is unlawful for any
person upon roller skates or skateboards, to go upon
and/or ride upon any public or private property,
public or private parking lot or shopping center
parking lot, or any applicable portion thereof,
provided official signs prohibiting the acts are erected
in accordance with § 25-18-3.
25-18-3 Posting Procedure. Persons, who own,
lease, rent or otherwise have control over real
property, and who wish to post signs prohibiting the
use of roller skates or skateboards on the property,
must post signs prohibiting the use of skateboards
and roller skates on the property. Signs must be
posted in plain view at all entrances to the property,
or at all entrances to that portion of the property for
which the use of skateboards and roller skates is
prohibited. Signs must reference Clinton City Code
of Ordinances Title 25 Chapter 17. Public property
shall be posted using the same procedure.
25-18-4 Designated Areas.
(1) The City Council may, from time to time,
designate certain areas for the use of skates and/or
skateboards. Areas shall be designated by resolution
of the City Council and posted with signs which are
consistent with the standards for signs adopted by
Clinton City.
(2) All persons using a skateboard in an area
designated for the use of roller skates and/or
skateboards are required to wear protective
equipment and comply with the requirements and
regulations of Title 19, Parks, as amended.
25-18-5 Skateboarding or Roller Skating as
Nuisance. No person shall use a skateboard or roller
skates in a manner which creates a nuisance. For
purposes of this Section, "nuisance" is defined as an
activity which:
(1) Threatens injury to person or property;
(2) Creates an obstruction or presents a hazard to the
free use of public or private property by pedestrians
or motorists; or
(3) Generates loud or unreasonable noise.
25-18-6 Violation as Infraction. A violation of any
Section in this chapter is deemed to be an infraction
and is punishable according to the provisions of this
code and state law.
History; 03/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
Chapter 19. Crosswalks
25-19-1 Definitions
25-19-2 Intersection Crosswalks
25-19-3 Uncontrolled Crosswalks
25-19-4 Crosswalk Installation
25-19-5 Decision to Install a Crosswalk
25-19-6 Appeal of a Decision not to Install a
Crosswalk
25-19-1 Definitions.
“Crosswalk”
(1) That part of a roadway at an intersection included
within the connections of the lateral lines of the
sidewalks on opposite sides of the street measured
from the curbs, or in the absence of curbs, from the
edges of the traversable roadway; and in the absence
of a sidewalk on one side of the roadway, the part of
a roadway included within the extension of the lateral
lines of the existing sidewalk at right angles to the
centerline.
(2) Any portion of a roadway at an intersection or
elsewhere distinctly indicated for pedestrian crossing
by lines or other markings on the surface. (1992
Uniform Vehicle Code Section 1-112)
“Uncontrolled Crosswalks” Unmarked crosswalk at
an intersection.
25-19-2 Intersection Crosswalks. Crosswalks exist
at all public street intersections whether they are
marked or unmarked. Crosswalks will typically be
marked at signalized intersections, school crossing
locations, and areas of considerable pedestrian
activity.
25-19-3 Uncontrolled Crosswalks. Before
installing a new marked crosswalk at uncontrolled
street crossings, a staff evaluation is required to
determine if the location is suitable for a marked
crosswalk. The evaluation will be a Council
approved rating system, “Guidelines and Standards
for Pedestrian Crossings’” based on guidelines
established by Federal Highways Administration
(FHA) and the Manual on Uniform Traffic control
Devices (MUTCD) guidelines. It is recommended
that a minimum of 20 pedestrian crossings per peak
hour (or 15 or more elderly and/or child pedestrians)
be confirmed at a location before being considered
for installation of marked crosswalk.
25-19-4 Crosswalk Installation. The need for
pedestrian crossing enhancements will be reviewed
as part of the staff evaluation. Where it is determined
to install a crosswalk, the crosswalk shall be
constructed per the MUTCD guidelines.
25-19-5 Decision to Install a Crosswalk. Findings
of the staff review will be evaluated and the results
presented to the Manager with a recommendation to
either install or not install the crosswalk.
Recommendation will include the cost of necessary
right-of-way and safety enhancements. If the
crosswalk is to be installed, based upon the
recommendation, the Manager will establish a
priority within the constraints of the budget.
25-19-6 Appeal of a Decision not to Install a
Crosswalk. If the decision of staff is that the
crosswalk should not be installed, an appeal by
interested parties may be made to the City Council.
The decision of the Council will be final.
History: 11/08, 03/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
Chapter 20. Special Events
25-20-1 Intent
25-20-2 Definitions
25-20-3 Film/Filming Requirements and
Procedures
25-20-4 General Requirements
25-20-5 Application
25-20-6 Review Process
25-20-7 Contents of Permit
25-20-8 Appeal Procedure
25-20-9 Alternative Route – Time - Date
25-20-10 Notice to City and Other Officials
25-20-11 Public Conduct During Event
25-20-12 Revocation of Permit
25-20-13 Permit Exemptions
25-20-1 Intent. It is the intent of the City to
encourage special events; parades, races, runs, walks,
on or in a part of the right-of-way, as they express
pride in the City and support for community
organizations. The City supports the events to the
degree they create and maintain a safe, clean and
maneuverable environment for participants and the
citizens of the City. However, it is the City's desire
that the events do not detract from normal City
operations and services provided to the citizens-atlarge.
These special events need to pay for their
impacts on City services in order not to hinder or
cause a drain on the City's limited resources.
25-20-2 Definitions. The following words and
phrases are defined for use in this chapter:
"Block Party" means a one-day social gathering of
neighbors in which the associated residential street is
temporarily closed.
"Special Event" means any parade, march, race,
walk, procession, or gathering of any kind or similar
display that necessitates the exclusive temporary use
and/or closure of a public right-of-way, publiclyowned
parking lot, or other public place in the City,
excluding parks and parking lots adjacent to parks.
25-20-3 Film/Filming Requirements and
Procedures. Refer to Title 16, Chapter 16, for
requirements related to Film/Filming Requirements
and Procedures.
25-20-4 General Requirements.
(1) A Special Event Permit shall be obtained from the
City prior to the start of any special event. City
sponsored special events shall be subject to the
requirements of this chapter.
(2) A street closure Permit may be required as a
condition of approval. If this is necessary, then the
event sponsor shall coordinate with Community
Development for its issuance.
(3) Police Services: Required or requested police
services may be provided by the Clinton City Police
Department and will be processed through the
Clinton City Police Chief. Applicant is to provide
adequate information so that any need for police
services is clearly explained, to include dates, times,
specific reason for officers (traffic control, security,
etc.), and number of officers.
(a) Once the Permit has been approved the applicant
may make arrangements with off duty police officers
for scheduling.
(b) Certified officers from other jurisdictions may be
utilized when Clinton officers are not available.
(c) Use of any officers, Clinton City or otherwise, is
to be approved by the Clinton City Chief of Police.
(d) Cancellation of police services will be as
established with the individual officers; however
applicant is to inform the Clinton City Chief of Police
of any changes in the schedule.
(e) Fees for police services shall be established as set
forth in § 25-6-4. Charges for off-duty officers or
officers from other jurisdictions shall be resolved
with the individual officers and not processed
through the City.
(4) Fire and Ambulance Services. Required or
requested fire and ambulance services can be
provided by the Clinton City Fire Department and
will be processed through the Clinton City Fire Chief.
Applicant is to provide adequate information so that
any need for these services is clearly explained, to
include dates, times, specific reason (fire standby,
ambulance standby, hazmat, extinguish burn, etc.)
and number and type of vehicles required.
(a) All activities related to the event must meet the
existing Fire Code adopted by the State of Utah
(International Fire Code).
(i) An inspection of the site/route will be required.
(ii) Obtain appropriate Permits; pyrotechnics, flame
effects (NFPA 160).
(b) Fees for fire services shall be established as set
forth in § 25-6-4.
(5) Events that require closure or access to SR-37
(1800 North) or SR-108 (2000 West) shall be
required to obtain UDOT Permits and file copies of
Permits with applications. An approved UDOT
Permit does not obligate the City to grant a Permit for
a special event.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
(6) The applicant shall defend the City, its agents,
officers, officials and employees against any legal
proceeding in law or equity, and further shall
indemnify and hold harmless the City and its agents,
officers, officials and employees from any costs,
awards, fees, including attorney fees, or judgments
which arise from any act or omission, whether
intentional or negligent, or from strict liability arising
from the conduct of any participant, invitee, attendee,
sponsor or any third person who is or is not an
invitee, attendee, participant, or sponsor of the event.
(7) A Permit holder shall comply with all Permit
directions and conditions and with all applicable laws
and ordinances. The event chairman or other person
heading or leading the activity shall carry the event
Permit upon their person during the course of the
event.
25-20-5 Application.
(1) Submittal Requirements. A person seeking a
Special Event Permit shall file ten (10) copies of the
complete application on City forms with Community
Development not less than forty-five (45) calendar
days nor more than one hundred eighty (180)
calendar days prior to the date of the proposed event.
The application shall contain the information below.
Additional information may be required depending
on the size and scope of the event. Each Permit
application must contain the following:
(a) The name, address and phone number of the event
sponsor and/or individual(s) responsible for its
conduct;
(b) A written description of the event and its purpose;
(c) The date, the place of assembly, start and finish
times of the event;
(d) A written narration of the route to be traveled,
including the assembly and parking areas, and the
start and termination points;
(e) Parking Plan:
(i) A parking plan for all vehicles associated with the
event, including equipment vans, trailers, etc. must be
submitted with the Permit application.
(ii) Parking in “no parking” areas will only be
allowed with prior clearance from the Clinton City
Police Department.
(f) A detailed map of the route to be traveled
delineating which part of the right-of-way to be
traveled, how street crossings are to be accomplished
(i.e. use of barricades, police traffic control, etc.),
assembly and parking areas;
(g) The approximate number of persons (participants
and spectators), and the number and type of vehicles
(if any) which will constitute the special event;
(h) The number and location of any rest stop/aid
stations and the facilities to be provided (i.e.
restrooms, refreshments, first aid, etc.);
(i) If the event is to be conducted for or by an
organization, the name, address and telephone
number of the headquarters of the organization and of
the authorized and responsible heads of the
organization;
(j) An indication of any route marshals to be
provided by the event sponsor. If so, the map shall
indicate their location along the route.
(2) Application Fee. The applicant shall pay a fee as
established in § 25-6-4.
(3) Waiver of Fees and/or Deposits. The City Council
may waive a part or all of the fees if it can be shown
that the City will benefit in some tangible way and
the action will not cause a drain on public resources.
(4) Proof of Insurance. The applicant shall submit
proof of insurance in the amount determined by the
Community Development Director naming the City
as an insured party.
(5) Security Deposit.
(a) Depending on the size, scale and location of the
event, the Community Development Director may
require a deposit to cover the costs of clean-up. The
amount of the deposit will be commensurate with the
size of the event and determined by Public Works. If
the sponsor cleans up the route/course to the
satisfaction of Public Works, then the deposit will be
refunded. If the clean-up is not to the Public Works
Director’s satisfaction, then the City will clean or
have cleaned the route and the cost to the City will be
billed against the sponsors deposit one and one-half
(1 ½) times the pay rate of the City crews plus an
appropriate administrative fee. Any balance of
deposit will be returned to the sponsor after the City
charges are deducted.
(6) If a department finds that the special event will
detract from normal City operations to an extent that
additional personnel or equipment is needed, that
department shall so notify the Manager, indicating
the estimated costs created by the special event, and
the Manager shall direct the Community
Development Director to require a security deposit to
cover the costs in an amount equal to one and onehalf
(1 ½) times the applicable pay rate. Upon
completion of the special event, the applicant shall be
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
refunded any unused funds or billed for the services
provided in excess of the deposit.
(7) Property Owner’s Permission: For events that
take place on property not owned or controlled by the
City, applicants must obtain written permission from
the property owner(s) and tenant(s) and/or enter into
a lease agreement for the use of the property. Copies
of the permission or agreement must be provided to
the City prior to the issuance of an event Permit.
(8) Notice Requirements. At the time of submittal, a
public notice shall be placed in the local paper
specifying the date and time of the special event
along with the map of the route. The notice shall also
state the time frames of the review period. In
addition, notice to residents and/or merchants
adjacent to route/course may be required by the
Community Development Director depending on the
size, location and time of event.
25-20-6 Review Process.
(1) The Community Development Director shall
review all applications within seven (7) calendar days
from the time of submittal. If the application is
deficient, then the sponsor shall be informed and the
processing will cease until the application is
complete. Upon reapplication the review time starts
over.
(2) Once the application is deemed complete, the
Community Development Director shall forward
copies of the application with the map to the
following City Departments for review and comment.
Each department shall evaluate the event's impact on
its respective area of responsibility and respond
accordingly.
(a) Manager;
(b) Police;
(c) Fire;
(d) Recreation;
(e) Public Works;
(f) Any other affected department;
(3) Responses shall be returned to the Community
Development Director within fourteen (14) calendar
days.
(4) The Community Development Director shall act
upon an application for a Special Event Permit within
twenty-one (21) calendar days after the application is
deemed complete. A letter specifying the action and
the appeal period shall be sent to the event sponsor
and any concerned citizen.
(5) If the event is of a size and type that warrants
special consideration, staff may refer the item to a
meeting of the City Staff. If this were to occur, the
twenty-one (21) day time frame will not apply.
(6) A Special Event Permit shall be issued when it
can be found that:
(a) The conduct of the special event will not
substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement
of traffic in the City or damage public property;
(b) The special event is scheduled to move from its
place of beginning to its place of termination without
unreasonable delays in route;
(c) The special event is not held for the sole purpose
of advertising any product, good or event for private
profit;
(d) The special event provides a specific benefit to
the City or to the business community, or to a
recognized community organization;
(e) The conduct of the special event will not require
the diversion of so many police officers of the City to
properly police the line of movement as to prevent
normal police protection to the City;
(f) The concentration of persons, animals and
vehicles in and about the special event will not
unduly interfere with proper fire and police
protection in the area.
25-20-7 Contents of Permit. Each Special Event
Permit shall state the conditions of approval, the
starting and ending time of the event, the portions of
the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by
the event, the maximum length of the event, and all
other information as the Community Development
Director shall find necessary to the enforcement of
this chapter.
25-20-8 Appeal Procedure. Any person aggrieved
shall have the right to appeal the Community
Development Director's decision on a Special Event
Permit (approval, denial, alternative route) to the City
Council by filing a notice of appeal with the City
recorder within five (5) calendar days after the
Community Development Director’s action
established in § 25-20-6(4) above. The appeal shall
be placed on the next regular City Council meeting
after the appeal is filed the City Council's
determination shall be final.
25-20-9 Alternative Route – Time - Date. The
Community Development Director, in denying an
application for a Special Event Permit, may authorize
the conduct of the event on a date, at a time, or over a
route different from that named by the applicant. An
applicant wishing to accept an alternate Permit shall
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
file a written notice of acceptance with the
Community Development Director within five (5)
calendar days after notice of the action. An alternate
Special Event Permit shall have the effect of a
Special Event Permit under this chapter.
25-20-10 Notice to City and Other Officials.
Immediately upon the issuance of a Special Event
Permit, the Community Development Director shall
send a copy of the Permit to the Manager, Chief of
Police, Fire Chief, and the Community Development
Director, each public transportation system whose
vehicles will be affected by the route of the proposed
special event, and any other public officials the
Community Development Director wishes to notify.
25-20-11 Public Conduct During Event. No
person shall tamper, obstruct, or interfere with any
special event or assembly or with any person, vehicle
or animal participating or used in the special event.
No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the
vehicles or persons comprising the special event
when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are
conspicuously designated as a special event. If Public
Works has posted temporary signs restricting the
parking, operation, or standing of vehicles in the area
pursuant to Title 16 of this code, it shall be unlawful
for any person to operate, park, or leave standing any
vehicle in violation of the posted signs.
25-20-12 Revocation of Permit. The Community
Development Director shall have the authority to
revoke a Special Event Permit if the event and/or
participants are not complying with the conditions of
the Permit.
25-20-13 Permit Exemptions. No Permit shall be
required for funeral processions, school field trips or
block parties.
History; 03/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 25 Streets, Sidewalks and Right-of-Way
Chapter 21. Miscellaneous Provisions
25-21-1 Injuring Curbs and Gutters
25-21-2 Injuring Sidewalks and Trails
25-21-1 Injuring Curbs and Gutters. It is
unlawful for any person to obstruct, break down or
otherwise injure, paint or destroy curb or gutter by
driving over, plowing, cultivating or otherwise within
the City.
25-21-2 Injuring Sidewalks and Trails. It is
unlawful for any person to obstruct, break down or
otherwise injure or destroy any dirt, wood, rock or
cement sidewalk or trail by driving over, plowing,
cultivating or otherwise within the City.
History: 03/10
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26 Subdivisions
TITLE 26. SUBDIVISIONS
Chapter 1. Subdivision Code
Chapter 1. Subdivision Code
26-1-1 Subdivision Ordinance Adopted by
Reference
26-1-2 Penalties
26-1-1 Subdivision Ordinance Adopted by
Reference. The subdivision ordinance, adopted as
Ordinance No. 6-69, and as the same has been and
may be from time to time amended and superseded,
three (3) copies of which have been filed in booklet
form in the office of the recorder for use and
examination by the public, is hereby incorporated by
reference into this code and shall become the
subdivision code applicable to the city.
History: 9/84
26-1-2 Penalties. A violation of the subdivision
code is a class C misdemeanor.
History: 9/84, 05/99
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
TITLE 27. WATER
Chapter 1. General
Chapter 2. Definitions
Chapter 3. Administration
Chapter 4. Culinary Water System
Chapter 5. Obstructing Watercourses
Chapter 6. Control of Backflow and Cross
Connections
Chapter 7. Pressure Irrigation Water
Service
Chapter 8. Provisions for Secondary
Irrigation Water for New
Developments
Chapter 9. Water Source Protection
Chapter l. General
27-1-1 Statement of Purpose
27-1-2 Applicability
27-1-3 Water Department and System
27-1-4 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions
27-1-5 Interpretation
27-1-6 Division to Have Free Access
27-1-7 Non-Liability for Damages
27-1-8 Water Not Supplied for Motors,
Siphons, Etc
27-1-9 Sprinklers
27-1-10 Curtailment
27-1-11 Severability
27-1-1 Statement of Purpose. The purpose of
this Title is to protect the health, safety and
welfare of the Clinton City residents by
establishing, and controlling the systems outlined
in this Title as well as setting up procedures
related to management, and outside influences
upon the systems. The objectives of this Title
are:
(1) Protect human life and health;
(2) To prohibit illicit connections and discharges
to the systems;
(3) To manage and control flows and the
introduction of inappropriate materials into the
systems;
(4) To protect the environment;
(5) Minimize expenditure of public money for
costly public works and infrastructure projects;
(6) Minimize the need for rescue and relief
efforts associated with flooding generally
undertaken at the expense of the general public;
(7) Minimize prolonged business interruptions;
(8) Minimize damage to public facilities and
utilities such as water, sewer, stormwater and gas
mains, electric, telephone and cable lines, streets
and bridges located in and servicing the City;
(9) Help maintain a stable tax base by providing
for the sound use and development of areas in
such a manner as to provide adequate
infrastructure and minimize blight areas;
(10) To guide, regulate and control the design,
construction, use, and maintenance of any
development or other activity that results in the
movement of earth on land within the City;
(11) Insure that potential buyers are notified of
probability of incompatibility of land features
that may make that property inappropriate for an
intended use. To establish legal authority to carry
out all inspection, surveillance and monitoring
procedures necessary to ensure compliance with
this Title; and,
(12) To establish a viable and fair method of
financing the construction, operation and
maintenance of the systems.
27-1-2 Applicability. This Title shall apply to
all water, waste water, sewerage, effluent, and
other materials entering the systems established
in this Title generated on any developed and
undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by
an authorized enforcement agency.
27-1-3 Water Department and System.
(1) The city water department is hereby created
to administer the operation and maintenance of
the water systems of the city.
(2) The water system shall consist of property,
equipment, rights, contractual or otherwise,
possessed by the city to the utilization of mains.
History: 9/65, 9/8
27-1-4 Abrogation and Greater Restrictions.
This Title is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or
impair any existing easements, covenants, or
deed restrictions. However, where this Title and
another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed
restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes
the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
27-1-5 Interpretation. In the interpretation
and application of this Title, all provisions shall
be;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
(1) Considered as minimum requirements;
(2) Liberally construed in favor of the governing
body; and,
(3) Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other
powers granted under State statutes.
27-1-6 Division to Have Free Access. The
supervisor and his representatives shall at all
ordinary hours have free access to places
supplied with one or more of the systems
established by this Title for the purpose of
examining the apparatus, ascertaining flows, and
the manner of use.
27-1-7 Non-Liability for Damages.
(1) The city shall not be liable for any damage to
a water service user by reason of stoppage or
interruption of his water service caused by fires,
scarcity of water, accidents to the water systems,
or their mains, or as the result of maintenance
and extension operations, or from any other
unavoidable cause.
(2) The City shall not be liable for any damage to
the structure, building, or location if the “fullopen
valve”, main shutoff valve, located on the
“water distribution supply pipe at the entrance to
the structure” is left on or is not fully closed and
the City turns on the “full-open valve” from the
“public water supply near the curb”. (Terms in
quotations are defined in the International
Plumbing Code and International Residential
Code.)
History: 9/65, 9/84, 10/09
27-1-8 Water Not Supplied for Motors,
Siphons, Etc. No water shall be supplied from
the pipes of the city water system for the purpose
of driving any motor, siphon, turbine, or other
wheels, or any hydraulic engines, or elevators, or
for driving or propelling machinery of any kind
whatsoever, nor shall any license be granted or
issued for any such purpose except by special
permission of the city council.
History: 9/65
27-1-9 Sprinklers.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to use such
number of outlets simultaneously or to use such
sprinklers or combinations of sprinklers or
outlets as will in the opinion of city council
materially affect the pressure or supply of water
in the city water system or any part thereof, and
the city council may, from time to time, by
resolution, specify combinations or number of
outlets which may have such effect.
(2) The city council shall, after a determination
that such improper use exists, notify the affected
water user, or the owner of the premises whereon
such use occurs, of such determination in writing
and order such use discontinued and advise him
that such continued usage constitutes a violation
of this ordinance.
History: 9/65
27-1-10 Curtailment. In time of scarcity of
water, whenever it shall in the judgment of the
city council be necessary, the council shall, by
resolution and proclamation, limit the use of
water for other than domestic purposes to such
extent as may be necessary for the public good.
It shall be unlawful for any person by himself,
family, servants, or agents, to violate any
proclamation made in pursuance of this section.
History: 9/65, 9/84
27-1-11 Severability. The provisions of this
Title are hereby declared to be severable. If any
provisions, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this
Title or the application thereof to any person,
establishment, or circumstances shall be held
invalid, such invalidity shall not affect the other
provisions or application of this Title.
History: 1/12
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
Chapter 2. Definitions
27-2-1 Definitions
27-2-1 Definitions. Unless specifically defined
below, words or phrases used in this Title shall
be interpreted to give them the meaning they
have in common usage and to give this Title it’s
most reasonable application.
"Abandoned Well" means a well whose
purpose and use has been permanently
discontinued or a well that is in a state of
disrepair and its intended purpose cannot
reasonably be achieved. A well can be
abandoned only after being properly sealed
according to the requirements of the State of
Utah Administrative Rules for Water Well
Drillers, R655-4-12.
"Allowed Uses" or “A” means a use, activity or
practice of which does not create a risk of
contamination in the specified zone significant
enough to require the implementation of
regulatory requirement and Best Management
Practices and, therefore, the use is allowed.
“Approved Backflow Assembly” means an
approved by the State of Utah as meeting an
applicable specification or as suitable for the
proposed use.
“Auxiliary Water Supply” means any water
supply on or available to the premises other than
the purveyor's public water supply will be
considered as an auxiliary water supply. These
auxiliary waters may include water from another
purveyor, public potable water supply or any
natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river,
stream, ditch, secondary water system, etc., or
"used waters" or "industrial fluids". These
waters may be contaminated or polluted or they
may be objectionable and constitute an
unacceptable water source over which the water
purveyor does not have authority for sanitary
control.
“Backflow” means the flow of water or other
liquids, mixtures, or substances into the
distributing pipes of a potable supply of water
from any sources other than its intended source
caused by either back-pressure or backsiphonage.
“Back-Pressure” means backflow due to an
increased pressure above the supply pressure.
This may be due to pumps, boilers, gravity or
other sources of pressure.
“Back-Siphonage” means the flowing back of
used, contaminated, or polluted water from a
plumbing fixture or vessel into a water supply
pipe due to a negative pressure in such pipe.
“Backflow Prevention Assembly” means an
assembly or other means designed to prevent
backflow which is capable of being tested in line.
Specifications for backflow prevention
assemblies are contained within the IPC.
“Backflow Prevention Device” means a device
that prevents backflow but is not capable of
being tested in line nor is it listed in the IPC.
"Best Management Practices" means a
practice or combination of practices determined
to be the most effective practicable means of
conducting a land use activity to minimize the
potential for becoming a pollution source
(including technological, economic and
institutional considerations).
"Building Supply Pipe" means the pipe
carrying potable water from the water meter or
other source of water supply to a building or
other point of use or distribution on the lot.
"Building Supply Pipe" also means water
service pipe.
"Clinton City Users" means any user of
culinary water who resides within the corporate
limits of Clinton City.
History: 11/82, 12/83, 9/84, 1/12
"Collection Area" means the area surrounding a
ground-water source which is underlain by
collection pipes, tile, tunnels, infiltration boxes
or other ground-water collection devices.
“Consumer's Water Distribution System”
means all culinary water piping and fixtures
extending from the meter box (in the case of an
inside meter set) into and throughout the
consumer's premises and extending to all free
flowing taps. The city shall retain control of all
meter assemblies and appurtenances.
“Contamination” means a degradation of the
quality of the potable water supply by sewage,
industrial fluids or waste liquids, auxiliary water
supply, compounds or other materials.
“Cross Connection” means any connection or
arrangement, physical or otherwise, between a
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
potable water supply system and any plumbing
fixture or any tank, receptacle, equipment or
device, through which it may be possible for nonpotable,
used, unclean, polluted and
contaminated water, or other substances, to enter
into any part of such potable water system under
any condition.
“Cross Connection-Controlled” means a
connection between a potable water system and a
non-potable water system with an approved
backflow prevention assembly properly installed
and maintained so that it will continuously afford
the protection commensurate with the degree of
hazard.
“Cross Connection-Containment” means the
installation of an approved backflow
device/assembly at the water service connection
to any consumer's premises where it is physically
and economically infeasible to find and
permanently eliminate or control all actual or
potential cross connections within the customer's
water system; or, it shall mean the installation of
an approved backflow prevention
device/assembly on the service line leading to
and supplying a portion of a customer's water
system where there are actual or potential cross
connections which cannot be effectively
eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross
connection (isolation).
"Design Standard" means established State or
National Standards for the design, construction,
placement or maintenance of a potential
contamination source to prevent discharges to the
ground water. See also "secondary containment."
"Hazardous Waste" means a waste with
properties that make it dangerous or potentially
harmful to human health or the environment.
“High Risk Consumer” means all cases where a
cross connection exists.
“International Plumbing Code – IPC” means
the International Plumbing Code, published by
the International Code Council, as adopted and
amended by the State.
History: 9/91, 1/12
"Land Management Strategies" means land
use and non land use controls which include, but
are not limited to, the following: land ordinance,
site plan reviews, design and operating standards,
source prohibitions, optional purchase of
property and development rights, public
education programs, ground-water monitoring,
household hazardous waste collection programs,
water conservation programs, memoranda of
understanding, written contracts and agreements,
and so forth.
“Land Use Authority” means the Clinton City
Planning Commission, applications to appear
before the Authority are submitted through the
Community Development Department.
“Land Use Ordinance” means the Clinton City
Zoning Ordinance, Subdivision Ordinance, and
Sign Ordinance.
“Low Risk Consumer” means those cases
where a consumer may inadvertently create a
temporary cross connection as a result of water
use practices.
"Pollution Source" means point source
discharge of contaminants to ground water or
potential discharges of the liquid forms of
"extremely hazardous substances" which are
stored in containers in excess of "applicable
threshold planning quantities" as specified in
SARA Title III. Examples of possible pollution
sources include, but are not limited to, the
following: storage facilities that store the liquid
forms of extremely hazardous substances, septic
tanks, drain fields, Class V underground
injection wells, landfills, open dumps, land filling
of sludge and septage, manure piles, salt piles, pit
privies and animal feeding operations with more
than ten animal units. The following clarify the
definition of pollution source:
(1) "Animal Feeding Operation" means a lot or
facility where the following conditions are met:
animals have been or will be stabled or confined
and fed or maintain for a total of 45 days or more
in any 12 month period and crops, vegetation
forage growth or post-harvest residues are not
sustained in the normal growing season over any
portion of the lot or facility. Two or more animal
feeding operations under common ownership are
considered to be a single feeding operation if
they adjoin each other, if they use a common area
or if they use a common system for the disposal
of wastes.
(2) "Animal Unit" means a unit of measurement
for any animal feeding operation calculated by
adding the following numbers: the number of
slaughter and feeder cattle multiplied by 1.0, plus
the number of mature dairy cattle multiplied by
1.4, plus the number of swine weighing over 55
pounds multiplied by 0.4 plus the number of
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
sheep multiplied by 0.1, plus the number of
horses multiplied by 2.0.
(3) "Extremely Hazardous Substances" means
those substances which are identified in the Sec.
302(EHS) column of the "TITLE III LIST OF
LISTS- Consolidated List of Chemicals Subject
to Reporting under SARA Title III," (EPA
560/4-91-011).
"Potential Contamination Source" means any
facility or site, which employs and activity or
procedure, which may potentially contaminate
ground water. A pollution source is also a
potential contamination source.
"Prohibited Uses" or “X” means a use, activity
or practice of which creates a substantial risk or
contamination in the specified zone. The use is
not permitted.
"Regulatory Agency" means any governmental
agency (local, state, and/or federal) with
jurisdiction of hazardous waste as defined herein.
"Restricted" or “R” means that the nature of
the use, or some element of the use, represents a
"Potential Contamination Source." The use may
be permitted only after review and approval by
the land use authority. As part of this review,
recommendations from the Davis County Health
Department and other applicable regulatory
agencies shall be considered.
"Sanitary Landfill" means a disposal site where
solid wastes, including putrescible wastes or
hazardous wastes are disposed of on land by
placing earth cover thereon.
"SARA Title III" means the Superfund
Amendment and Reauthorization Act section
found on 40 CFR 300-302, pertaining to
emergency response and right-to-know.
"Secondary Containment" means a type of
system that is used to provide release detection
prevention, such as trays under containers, floor
curbing or other systems designed to hold
materials or liquids that may discharge from
containers holding regulated substance.
Examples include a double-walled tank, a
double-walled integral piping system or a singlewalled
tank or integral piping system that is
protected by an enclosed concrete vault, liner, or
an impervious containment area.
"Septic Tank/Drain-field Systems" means a
system, which is comprised of a septic tank and a
grain-field, which accepts wastewater from
buildings or facilities for surface or subsurface
treatment and disposal.
“Source Protection Zone" means the specified
surface and subsurface area surrounding a
ground-water source of drinking water supplying
a Public Water Supply, through which
contaminants are reasonable likely to more
toward and reach such ground-water source.
These zones shall have the approval of the State
of Utah, Division of Drinking Water as described
in R309-600 Source Protection: Drinking Water
Source Protection for Ground-Water Sources and
stated in Section Three herein.
“Underground Storage Tank" means a tank or
combination of tanks and underground pipes and
impact valves connected to tanks being used or
having been used to contain regulated substances
and which has at least ten per cent of the total
volume of the tank and underground portions of
pipes connected to the tank underground.
"Watercourse" means a channel in which a
flow of water occurs, either continuously or
intermittently.
“Water Purveyor” means the water department
of the city is invested with the authority and
responsibility for the implementation of an
effective cross connection control program and
for the enforcement of the provisions of this
chapter.
“Water System” means the Clinton City Public
Works Director for issues within Clinton City or
the appropriate authority, as designated by
adjoining governmental entities, where the well
is located outside of Clinton City.
“Wellhead" means the upper terminal of a well,
including adapters, ports seals valves and other
attachments.
"West Point Users" means any user of a Clinton
Utility who resides within West Point, Utah.
History: 11/82, 12/83, 9/84, 1/12
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
Chapter 3. Administration
27-3-1 Responsibility of Administration
27-3-2 Office of Primary Responsibility
27-3-3 Supervisor of the Public Works
Divisions
27-3-4 Duties of the Supervisor
27-3-5 Regulations
27-3-6 Policies
27-3-7 Application for Culinary Water
Service
27-3-8 Permit Required
27-3-9 Establishment of Land Use Permit
27-3-10 Establishment of a Road Cut Permit
27-3-11 Applications for Installation Permit
27-3-12 Permit Fees
27-3-13 Revocation of Permits
27-3-14 When Permits Shall not be Issued
27-3-15 Turning on Water after being Turned
off - Prohibited
27-3-16 Separate Connections
27-3-17 Unauthorized Users
27-3-18 Unauthorized Tampering Prohibited
27-3-19 Pipes to be Kept in Good Repair
27-3-20 Quality of Materials and Construction
Standards
27-3-21 Waste Prohibited
27-3-22 Sprinkling Vehicles
27-3-23 Department to Have Free Access
27-3-24 Supply of Water Services to Persons
Outside City Limits
27-3-1 Responsibility of Administration. The
City Manager shall administer, implement, and
enforce the provisions of this Title. Any powers
granted or duties imposed upon the City may be
delegated, in writing, by the City Manager to
persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest
of or in the employ of the City.
27-3-2 Office of Primary Responsibility. The
Public Works Department is the Office of
Primary Responsibility for review and proposing
changes to this Title. The Public Works Director
may call on the Community Development
Department and City Engineer for assistance in
reviewing this Title.
27-3-3 Supervisor of the Public Works
Divisions. The Public Works Director, with the
advice and consent of the City Manager, shall
appoint a competent person to act as the
supervisor of the systems outlined in this Title
(Supervisor).
History: 9/65, 9/84, 1/12
27-3-4 Duties of the Supervisor. The Public
Works Director shall prescribe the Supervisor’s
duties, and direct the manner and frequency of
reporting on the City’s systems outlined in this
Title.
History: 9/65, 9/84, 1/12
27-3-5 Regulations. The City Council shall
have power and retains the right to adopt
regulations controlling the manner and
circumstances under which the systems
established by this Title may be used, in addition
to the regulatory provisions set forth expressly in
this Title. Such regulations may include, but are
not limited to, the manner in which excavations
shall be made, connections or repairs, service
lines which may necessitate excavations on or
near and under sidewalks and the public ways,
the manner in which excavations shall be
backfilled and the type of materials that may be
used for the purpose.
27-3-6 Policies. The Public Works and
Community Development Directors may adopt
policies, consistent with this Title and any
resolutions passed by the City Council, to assist
in the application, administration and
interpretation of this Title and systems
established in this Title.
27-3-7 Application for Culinary Water
Service. Application for Culinary Water service
shall be as established in Title 2, Chapter 13.
27-3-8 Permit Required. No person shall be
allowed to cut into the street or conduct activities
to expose, gain access to, connect to, turn on or
off main valves, or otherwise disturb the systems
established in this Title without obtaining a
permit as outlined in § 27-3-9 or 27-3-10.
History: 9/65, 9/84, 1/12
27-3-9 Establishment of Land Use Permit.
For activities related significant construction or
connection to the systems in this Title:
(1) A Land Use Permit shall be required to
ensure conformance with the provisions of this
Title.
(2) Land Use Permits are to be reviewed and
approved in accordance with Title 26 of the
Clinton City Code.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
27-3-10 Establishment of a Road Cut Permit.
For activities related service laterals extending
into a right-of-way or easement for access to a
system outlined in this Title:
(1) A Road Cut Permit shall be obtained from the
Public Works Department.
(2) Road Cut Permits shall be processed as
outlined in Title 9, Chapter 21, Street
Excavations/Road Cuts, Clinton City Code.
27-3-11 Applications for Installation Permit.
(1) Applications for a permit or for connections
to any connecting systems established in this
Title or other alteration, laying or repairing of
lines connected directly or indirectly thereto must
be made in writing by a licensed contractor, his
authorized representatives, or by the owner of the
premises.
(2) Application shall describe the manner and
circumstances surrounding such installation or
alteration. If, in the judgment of the supervisor,
the carrying out of such connection, repair, or
installation, will cause no injury to the street in
which the system sought to be connected with is
located, or that such installation, improvement or
repair will not be prejudicial to the interest of the
persons whose property has been or may
thereafter be connected with the system and that
the connection in all things shall conform to the
code and standards of the City, then the
application to connect with the systems shall be
granted subject to the provisions of this Title.
(3) All the connections or installations shall be to
line and grades designated by the project
engineer and approved by the supervisor.
History: 9/65, 9/84, 1/12
27-3-12 Permit Fees. Fees for permits or for
inspection services shall be established by the
city council, by resolution, and published in the
Consolidated Fee Schedule.
History: 9/65, 9/84, 1/12
27-3-13 Revocation of Permits. All
construction permits for water connections or
installations shall be issued to the plumber who is
to do the work, or to the owner of the property,
subject to supervision and inspection by the
supervisor or his agents, but the city recorder or
supervisor may at any time revoke a permit
because of defective work or because of undue
delay in completing the permitted work.
History: 9/65, 9/84
27-3-14 When Permits Shall not be Issued.
Permits to connect with the water system of the
city shall not be issued unless the plumbing in the
house or building to be connected is in
accordance with the provisions of the building
and IPC.
History: 9/65, 9/84
27-3-15 Turning on Water after being Turned
off - Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any
person after the water has been turned off from
his premises for nonpayment of water charges or
other violation of the rules and regulations
pertaining to the water supply to turn on or allow
the water to be turned on or used without
authority.
History: 9/65, 9/84
27-3-16 Separate Connections. It shall be
unlawful for two or more families or service
users to be supplied from the same service pipe
or connection or water meter unless special
permission for such combination usage has been
granted and the premises served are owned by
the same owner. In all such cases a failure on the
part of any one of said users to comply with this
chapter shall warrant a withholding of a supply
of water through said service connections until
compliance or payment has been made and in
any event the property owner shall be primarily
liable to the city for all water services utilized on
all such premises. Nothing herein shall be
deemed to preclude the power of the city to
require separate pipes, connections, or meters at
a subsequent time.
History: 9/65, 9/84
27-3-17 Unauthorized Users. It shall be
unlawful for any water service user to permit any
person from other premises or any unauthorized
persons to use or obtain water services regularly
from his premises water facilities, either outside
or inside his premises.
History: 9/65, 9/84
27-3-18 Unauthorized Tampering Prohibited.
No person, other than authorized City personnel
acting within the scope of their employment,
shall tamper with, modify, obstruct, or damage
any water meter, valve, main, pipe, service
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
opening, or other part of the City water system,
nor detach, install, use, or knowingly permit the
use of any jumper or bypass pipe or other bypass
structure on or in connection with any part of the
City water system. No person shall impede the
natural flow of any waterline or pipe in any
manner whatsoever.
27-3-19 Pipes to be Kept in Good Repair. All
users of water services shall keep their service
pipes and connections and other apparatus in
good repair and protected from frost at their own
expense. No person shall be allowed to dig into
the street for any purpose without complying
with the requirements of § 27-3-8.
History: 9/65, 9/84, 1/12
27-3-20 Quality of Materials and
Construction Standards.
(1) All service and other pipes used in
conjunction with the culinary water system shall
be of such material, quality, and specifications
and shall be installed at such distances below
ground as specified in Title 9 Clinton City Code.
(2) All work, alterations, or extensions affecting
culinary water pipes shall be subject to the
acceptance of the supervisor, nor shall any
connections with systems established in this Title
be made without first obtaining the permit
required in § 27-3-8.
(3) No person shall be allowed to conduct pipes
associated with the systems established in this
Title across lots or under future building pads to
adjoining premises or building without first
applying for and receiving a permit from the
Community Development Department. Actions
of this type will require property rights to be
honored and that easements be established for
construction and maintenance access.
(4) All work associated with the secondary water
system shall meet the permit requirements and
standards of the Davis and Weber County’s
Canal Company.
History: 9/65, 9/84, 1/12
27-3-21 Waste Prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any water user to waste water, or to allow it
to be wasted, by imperfect stops, taps, valves,
leaky joints or pipes, or to allow tanks or
watering troughs to leak or overflow, or to
wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets, or
stops or through basins, water closets, urinals,
sinks, or other apparatus, or to use the water for
purposes other than for those which he has paid,
or to use water in violation of the rules and
regulations for controlling the water supply.
History: 9/65
27-3-22 Sprinkling Vehicles. Vehicles for
sprinkling shall be regulated and controlled by
the water department through the supervisor of
the water and sewer department.
History: 9/65
27-3-23 Department to Have Free Access.
The supervisor and his agents shall at all
ordinary hours have free access to places
supplied with water services from the city system
for the purpose of examining the apparatus,
ascertaining the amount of water service being
used, and the manner of its use.
History: 9/65, 9/84
27-3-24 Supply of Water Services to Persons
Outside City Limits.
(1) The city may furnish water service from its
water system to persons outside its corporate
limits in accordance with the provisions of the
following sections.
(2) Any person located outside the city limits
desiring to be supplied with water services from
the city water system and being willing to pay in
advance the whole expense of extending the
water system to his property, including the cost
of extending the water main from its present
location to the city limits, may make application
to the city council by petition containing the
following:
(a) A description of the proposed extension;
(b) Accompanied by a map showing the location
thereof;
(c) An offer to pay the whole expense incurred
by the city in providing such extension and to
advance such expense as said expense shall be
certified to by the supervisor. The city council
and the person or persons seeking such extension
may enter into an agreement providing in detail
the terms under which the extension may be
utilized by others in the future and the terms
under which all or any portion of the cost of
installing such extension may be refunded.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
(d) An acknowledgment that the city in granting
said petition engages to supply only such water
service to petitioner which, from time to time, the
city council deems beyond the requirements of
water users within the city limits; and
(e) An acknowledgment that such extension shall
be the property of and subject to the control of
the city.
History: 9/65, 9/84
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
Chapter 4. Culinary Water System
27-4-1 Mandatory Nature of Charge
Supervisor
27-4-2 Private Water Service, Fire Service
Mains and Hydrants
27-4-3 Water Meters
27-4-4 Access to Water Meters
27-4-5 Service meters
27-4-6 Fire Hydrant Use
27-4-7 Extension of Water Mains Within the
City
27-4-8 Costs of Extensions Determined
27-4-9 Amount of Cost to be Deposited with
City Recorder
27-4-10 Return of any Money
27-4-11 Ownership of Extension
27-4-12 Extensions may be Master-Metered
27-4-13 Cost of Extensions to be Determined
by Supervisor
27-4-14 Ownership of Connecting Lines
27-4-15 Destruction--Contaminating Materials
Use Without Payment Prohibited
27-4-1 Mandatory Nature of Charge. Any
home or structure built within the City must
connect to the city culinary water system,
irrespective of whether or not the owner of the
structure intends to use the culinary water
provided by Clinton City.
History: 11/82, 12/8
27-4-2 Private Water Service, Fire Service
Mains and Hydrants. Developments with
water mains and fire hydrants within the
development that do not designed to specifically
loop the City System are the property of the
Development and shall be maintained as outlined
in this section.
(1) Testing, inspection, maintenance, and repair
of private fire hydrants shall be the responsibility
of the property owner. Private fire hydrants shall
be maintained in an operable condition at all
times. Testing, inspection, and maintenance of
private fire hydrants shall be conducted on an
annual basis and after each use.
(2) The annual maintenance shall include steps as
promulgated in the Private Fire Hydrant Testing,
Inspection and Maintenance Policy.
(3) If a private fire hydrant is defective, has been
damaged or otherwise been rendered inoperable
repairs or other necessary efforts must be made
to render the hydrant fully operational within ten
(10) working days. All repair work shall be
preapproved by the Clinton City Public Works
Department and inspected and approved by
Clinton City Public Works Department after
repairs have been made. If the property owner
fails to comply within the ten (10) working days
a fine of not more than One Hundred Dollars
($100.00) will be levied against the property
owner each day the hydrant remains out of
service.
(4) Every fie (5) years, a fire flow test of the fire
service main piping shall be conducted as
outlined in National Fire Protection Association
(NFPA) Standard 291 Recommended Practice
for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants.
Fire flow tests shall be conducted by a person
trained in the procedures specified in NFPA 291
and the conducting of the test shall be
coordinated with Clinton City Public Works
Department.
(5) Written documentation of the testing and
maintenance required in § (1), and (2) above
shall be provided to the Public Works and Fire
Departments upon the completion.
History: 1/12
27-4-3 Water Meters.
(1) All culinary water laterals extending from the
City culinary water system shall have a water
meter. Meters will be furnished by the city at the
expense of the property holder, at rates
established from time to time by resolution of the
city council and published in the Consolidated
Fee Schedule.
(2) The Public Works Director shall cause meter
readings to be taken regularly and shall advise
the city treasurer thereof for the purpose of
recording the necessary billings for water
service.
27-4-4 Access to Water Meters.
(1) Access to any water meter on private or
public property shall not be obstructed or
interfered with by any person, trees, shrubs,
barriers, or hindrance of any kind.
(2) If the reading of any water meter is
obstructed or interfered with, the city shall cause
the property owner to be given a written notice to
remove the obstruction or interference as
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
established in Title 18 of the Clinton City Code
of Ordinances.
History: 9/65, 9/84, 11/89, 1/12
27-4-5 Service meters. All service meters
shall be installed by the waterworks crews upon
application.
27-4-6 Fire Hydrant Use.
(1) No persons, other than City personnel acting
within the scope of their employment, shall open
a fire hydrant or other access facility, standpipe,
or bypass valve on the City water system, or
extract water from by any other means for any
purpose except upon permission from the Public
Works Department.
(2) Any person using water from a City hydrant
or other facility shall pay a fee established by the
City Council, set by resolution, and published in
the Consolidated Fee Schedule.
27-4-7 Extension of Water Mains Within the
City. Any person or persons, including any
subdivider, desiring to have the water mains
extended within the city shall comply with the
requirements of § 27-3-8, Titles 9 and 28 and
other applicable items in the Clinton City Code.
History: 9/65, 9/84
27-4-8 Costs of Extensions Determined.
Upon receipt of such petition and map, and
before the petition is granted, the city council
shall obtain from the supervisor a certified
statement showing the whole cost and expense of
making such extension.
History: 9/65, 9/84
27-4-9 Amount of Cost to be Deposited with
City Recorder. If the city council shall grant
said petition, before any work shall be done on
such extension, and within 30 days, or such other
time as the city council shall indicate, after the
granting thereof, the amount of the cost and
expense of making such extension as certified by
the supervisor shall be deposited with the city
recorder.
History: 9/65, 9/84
27-4-10 Return of any Money. At the time that
the city council determines whether or not to
grant said petition for an extension, it shall also
determine whether or not any of said deposited
costs of extension shall be ultimately refunded to
the applicant, the amount to be so refunded, if
any, and the manner and circumstances under
which said refund shall be made or credited to
the applicant, his successors or representatives.
Such determination shall be duly recorded in
writing and a copy thereof furnished to the
applicant.
History: 9/65
27-4-11 Ownership of Extension. Any such
extension shall be deemed the property of the
city.
History: 9/65
27-4-12 Extensions may be Master-Metered.
When an extension supplying more than one
house or user outside the city limits is connected
to the city mains, the supervisor may require a
master meter to be installed near the point where
the connection is to be made to the city main.
This installation will be at the expense of the
persons served by such extension according to
the regular rates for meter installation.
Responsible parties must agree to pay all bills for
water served through said meter at the meter
rates hereinafter provided.
History: 9/65, 9/84
27-4-13 Cost of Extensions to be Determined
by Supervisor. Upon receipt of such petition
and map and before the petition is granted, the
city council shall determine what portion, if any,
of the extension of the city water mains to the
city limits the city shall construct, and shall
obtain from the supervisor a certified statement
showing the whole cost and expense of making
such extensions. Such costs and expenses shall
include administrative and supervisory
expenditures of the city water department, which
shall in no event be deemed to be less than ten
percent (10%) of the cost of materials and labor.
History: 9/65, 9/84
27-4-14 Ownership of Connecting Lines.
Unless provision is expressly made for
ownership of mains or lines by the owner of
adjacent property, by means of written
agreement, all pipe lines and mains connecting
the municipal water systems to a landowner or
residents premises which are situated on the
public way between the main and the property
line shall be deemed to be the property of the city
and subject to its absolute control and
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
supervision even though actual installation may
have been performed by the owner or resident of
the premises. Repair and maintenance of said
water lines shall be done by the landowner at his
cost, or if done by the city, the cost thereof shall
be paid by the landowner.
History: 9/65, 9/84
27-4-15 Destruction--Contaminating
Materials. It shall be unlawful for any person to
destroy, deface, injure, or interfere with the
operation of any part, pipe, fixtures, appliance, or
appurtenance of the city water systems. No
person shall cause to be placed or induced into
the water system or any source of water
supplying said system, any matter or substance
which shall cause the contamination of the water
of the city's system or which may result in
deleterious or harmful effects to human health.
History: 9/65, 9/84
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
Chapter 5. Obstructing Watercourses
27-5-1 Prohibited Acts
27-5-2 Correction of Existing Conditions
27-5-3 Permitted Acts
27-5-4 Procedure for Obtaining Permit
27-5-5 Appeal from Building Inspector's
Decision
27-5-6 Penalties and Corrective Action
27-5-1 Prohibited Acts. Except as hereinafter
provided, it shall be unlawful for any person,
firm, entity or corporation to:
(1) Place, deposit or permit to be placed or
deposited any debris, fill, sand, stone, or other
solid materials of any kind or nature, or
construction of any kind or pipeline into or
across any stream, ditch, culvert, pipe,
watercourse or other drainage system within the
city;
(2) Construct and/or place any ditch, pipe,
culvert or artificial watercourse of any kind or
nature which shall collect and direct the flow of
natural surface waters or drainage, or increase in
intensity or quantity the flow of surface waters or
drainage from paved surfaces, structures, roads
or improvements directly into any stream, ditch,
culvert, pipe or watercourse or other drainage
system within the city;
(3) Fill, obstruct, dam, divert or otherwise
change or alter the natural or artificial flow of
waters or drainage, or the intensity or quantity of
flow, through any stream, ditch, pipe, culvert,
watercourse or other improvements or drainage
system within the city.
History: 2/77
27-5-2 Correction of Existing Conditions.
Except as hereinafter provided, all existing
obstructions, dams, diversions, construction of
any kind, deposits of debris, fill, sand, stone, or
other solid materials, or other alterations or
diversions of the natural flow of water or the
intensity or quantity of flow, through across, or
to any stream, ditch, culvert, watercourse or other
drainage systems within the city which:
(1) Causes the inundation of real property and
streets and roads, or
(2) Constitutes an undue burden upon the official
drainage system or hampers the proper present or
future course of development of official drainage
system, or
(3) Presently constitutes or in the reasonably
foreseeable future will constitute a danger or
hazard to well-being, safety or general welfare of
the residents of the city or any property located
therein, shall be removed or corrected by the
owners of the premises upon which said
obstructions, dams, diversion, construction,
deposits, or other alterations of the natural flow
of water are situated, within 60 days after a
written notice to remove or correct the same.
History: 2/77, 9/84
27-5-3 Permitted Acts. The prohibited acts in
correction of existing conditions set forth above
shall have no application to work done pursuant
to the authority of an agency of the federal, state
or other governmental body.
History: 2/77, 9/84
27-5-4 Procedure for Obtaining Permit. All
applicants for a permit to do any of the acts
prohibited above or to fill, divert, dam or in any
way alter the natural flow of a stream, ditch,
culvert, watercourse, or other drainage system
shall be made from the building inspector of the
city, who shall refer the request to the city
engineer, who shall review the application and
make a recommendation to the building
inspector, either granting or denying the permit.
History: 2/77
27-5-5 Appeal from Building Inspector's
Decision.
(1) If any interested person, firm, entity or
corporation that is denied a permit, as provided
herein, shall have the right to appeal said
decision to the city council, provided said appeal
is made in writing and within 30 days after the
building inspector's decision.
(2) The city council shall render its
determination to the applicant who appealed and
to the building inspector within 45 days after
receipt of the appeal. If the city council approves
the proposed permit, the building inspector shall
issue a permit therefore.
History: 2/77
27-5-6 Penalties and Corrective Action.
(1) Any person, firm, entity or corporation found
to be violating any provisions of this chapter
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
shall be served with a written notice stating the
nature of the violation and providing a 60-day
time limit for satisfactory correction thereof. The
offender shall, within the period stated in such
notice, correct or remove all violations.
(2) Any person, firm, entity, or corporation who
shall continue any violation beyond the time limit
provided for above shall be deemed guilty of a
class C misdemeanor and each day of violation
of this chapter shall be considered a separate
offense.
History: 2/77, 6/96
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
Chapter 6. Control of Backflow and
Cross Connections
27-6-1 Definitions
27-6-2 Purpose of Ordinance
27-6-3 Responsibilities
27-6-4 Water Service Termination Policy
27-6-5 Public Education
27-6-6 Training and Reporting
27-6-7 Violations of this Policy
27-6-1 Definitions
“Administrative Authority” shall mean the
individual, official, board, department, or agency
established and authorized by a state, county,
city, or other political subdivision created by law
to administer and enforce the provisions of the
cross connection control program and/or the
plumbing code.
“Backflow” shall mean the undesirable reversal
of flow of water or mixtures of water and other
liquids, gases, or other substances into the
distribution pipes of the potable (culinary) water
supply from any source.
“Backpressure” shall mean the phenomenon
that occurs when the customer's pressure is
higher than the supply pressure. This could be
caused by an unprotected cross connection
between a drinking water supply and a
pressurized irrigation connection, a boiler, a
pressurized industrial process, elevation
differences, air or steam pressure, use of booster
pumps or any other source of pressure.
“Back-siphonage” shall mean a form of
backflow due to a reduction in system pressure
which causes a sub-atmospheric pressure to exist
at a site in the water system.
“Certified Backflow Technician” shall mean an
individual that has successfully completed a
Division of Drinking Water approved backflow
certification course with a written and practical
examination, and has maintained this
certification in accordance with R309-305,
Certification Rules for Backflow Technicians.
“Consumer/Customer” shall mean the owner or
operator of a privately or publicly owned
plumbing system(s) having a service connection
from the public drinking water system.
“Containment (Meter or Point of Connection
Protection)” shall mean the practice of installing
approved backflow prevention
assemblies/devices at the service connection of
consumers in order to protect the public drinking
water system from any backflow from the
consumers plumbing system.
“Contaminant” shall mean any substance
introduced into the public drinking water system
which creates a threat to the public health such as
poisoning, pathogenic organisms or any other
public health concern.
“Cross Connection” shall mean any actual or
potential connection between a potable (culinary)
water system and any other source or system
through which it is possible to introduce into the
public drinking water system any used water,
industrial fluid, gas or substance other then the
intended potable water.
“Degree of Hazard” shall mean either a
pollutant (non-health) or contaminant (health)
hazard that may be introduced into the public
drinking water system through a cross
connection. Through an evaluation of the
consumers plumbing system, the threat to public
health (the degree of hazard) will be determined.
In the past these terms have been referred to as
high hazard for health and low hazard for nonhealth.
“Isolation (Plumbing Code Compliance)” shall
mean the practice of installing approved
backflow prevention assemblies/devices at each
point of cross connection or system outlet as
required by Plumbing Code as adopted by the
State and its amendments.
“Pollutant” shall mean any substance introduced
into the public drinking water system which does
not create a threat to the public health but which
does adversely and unreasonably affect the
aesthetic quality of the water.
“Public Drinking Water System” shall mean a
water system that is either publicly or privately
owned, that provides water for human
consumption and other domestic uses, which: has
at least 15 service connections, and/or serves an
average of at least 25 individuals at least 60 days
out of the year.
“Plumbing Official” shall mean the City’s Chief
Building Inspector.
“Service Connection” shall mean the terminal
end of the public drinking water system where
the water purveyor transfers jurisdiction and
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
sanitary control of the water. If a water meter is
present then the service connection exists at the
downstream end of the meter.
“Water Purveyor” shall mean the public or
private owner or responsible party of a public
drinking water system.
27-6-2 Purpose of Ordinance:
(1) To protect the Public drinking water supply
of Clinton City from the possibility of
contamination or pollution by requiring
compliance with the Utah Public Drinking Water
Rules (UPDWR) and the Plumbing Code, as
adopted by the State of Utah. Compliance with
these minimum safety codes will be considered
reasonable diligence for the prevention of
contaminants or pollutants which could backflow
into the public drinking water system; and,
(2) To promote the reasonable elimination or
control of cross connections in the plumbing
fixtures and industrial piping system(s) of the
consumer, as required by the state regulations
and plumbing code to assure water system safety;
and,
(3) To provide for the administration of a
program for backflow prevention, which will
systematically examine risk and reduce the
possibility of contamination of the drinking water
system.
27-6-3 Prohibited Connections:
(1) Dual source sprinkling systems (providing
both raw water pressure irrigation and drinking
water supplies) are considered high health
hazards and are prohibited.
27-6-4 Responsibility
(1) Responsibility: Drinking Water Purveyor
(a) The City shall be responsible for the
protection of the drinking water distribution
system from the foreseeable conditions leading to
the possible contamination or pollution of the
drinking water system due to the backflow of
contaminants or pollutants into the drinking
water supply.
(b) The City will assess the degree of hazard at
all existing service connections. All existing
service connections will be surveyed at least
once every 2 years or as often as may be
necessary. Accounts are currently classified as
Residential or Commercial. Many assessments
will be completed based solely on the account
classification. Commercial accounts will be
surveyed through a mailed or hand delivered
questionnaire. A determination of which sites are
in need of an onsite inspection will be made by
reviewing the survey results. Survey records
shall indicate compliance with the State of Utah
Regulations. All such records will be maintained
by the City.
(c) Selection of an approved backflow prevention
assembly for containment control required at the
service entrance shall be determined from the
results of the system survey in (b).
(2) Responsibility: Consumer
(a) Compliance with this ordinance is required as
a term and condition of receiving water service.
The consumer's acceptance of service is
admittance of his/her awareness of his/her
responsibilities as a water system user.
(b) It shall be the responsibility of the consumer
to purchase, install, and arrange testing and
maintenance of any backflow prevention
device/assembly required to comply with this
ordinance. Failure to comply with this ordinance
shall constitute grounds for discontinuation of
service and a penalty as outlined in 27-6-7.
(3) Responsibility: Plumbing Official
(a) The plumbing official’s responsibility to
enforce the applicable sections of the plumbing
code begins at the point of service (downstream
or consumer side of the meter) and continues
throughout the length of the consumer's water
system.
(b) The plumbing official will review all plans to
ensure that unprotected cross connections are not
an integral part of the consumer's water system.
If a cross connection cannot be eliminated, it
must be protected by the installation of an air gap
or an approved backflow prevention
device/assembly, in accordance with the adopted
Plumbing Code.
(4) Responsibility: Certified Backflow
Technician, Surveyor, or Repair Person
(a) Whether employed by the consumer or the
City to survey, test, repair, or maintain backflow
prevention assemblies the Certified Backflow
Technician, Surveyor, or Repair Person will have
the following responsibilities:
(b) Insuring that acceptable testing equipment
and procedures are used for testing, repairing or
overhauling backflow prevention assemblies.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
(c) Make reports of such testing and/or repairs to
the consumer and the water purveyor on form
approved for such use by the water purveyor
within time frames as described by the Division
of Drinking Water.
(d) Include the list of materials or replacement
parts being used on the reports.
(e) Insuring that replacement parts are equal in
quality to parts originally supplied by the
manufacturer of the assembly being repaired.
(f) Not changing the design, material or
operational characteristics of the assembly during
testing, repair or maintenance.
(g) Performing all test of the mechanical
devices/assemblies and shall be responsible for
the competence and accuracy of all test and
reports.
(h) Insuring that his/her license is current, the
testing equipment being used is acceptable to the
State of Utah, and is in proper operating
condition.
(i) Being equipped with, and competent to use,
all necessary tools, gauges, and other equipment
necessary to properly test, and maintain backflow
prevention assemblies.
(j) Tagging each double check valve, pressure
vacuum breaker, reduced pressure backflow
assembly and high hazard air gap, showing the
serial number, date tested and by whom. The
certified technician's license number must also be
on the tag.
(5) Responsibility: Repair of backflow
assemblies
In the case of a consumer requiring an assembly
to be tested, any currently Certified Backflow
Technician is authorized to make the test and
report the results to the consumer and the water
purveyor. The installation, replacement or repair
of assemblies must be made by a Certified
Backflow Technician having appropriate
licensure from the Department of Commerce,
Division of Occupational and Professional
Licensing, except when the Backflow Technician
is an agent of the assembly owner.
27-6-5 Water Service Termination Policy:
(1) No water service connection to any premises
shall be installed or maintained by the Water
Purveyor unless the water supply is protected as
required by State laws, regulations, codes, and
this ordinance.
(2) The customer's system shall be open for
inspection at all reasonable times to authorized
representatives of the water purveyor to
determine whether cross connections or other
structural or sanitary hazards, including violation
of this ordinance exist and to audit the results of
a survey.
(3) Whenever the public water purveyor deems a
service connection's water usage contributes a
sufficient hazard to the water supply, an
approved backflow prevention assembly shall be
installed on the service line of the identified
consumer's water system, at or near the property
line or immediately inside the building being
served; but, in all cases, before the first branch
line leading off the service line.
(4) The type of protective assembly required
under subsection 27-6-3.3, shall depend upon the
degree of hazard which exist at the point of cross
connection (whether direct or indirect),
applicable to local and state requirements or
resulting from the required survey.
(5) All presently installed backflow prevention
assemblies which do not meet the requirements
of this section but were approved assemblies for
the purposes described herein at the time of
installation and which have been properly
maintained, shall, except for the inspection and
maintenance requirements under subsection 27-
6-3.6, be excluded from the requirements of
these rules so long as the water purveyor is
assured that they will satisfactorily protect the
public water system. Whenever the existing is
moved from the present location or, requires
more than minimum maintenance or, when the
water purveyor finds that the operation or of this
assembly constitutes a hazard to health, the unit
shall be replaced by an approved backflow
prevention assembly meeting all local and state
requirements.
(6) It shall be the responsibility of the consumer
at any premises where backflow prevention
assemblies are installed to have certified
surveys/inspections, and operational test made at
least once per year at the consumer's expense. In
those instances where the Public Water Purveyor
deems the hazard to be great, he may require
certified surveys/inspections and test at a more
frequent interval. It shall be the duty of the
purveyor to see that these tests are made
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
according to the standards set forth by the State
Department of Environmental Quality, Division
of Drinking Water.
(7) All backflow prevention assemblies shall be
tested within ten (10) working days of initial
installation and annually thereafter.
(8) No backflow prevention assemblies shall be
installed so as to create a safety hazard. Example:
Installed over an electrical panel, steam pipes,
boilers, or above ceiling level.
(9) If the City becomes aware of a clear and
immediate hazard to its public water system and
the hazard cannot be immediately abated, the
City may institute proceedings to discontinue
water service to the premises at which the hazard
exists.
(10) Conditions or water uses that shall be
deemed an immediate hazard which create a
basis for water service termination. These shall
include, but are not limited to, the following:
(a) Refusal to, immediately install a required
backflow prevention assembly.
(b) Refusal to, immediately upon notice, test a
backflow prevention assembly.
(c) Refusal to, immediately upon notice, repair a
faulty backflow prevention assembly.
(d) Refusal to, immediately upon notice, replace
a faulty backflow prevention assembly.
(e) A direct or indirect connection between the
public water system and a sewer line.
(f) An unprotected direct or indirect connection
between the public water system and a system or
equipment containing contaminants.
(g) Any direct or indirect connection between the
public water system, and an auxiliary water
system, and/or secondary water irrigation system.
(h) Any other situation which the water system
operator or his designee reasonably determines
presents an immediate health hazard to the public
water system.
(i) Refusal to complete or allow periodic system
survey.
(j) Service will not be restored until such
conditions or defects are corrected and any
applicable fees or penalties paid.
(11) Procedures for water service termination
are as follows:
(a) The City may terminate service to a
customer's premise after two written notices have
been sent specifying violation of item (a), (b), (c)
or (d) of subsection (10) above.
(b) For violations of items (e), (f), (g), or (h), as
set forth in subsection (10) above the City may
take the following action:
(i) The City may make a reasonable effort to
advise the water user of intent to terminate water
service.
(ii) The City may terminate water supply and
lock the service valve.
27-6-6 Public Education: The City will
establish a public education program to inform
water operators and users on operating dual
potable and non-potable water systems. The
public education program will be identified in the
Standard Operating Procedures.
27-6-7 Training And Reporting:
(1) The City will have on staff personnel
certified as Backflow Technician Class I,
Program Administrator by April 30, 2016.
(2) Cross connection training for public works
staff, building officials, canal company staff, etc.
will be held as identified in the Standard
Operating Procedures.
(3) Quarterly reports documenting the system
progress with the Compliance
Agreement/Enforcement Order will be submitted
to the Division of Drinking Water beginning the
3rd quarter of 2015 and ending the 2nd quarter of
2018.
27-6-8 Violations of this Policy:
(1) The violation of any provision of this Chapter
shall be considered a Class B Misdemeanor and
punishable by fines and imprisonment according
to state law.
(2) Every day any violation of this Chapter shall
constitute a separate offense.
(3) In addition to other fines and punishments, all
costs reasonably related to the violation incurred
by the City, or any other agent working on its
behalf, shall be allowed in a claim for restitution
to the courts including but not limited to, labor
and materials for flushing, disinfection, sampling,
alternate water supply any subsequent claims and
litigation as well as all other legal remedies that
are available.
History: 11/15; Ord 15-05
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
Chapter 7. Pressure Irrigation Water
Service
27-7-1 Connections Mandatory
27-7-2 Schedule of Rates and Charges
27-7-3 Establishment of Rate
27-7-4 Connection Fees
27-7-5 Special Rates
27-7-6 Due Date of Service Charges
27-7-7 Due Date of Connection Fee
27-7-8 Application for Water Service
27-7-9 Permits and Reports
27-7-10 Fixtures and Fittings Used in Water
Connections
27-7-11 Use Without Payment Prohibited
27-7-12 Discontinuance of Service if Payment
is Delinquent
27-7-13 Turning on Water Without
Authorization
27-7-14 Taker Only to Use Water
27-7-15 Waste Prohibited
27-7-16 Multi-family Lots
27-7-17 Failure to Connect
27-7-18 Compliance to Standards
27-7-1 Connections Mandatory. The owners
of all residential lots possessing or requiring
culinary water connections shall connect to the
Clinton City pressure irrigation system except
those residential lots whose total irrigation needs
are served by irrigation water and have an
established run-off right-of-way as of April 15,
1997. Owners of commercial, industrial or
agricultural lots or other lots using culinary water
or having a need for culinary water shall also be
required to connect to the Clinton City pressure
irrigation system, as reviewed and determined by
the Canal Company. The intent of this chapter is
to require all residents and property owners in
the city to use only culinary water for household
or business purposes and to use pressure
irrigation water for all other purposes. Lot
owners shall be required to connect to the
Clinton City pressure irrigation system within 60
days of receiving written notice from the city that
the pressure irrigation system is available for
connection.
History: 8/96, 7/97
27-7-2 Schedule of Rates and Charges. The
initial schedule of rates and charges for service
by the pressure irrigation water system, which
initial schedule shall be subject to increase and
revision by resolution of the city council from
time to time as may be necessary to repay the
Board of Water Resources loan and to operate
and maintain the system, shall be as follows:
Pipe Size Lot Size Annual Fee
3/4" = .5 Acre $200
1" >.5 = 1 Acre $300
1" > 1 Acre $156 + $36 per .25 acre
or part thereof
2" > 1 Acre $624 + $36 per .25 acre
or part thereof
3" > 1 Acre $1,404 + $36 per .25 acre
or part thereof
4" > 1 Acre $2,469 + $36 per .25 acre
or part thereof
27-7-3 Establishment of Rate. Except as
noted in Section 27-7-1, the lot owner or user
shall be required to pay the monthly rate
beginning 60 days after the notice referred to in
the previous section is received, even if the lot
owner or user has failed to make a connection to
the pressure irrigation system or failed to pay the
connection fee. All other new users and lot
owners shall begin making the monthly payments
at the time occupancy is granted for the residence
or building, or at such time as the user begins
using the pressure irrigation system, whichever is
sooner.
History: 8/96, 7/97
27-7-4 Connection Fees. For every
connection to the pressure irrigation water
system, the following fees shall be collected by
and paid to the Canal Company or its Agent:
Pipe Size Lot Size Connection Fee
3/4" = .5 Acre Initial: $200
Future: $500
1" >.5 Acre
= 1 Acre
Initial: $300
Future: $750
1" > 1 Acre Initial: $300 + $75 per .25 acre
or part thereof over 1 acre
Future: $750 + $187.50 per .25
acre or part thereof over 1 acre
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
27-7-5 Special Rates. Any special connections
not covered by the above schedules shall pay fees
set by the Canal Company in each individual
situation and approved by the city council.
Connection fees may be revised and modified by
resolution of the city council.
History: 8/96
27-7-6 Due Date of Service Charges.
Payment of all rates and water charges accruing
herein shall be made to the city at the same time
as payments are due and payable for culinary
water service furnished by the city. All payments
for culinary or pressure irrigation water shall be
applied in the following order: first to any late
charges or reconnection fees, expenses of the city
including attorney's fees, pressure irrigation
system charges, sewer fees, garbage fees and last
to culinary water charges.
History: 8/96
27-7-7 Due Date of Connection Fee. Payment
of the water connection fees as required herein
shall be made according to 27-7-3 for existing
residences and businesses and prior to receiving
a building permit for a new development.
History: 8/96
27-7-8 Application for Water Service. For
all new development, application for pressurized
irrigation water must be obtained from the Canal
Company.
History: 8/96
27-7-9 Permits and Reports. It shall be
unlawful for any person to make any extension of
any pipe or connect any fixture to the pressure
irrigation water system for any purpose
whatsoever without first obtaining a permit
therefrom from the Canal Company. All persons
must, within 24 hours after the completion of any
plumbing work connected with the pressurized
irrigation water system, report the same to the
Canal Company.
History: 8/96
27-7-10 Fixtures and Fittings Used in Water
Connections. It shall be unlawful for any person
to use any kind or size of fitting, pipe stopcock,
drawcock, or other equipment in connection with
the pressure irrigation water system except the
kind prescribed by the Canal Company.
History: 8/96
27-7-11 Use Without Payment Prohibited. It
shall be unlawful for any person by himself,
family, servants, or agents to utilize the city
pressure irrigation water system without paying
therefore as herein provided, or without authority
to open any stopcock, valve, or other fixture
attached to the system or water supply, or to in
any way injure, deface, or impair any part or
appurtenance of the system or to cast anything
into any reservoir or tank belonging to said
system.
History: 8/96
27-7-12 Discontinuance of Service if Payment
Delinquent. The city shall mail a written
statement to each user of the pressure water
service once each month, or at such other regular
intervals as the city council shall direct. The
statement shall specify the amount of the bill for
the pressure irrigation water service used and the
place of payment and date due. If any person
fails to pay the charges within the 30 days of the
due date, the city shall so notify the public works
director and shall have authority to direct the
public works director to shut off all water
service, both pressure irrigation and culinary, to
the premises involved. Before the service to the
premises shall again be provided, all delinquent
water charges must be paid to the city treasurer,
together with such disconnection and
reconnection charges as may be established by
resolution of the city council. The city is hereby
authorized and empowered to enforce payment of
all delinquent water service charges by an action
at law in the corporate name of the city. Except
as outlined in Section 27-7-1, should a lot owner
or user fail to connect to the pressure irrigation
system within the time required after having
received written notice from the city, the culinary
water service to the lot may be shut off until the
lot owner or user pays all connection fees, all
service fees and monthly charges, all expenses
incurred by the city, and until the lot owner or
user connects to the pressure irrigation system.
History: 8/96, 7/97
27-7-13 Turning on Water Without
Authorization. It shall be unlawful for any
person, after the culinary or pressure irrigation
system water has been turned off from his or her
lot on account of nonpayment or other violations
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
of the rules and regulations pertaining to the
culinary water supply or pressurized irrigation
system, to turn on or allow the water to be turned
on or used or allow the water to be used without
authorization from the public works director.
History: 8/96
27-7-14 Taker Only to Use Water. It shall be
unlawful for any water user to permit any person
from other premises, or any unauthorized
persons, to use or obtain pressure irrigation water
from his premises or water fixtures.
History: 8/96
27-7-15 Waste Prohibited. It shall be unlawful
for any pressure irrigation water user to waste
water, or to allow it to be wasted, by imperfect
stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes, or to
allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or
overflow or to wastefully run water from
hydrants, faucets, or stops, or other apparatus, or
to use water in violation of the rules and
regulations for controlling the water supply.
History: 8/96
27-7-16 Multi-Family Lots. Lots containing
more than one multi-family residence or structure
shall be required to pay a connection fee and
monthly service charge in accordance to the same
rate structure as single family residence,
according to lot size.
History: 8/96
27-7-17 Failure to Connect. Any lot owner or
resident who is required by this chapter to
connect to the Clinton City pressure irrigation
system and who fails to connect in a timely
manner, who fails to pay connection fees when
required, or fails to pay monthly service charges,
shall be required to pay all costs and expenses,
including attorney's fees incurred by the city, that
result from the city taking action to enforce the
provisions of this chapter.
History: 8/96
27-7-18 Compliance to Standards. All
pressure irrigation users must comply with the
Davis and Weber Counties Canal Company's
standards, specifications and policies.
History: 8/96
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
Chapter 8. Provisions for Secondary
Irrigation Water for New Developments
27-8-1 Dedication of Water Shares
27-8-2 Water Shares Transfer
27-8-3 Alternate Source of Irrigation Water
27-8-1 Dedication of Water Shares. Prior to
the final approval of any subdivision, or any
other activity requiring secondary pressurized
irrigation water from the City, the developer shall
dedicate to the City, a sufficient quantity of water
necessary to provide and deliver to each lot
and/or dwelling unit, or use, within the new
development, a minimum of three (3) acre feet
(½ a water share) of water per acre of land
proposed for development. The City, in
conjunction with other existing agreements, may
adjust this amount depending on the type of use
and water requirements of that use.
27-8-2 Water Shares Transfer. The water
shares provided pursuant to the provisions of this
chapter shall comply with the following
requirements:
(1) The water shares provided pursuant to this
chapter shall be shares from the Davis and
Weber Counties Canal Company. Water shares
from Kayscreek Irrigation Company, Holmes
Creek Irrigation Company, Hooper Water
Improvement District, or from such other usable
source, may be considered and approved by the
City at its own discretion. Such approval may be
granted by the City Manager.
(2) The developer shall provide water rights that
are reasonably accessible for use by the City, and
shall cooperate in and provide anything
necessary for any transfer of point of diversion or
change of use.
27-8-3 Alternate Source of Irrigation Water.
In the event there are no owner water rights or
water shares on the land being proposed for
development, and the developer is unable to
acquire such water shares from another
acceptable water source, the developer may, with
the approval of the City, pursue accessing water
for the property from the Weber Basin Water
Conservancy District, in accordance with
existing agreements with the City. Compliance
with all the provisions of those agreements would
need to be met before final approval of the
development would be granted by the City.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
Chapter 9. Water Source Protection
27-9-1 Short Title and Purpose:
27-9-2 Definitions
27-9-3 Establishment Of Drinking Water
a. Source Protection Zones
27-9-4 Allowed Uses
27-9-5 Prohibited Uses
27-9-6 Overly Protective Protection Zones
27-9-7 Administration
27-9-8 Potential Contamination Sources
27-9-9 Generic Regulated Substance List
27-9-1 Short Title and Purpose:
(1) This ordinance shall be known as the
"Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance"
and may be referred to as the “Source Protection
Ordinance.”
(2) The purpose of this ordinance is to ensure the
provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water
supply to the residents of Clinton City
(hereinafter "City"), surrounding cities, and
Davis County (hereinafter “County”), by the
establishment of drinking water source protection
zones surrounding the wells and springs located
in or used by public water systems in the City
and by the designation and regulation of property
uses and conditions that may be maintained
within such zones. Included under this ordinance
are all source protection zones or portions
thereof falling within and regulated by the
County, which protect public drinking water
sources not owned, operated or controlled by the
City.
27-9-2 Definitions: When used in this
ordinance the following words an phrases shall
have the meanings given in this section:
27-9-3 Establishment Of Drinking Water
Source Protection Zones:
(1) There are hereby established use districts to
be known as zones one, two, three, and four, of
the drinking water source protection area, or
alternatively the Management Area. These zones
shall have the approval of the State of Utah,
Division of Drinking Water as described in
R309-600 Source Protection: Drinking Water
Source Protection for Ground-Water Sources and
are identified and described as follows:
(a) Zone one is the area within a 100-foot radius
from a wellhead or margin of the collection area.
(b) Zone two is the area within a 250-day
ground-water time to travel to a wellhead, the
boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water
to the ground-water source, or the ground-water
divide, whichever is closer, as specified on the
"Drinking Water Source Protection Zone Map"
on file with the County.
(c) Zone three (waiver criteria zone) is the area
within a 3-year ground-water time of travel to a
wellhead or margin of the collection area, the
boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water
to the ground-water source, or the ground-water
divide, whichever is closer, as specified on the
"Drinking Water Source Protection Zone Map"
on file with the County.
(d) Zone four is the area within a 15-year
ground-water time of travel to a wellhead, the
boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water
to the ground-water source or the ground-water
divide, whichever is closer, as specified on the
"Drinking Water Source Protection Zone Map"
on file with the County. In some cases, such as
bedrock areas, zones two, three, and four are
overlapping, due to the inability to determine
time of travel. These are sensitive areas. In these
cases, the zone should be protected as for zone
two.
(2) Management area means the area outside of
zone one and within a two-mile radius where the
Optional Two-mile Radius Delineation
Procedure has been used to identify a protection
area as described in the Utah, Division of
Drinking Water R309-600 source Protection:
Drinking Water Source Protection for Ground-
Water Sources. This area shall be treated as for
zone two.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
Clinton City Source Protection Map
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
Source Protection for Wells Located Around Clinton City
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
27-9-4 Allowed Uses: The following uses shall be
permitted within drinking water source protection
zones:
(1) Any use permitted within existing agricultural,
single family residential, multi-family residential and
commercial districts so long as uses conform to the
rules and regulations of the regulatory agencies.
(2) Any other open land use where any building
located on the property is incidental and accessory to
the primary open land use.
27-9-5 Prohibited Uses:
(1) The following uses or conditions shall be and are
hereby prohibited within drinking water source
protection zones, whether or not such uses or
conditions may otherwise be ordinarily included as
part of a use permitted under Section 4 of the
ordinance.
(a) Zone one - The location of a potential
contamination source as defined herein.
(b) Zone two and Management area- The location of
pollution sources as defined herein unless their
contaminated discharges are controlled with design
standards.
(c) Zones three and four - The location of potential
contamination sources, unless they are controlled
through land management strategies.
(2) To further clarify uses and prohibitive uses in
protective zones, refer to Table 1, Use Matrix for
Potential Contamination Sources in § 27-9-7(3)
below. For a generic list of regulated substances, see
§ 27-9-9 below. This list and table are for
clarification and planning purposes. They are not all
inclusive. Substances that are not in this table and list
may need further clarification.
27-9-6 Overly Protective Protection Zones: If
management areas were delineated using the Optional
Two-Mile Radius Delineation Procedure or if
protection zones appear to be excessively
conservative (too large), they may be disputed
according to the following procedure:
(1) Submit written comments to the Land Use
Authority stating the reasons that the delineated
management area or protective zones should be
reconsidered.
(2) If the Land Use Authority concurs, it may
authorize a new hydrogeologic investigation at the
expense of the entity requesting changes to the
delineated management area or protective zones.
(3) The new hydrogeologic investigation must then be
submitted to the Utah Division of Drinking Water for
their review.
(4) If the Division of Drinking Water finds that the
new hydrogeologic investigation is protective and
meets the requirements of a Delineation Report
according to the Utah Drinking Water Source
Protection for Ground Water Sources Rule (R309-
600), the Land Use Authority may enforce this
ordinance according to the new protection zones.
27-9-7 Administration:
(1) The policies and procedures for administration of
any source protection zone established under this
ordinance, including without limitation those
applicable to existing nonconforming uses, exception,
enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as
provided in the existing land use ordinance for
Clinton City, as presently enacted except that the
Land Use Authority can not grant a permit to a
restricted use until the request is reviewed and
recommendation is provided by the Davis County
Health Department. If it is necessary to have
additional expertise evaluate the use or restrictions
that may be placed upon it, it shall be at the expense
of the entity requesting the restricted use. The
recommendation relative to the requested use shall be
documented and returned to the requester, Clinton
City Community Development, and the Davis County
Land Use Authority.
(2) If there are noncompliant potential contamination
source found in the source protection zones that
cannot be resolved by the water system, this shall be
brought before Clinton City Community
Development, Public Works, the Davis County Land
Use Authority, Davis County Health Department
and/or the applicable regulatory agency for
enforcement action.
(3) It shall be the water system's responsibility to
maintain and supply maps of their source protection
zones to both the County Health Department and the
Davis County Land Use Authority in which the
source protection zones reside or the data may be
obtained by the County, through the State Division of
Drinking Water. The County shall check with the
Division of Drinking Water for updates on an annual
basis. The extent of the source protection zones can
be seen on the "Drinking Water Source Protection
Zone Map" on file with the County and is
incorporated and made part of this ordinance, made
available through GRAMA.
27-9-8 Potential Contamination Sources: The
following table identified uses, which have varying
potentials to contaminate groundwater sources. These
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
uses have been classified according to the risk of
contamination in each protection zone as follows (see
definitions for risk classifications):
(1) Allowed Uses (A)
(2) Restricted (R)
(3) Prohibited Uses (X)
TABLE 1
USE MATRIX FOR POTENTIAL
CONTAMINATION SOURCES
POTENTIAL
CONTAMINATED
SOURCES
Protection Zone
Zone
1
Zone
2
Zones 3
& 4
Abandoned wells X X X
Agricultural pesticide,
herbicide and fertilizer
storage, use, filling, and
mixing area pursuant to
federal regulations
X R A
Airport maintenance and
fueling sites
X R R
Appliance repair X R R
AUTO OPERATIONS AND FLEET VEHICLE
MAINTENANCE FACILITIES (commercial):
Dealership maintenance departments X R R
Tire X R R
Auto body X R R
Engine Repair X R R
Rust proofing X R R
Oil and lube shops X R R
Vehicle rental with maintenance X R R
Beauty salons X R A
Boat building and refinishing X R R
Car washes X A A
Cemeteries, golf courses, parks and
plant nurseries
X R R
Chemical reclamation facilities X R R
Chemigation wells X X R
Concrete, asphalt and tar companies X R R
Dairy Farms and animal feed lots
(more than 1,000 animal units)
X X A
Dry cleaners (with onsite chemicals) X X R
Dry cleaners (without onsite
chemicals)
X A A
Embalming services X R R
FARM OPERATIONS:
Dump sites X R R
Maintenance garages X R R
Manure piles (per 1,000 animal
units)
X X A
Food processing, meat packing and
slaughter houses
X X A
Fuel, oil and heating oil distribution
and storage facilities
X R R
Furniture stripping, painting and
finishing businesses
X R R
Gasoline service stations (including
underground storage tanks)
X R R
Hospitals and medical, dental and
veterinary offices
X R R
Industrial manufacturers of:
chemicals, pesticides, herbicides,
paper products, leather products,
textiles, rubber, plastic, fiberglass,
silicone glass, pharmaceuticals and
electrical equipment, etc.
X R R
Industrial waste disposal /
impoundment areas
X X R
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
Junk and salvage yards X R R
Landfills and transfer stations X R A
Laundromats X A A
Machine shops, metal plating, heat
treating, smelting, annealing and
descaling facilities
X R R
MINING OPERATIONS:
Radiological X R R
Sand and gravel excavation and
processing
X R R
Municipal wastewater treatment
plants
X X A
Photo processing and print shops X R R
Railroad loading or unloading areas X R R
Railroad yards X R R
Residential pesticide, herbicide and
fertilizer storage, use, filling and
mixing areas pursuant to federal
regulations
X A A
R V waste disposal stations X X A
Salt and salt-sand piles X R R
Septic tank drain field systems X X R
Storm water detention basin and
snow storage sites
X R A
Oil pipelines X R R
Toxic chemical storage X X X
Wood preservative treatment
facilities
X R R
27-9-9 Generic Regulated Substance List:
TABLE 2
GENERIC REGULATED SUBSTANCE LIST
Acid and basic
cleaning solutions
Laboratory chemicals
Antifreeze and
coolants
Liquid storage batteries
Animal Dips Medical, pharmaceutical, dental
veterinary and hospital
solutions
Arsenic and arsenic
compounds
Mercury and mercury
compounds
Battery acids Metal finishing solutions
Bleaches and
peroxide
Oils
Brake and
transmission fluid
Paints, primers, thinners, dyes,
stains, wood preservative,
varnishing and cleaning
compounds
Brine solution Painting solvents
Casting and foundry
chemicals
Pesticides and herbicides
Caulking agents and
sealants
Photo development chemicals
Cleaning solvents Plastic resins, plasticizers and
catalysts
Corrosion and rust
preventatives
Poisons
Cutting fluids Polishes
Degreasing solvents Polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs)
Disinfectants Pool chemicals
Dyes Processed dust and particulate
Electroplating
solutions
Radioactive sources
Explosives Reagents and standards
Fertilizers Refrigerants
Fire extinguishing
chemicals
Roofing chemicals and sealers
Food processing
wasters
Sanitizers, disinfectants,
bactericides and algaecides
Formaldehyde Soaps, detergents and
surfactants
Fuels and additives Solder and fluxes
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 27 Water
Glues, adhesives and
resins
Stripping compounds
Greases Tanning industry chemicals
Hydraulic fluid Transformer and capacitor oils
and fluids
Indicators Wastewater
Industrial and
commercial
janitorial supplies
Water and wastewater treatment
chemicals
Industrial sludges
and stillbottoms
Inks, printing and
photocopying
chemicals
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 28 Zoning and Real Property
TITLE 28. ZONING AND REAL
PROPERTY
Chapter 1. Zoning Code
Chapter 2. Constitutional Taking Issues
Chapter 3. Disposition of Capital Assets and
Supplies
Chapter 1. Zoning Code
28-1-1 Zoning Ordinance Adopted by
Reference
28-1-2 Penalties
28-1-1 Zoning Ordinance Adopted by
Reference. The zoning ordinance, adopted as
Ordinance no. 84-1Z and as the same has been and
may be from time to time amended and superseded,
three (3) copies of which have been filed in booklet
form in the office of the recorder for use and
examination by the public, is hereby incorporated by
reference into this code and shall become the
subdivision code applicable to the city.
History: 9/84
28-1-2 Penalties. A violation of the zoning code is
a class C misdemeanor.
History: 9/84, 05/99
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 28 Zoning and Real Property
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 28 Zoning and Real Property
Chapter 2. Constitutional Taking Issues
28-2-1 Policy Considerations
28-2-2 Definitions
28-2-3 Guidelines Advisory
28-2-4 Review of Decision
28-2-5 Reviewing Guidelines
28-2-6 Results of Review
28-2-7 Severability
28-2-1 Policy Considerations. There is an
underlying policy in the city strongly favoring the
careful consideration of matters involving
Constitutional Taking claims, in fairness to the owner
of private property bringing the claim and in view of
the uncertainty and expense involved in defending
lawsuits alleging such issues. At the same time, the
legitimate role of government in lawfully regulating
real property must be preserved and the public's right
to require the dedication or exaction of property
consistent with the Constitution. Consistent with this
policy, it is desired that a procedure be established for
the review of actions that may involve the issue of a
Constitutional Taking. These provisions are to assist
governments in considering decisions that may
involve Constitutional Takings. It is intended that a
procedure for such a review be provided, as well as
guidelines for such considerations. This ordinance is
further intended and shall be construed to objectively
and fairly review claims by citizens that a specific
government action should require payment of just
compensation, yet preserve the ability of the city to
lawfully regulate real property and fulfill its other
duties and functions.
History: 9/95
28-2-2 Definitions.
(1) "Constitutional Taking" means actions by the city
involving the physical taking or exaction of private
real property that might require compensation to a
private real property owner because of:
(a) The Fifth or Fourteenth Amendment to the
Constitution of the United States;
(b) Article I, Section 22, of the Utah Constitution;
(c) Any court ruling governing the physical taking or
exaction of private real property by a government
entity;
(2) Actions by the city involving the physical taking
or exaction of private real property is not a
Constitutional Taking if the physical taking or
exaction:
(a) Bears an essential nexus to a;
(b) Legitimate governmental interest; and,
(c) Is roughly proportionate and reasonably related,
on an individualized property basis, both in nature
and extent, to the impact of the proposed
development on the legitimate government interest.
History: 9/95
28-2-3 Guidelines Advisory. The guidelines
adopted and decisions rendered pursuant to the
provisions of this section are advisory, and shall not
be construed to expand or limit the scope of the city's
liability for a Constitutional Taking. The reviewing
body or person, shall not be required to make any
determination under this ordinance except pursuant to
Section 28-2-4.
History: 9/95
28-2-4 Review of Decision. Any owner of private
real property who claims there has been a
Constitutional Taking of their private real property
shall request a review of a final decision of any
officer, employee, board, commission, or council.
The following are specific procedures established for
such a review:
(1) The person requesting a review must have
obtained a final and authoritative determination,
internally, within the city, relative to the decision
from which they are requesting review.
(2) Within thirty (30) days from the date of the final
decision that gave rise to the concern that a
Constitutional Taking has occurred, the person
requesting the review shall file in writing, in the
office of the City Recorder, a request for review of
that decision. A copy shall also be filed with the City
Attorney.
(3) The city or an individual, or body designated by
the City Council shall immediately set a time to
review the decision that gave rise to the
Constitutional Takings claim.
(4) In addition to the written request for review, the
applicant must submit, prior to the date of the review,
the following:
(a) Name of the applicant requesting review;
(b) Name and business address of current owner of
the property, form of ownership, whether sole
proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation,
partnership, joint venture or other, and if owned by a
corporation, partnership, or joint venture, name and
address of all principal shareholders or partners;
(c) A detailed description of the grounds for the claim
that there has been a Constitutional Taking;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 28 Zoning and Real Property
(d) A detailed description of the property taken;
(e) Evidence and documentation as to the value of the
property taken, including the date and cost at the date
the property was acquired. This should include any
evidence of the value of that same property before
and after the alleged Constitutional Taking, the name
of the property from whom purchased, including the
relationship, if any, between the person requesting a
review and the party from whom the property was
acquired;
(f) Nature of the protectable interest claimed to be
affected, such as, but not limited to, fee simple
ownership, leasehold interest;
(g) Terms (including sale price) of any previous
purchase or sale of a full or partial interest in the
property in the three years prior to the date of
application;
(h) All appraisals of the property prepared for any
purpose, including financing, offering for sale, or ad
valorem taxation, within the three years prior to the
date of application;
(i) The assessed value of and ad valorem taxes on the
property for the previous three years;
(j) All information concerning current mortgages or
other loans secured by the property, including name
of the mortgagee or lender, current interest rate,
remaining loan balance and term of the loan and other
significant provisions, including but not limited to,
right of purchasers to assume the loan;
(k) All listings of the property for sale or rent, price
asked and offers received, if any, within the previous
three years;
(l) All studies commissioned by the petitioner or
agents of the petitioner within the previous three
years concerning the feasibility of development or
utilization of the property;
(m) For income producing property, itemized income
and expense statements from the property for the
previous three years;
(n) Information from a title policy or other source
showing all recorded liens or encumbrances affecting
the property; and
(o) The City Council or their designee may request
additional information reasonably necessary, in their
opinion, to arrive at a conclusion concerning whether
there has been a Constitutional Taking.
(5) An application shall not be deemed to be
"complete" or "submitted" until the reviewing
body/official certifies to the applicant, that all the
materials and information required above, have been
received by the City. The reviewing body/official
shall promptly notify the applicant of any incomplete
application.
(6) The City Council or an individual or body
designated by them, shall hear all the evidence related
to and submitted by the applicant, City, or any other
interested party.
(7) A final decision on the review shall be rendered
within fourteen (14) days from the date the complete
application for review has been received by the City
Recorder. The decision of the City Council regarding
the results of the review shall be given in writing to
the applicant and the officer, employee, board,
commission or council that rendered the final
decision that gave rise to the Constitutional Takings
claim.
(8) If the City Council fails to hear and decide the
review within fourteen (14) days, the decision
appealed from shall be presumed to be approved.
History: 9/95
28-2-5 Reviewing Guidelines. The City Council
shall review the facts and information presented by
the applicant to determine whether or not the action
by the City constitutes a Constitutional Taking as
defined in this chapter. In doing so, they shall
consider:
(1) Whether the physical taking or exaction of the
private real property bears an essential nexus to a
legitimate governmental interest.
(2) Whether a legitimate governmental interest exists
for the action taken by the City.
(3) Is the property and exaction taken, roughly
proportionate and reasonably related, on an individual
property basis, both in nature and extent, to the
impact caused by the activities that are the subject of
the decision being reviewed.
History: 9/95
28-2-6 Results of Review. After completing the
review, the reviewing person/body shall make a
determination regarding the above issued and where
determined to be necessary and appropriate, shall
make a recommendation to the officer, employee,
board, commission or council that made the decision
that gave rise to the Constitutional Takings claim.
History: 9/95
28-2-7 Severability. The paragraphs, sentences,
clauses, and phrases, of this chapter are severable,
and if any of the foregoing shall be declared
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 28 Zoning and Real Property
unconstitutional or invalid by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality or invalidity
shall not affect any of the remaining provisions
contained in this ordinance, since the same would
have been enacted by the Clinton City Council
without the incorporation in this chapter of any such
unconstitutional or invalid provisions.
History: 9/95
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 28 Zoning and Real Property
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 28 Zoning and Real Property
Chapter 3. Disposition of Capital Assets and
Supplies
28-3-1 Acquisition and Disposition of Real
Property
28-2-2 Disposition of Significant Parcel of Real
Property
28-2-3 Methods of Disposal
28-3-1 Acquisition and Disposition of Real
Property. The Clinton City Council may purchase,
receive, hold, sell, lease, convey, and dispose of real
property for the benefit of the City, whether the
property is within or without the City’s corporate
boundaries.
28-3-2 Disposition of a Significant Parcel of Real
Property.
(1) Before the City Council disposes of a significant
parcel of real property, the Council shall:
(a) Provide reasonable notice of the proposed
disposition at least 14 days before the opportunity for
public comment thereon; and,
(b) Allow opportunity for public comment on the
proposed disposition.
(2) All real property, which was acquired without the
intent to further convey it, constitutes a significant
parcel of real property for purposes of this Section.
Land acquired with the intent to further convey it,
such as land in excess of the portion needed for City
uses or land acquired for economic development or
redevelopment purposes, is not a significant parcel of
real property.
(3) A meeting of the City Council constitutes the
opportunity for public comment for purposes of this
Section.
(4) Posting notice in at least three (3) public places
within the City and/or publishing notice in a
newspaper of general circulation in the city
constitutes reasonable notice for purposes of this
Section.
28-3-3 Methods of Disposal. Any sale of real
property shall be by sealed bid or public auction,
except as otherwise approved by the Council after
determining that alternative action is in the best
interest of the City. Notice of the sale or auction shall
be given by publication in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City at least fourteen (14) days prior
to the opening of bids or the date of the auction.
History: 4/04
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
TITLE 29.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS
RIGHTS-OF-WAY
Chapter 1. Declaration of Findings and
Intent; Scope of Ordinance
Chapter 2. Definitions
Chapter 3. Franchise Required
Chapter 4. Compensation and Other
Payments
Chapter 5. Franchise Applications
Chapter 6. Construction and Technical
Requirements
Chapter 7. Franchise and License Non-
Transferrable
Chapter 8. Oversight and Regulation
Chapter 9. Rights of City
Chapter 10. Obligation to Notify
Chapter 11. General Provisions
Chapter 12. Federal, State and City
Jurisdiction
Chapter 1. Declaration of Findings and
Intent, Scope of Ordinance
29-1-1 Findings Regarding Rights-of-Way
29-1-2 Findings Regarding Compensation
29-1-3 Findings Regarding Local Concern
29-1-4 Findings Regarding Promotion of
Telecommunications Services
29-1-5 Findings Regarding Franchise
Standards
29-1-6 Power to Manage Rights-of-Way
29-1-7 Scope of Ordinance
29-1-1 Findings Regarding Rights-of-Way.
The City of Clinton finds that the Rights- of-way
within the City:
(1) Are critical to the travel and transport of
persons and property in the business and social
life of the City;
(2) Are intended for public uses and must be
managed and controlled consistent with that
intent;
(3) Can be partially occupied by the facilities of
utilities and other public service entities
delivering utility and public services rendered for
profit, to the enhancement of the health, welfare,
and general economic well-being of the City and
its citizens; and
(4) Are a unique and physically limited resource
requiring proper management to maximize the
efficiency and to minimize the costs to the
taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to minimize
the inconvenience to and negative effects upon
the public from such facilities' construction,
placement, relocation, and maintenance in the
Rights-of-Way.
29-1-2 Finding Regarding Compensation.
The City finds that the City should receive fair
and reasonable compensation for use of the
Rights-of-Way.
29-1-3 Finding Regarding Local Concern.
The City finds that while Telecommunications
Systems are in part an extension of interstate
commerce, their operations also involve Rightsof-
Way, municipal franchising, and vital
business and community service, which are of
local concern.
29-1-4 Finding Regarding Promotion of
Telecommunications Services. The City finds
that it is in the best interests of its taxpayers and
citizens to promote the rapid development of
Telecommunications Services, on a
nondiscrimination basis, responsive to
community and public interest, and to assure
availability for municipal, educational and
community services.
29-1-5 Findings Regarding Franchise
Standards. The City finds that it is in the interest
of the public to franchise and to establish
standards for franchising Providers in a manner
that:
(1) Fairly and reasonably compensates the City
on a competitively neutral and nondiscriminatory
basis as provided herein;
(2) Encourages competition by establishing terms
and conditions under which Providers may use
the Rights-of-Way to serve the public;
(3) Fully protects the public interests and the
City from any harm that may flow from such
commercial use of Rights-of-Way;
(4) Protects the police powers and Rights-of-
Way management authority of the City, in a
manner consistent with federal and state law;
(5) Otherwise protects the public interests in the
development and use of the City infrastructure;
(6) Protects the public's investment in
improvements in the Rights-of-Way; and
(7) Ensures that no barriers to entry of
Telecommunications Providers are created and
that such franchising is accomplished in a
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
manner that does not prohibit or have the effect
of prohibiting Telecommunication Services,
within the meaning of the Telecommunications
Act of 1996 (Act).
29-1-6 Power to Manage Rights-of-Way. The
City adopts this Telecommunications Ordinance
pursuant to its power to manage the Rights-of-
Way, pursuant to common law, the Utah
Constitution and statutory authority, and receive
fair and reasonable, compensation for the use of
Rights-of-Way by Providers as expressly set
forth by Section 253 of the Act.
29-1-7 Scope of Ordinance. This Ordinance
shall provide the basic local scheme for
Providers of Telecommunications Services and
Systems that require the use of the Rights-of-
Way, including Providers of both the System and
Service, those Providers of the System only, and
those Providers who do not build the System but
who only provide Services. This Ordinance shall
apply to all future Providers and to all Providers
in the City prior to the effective date of this
Ordinance, whether operating with or without a
Franchise as set forth in Chapter 29-12-2.
29-1-8 Excluded Activity. This Ordinance
shall not apply to the following:
(1) Personal Wireless Service Facilities; and,
(2) Providers excused by other law that prohibits
the City from requiring a Franchise shall not be
required to obtain a Franchise, but all of the
requirements imposed by this Ordinance through
the exercise of the City's police power and not
preempted by other law shall be applicable.
History: Ord. 15-09, 11/15
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
Chapter 2. Definitions
29-2-1 Definitions
29-2-1 Definitions. For purposes of this
Ordinance, the following terms, phrases, words,
and their derivatives shall have the meanings set
forth in this Chapter, unless the context clearly
indicates that another meaning is intended.
Words used in the present tense include the
future tense, words in the single number include
the plural numbers, words in the plural number
include the singular. The words "shall" and
"will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive.
Words not defined shall be given their common
and ordinary meaning.
"Application" means the process by which a
Provider submits a request and indicates a desire
to be granted a Franchise to utilize the Rights-of-
Way of all, or a part, of the City. An Application
includes all written documentation, verbal
statements and representations, in whatever form
or forum, made by a Provider to the City
concerning: the construction of a
Telecommunications System over, under, on or
through the Rights-of-Way; the
Telecommunications Services proposed to be
provided in the City by a Provider; and any other
matter pertaining to a proposed System or
Service.
"City" means Clinton City, Utah.
"Completion Date" means the date that
Provider begins providing Services to customers
in the City.
"Construction Costs" means all costs of
constructing a System, including make ready
costs, other than engineering fees, attorneys or
accountants fees, or other consulting fees.
"Control" or "Controlling Interest" means
actual working control in whatever manner
exercised, including, without limitation, working
control through ownership, management, debt
instruments or negative control, as the case may
be, of the System or of a Provider. A rebuttable
presumption of the existence of Control or a
Controlling Interest shall arise from the
beneficial ownership, directly or indirectly, by a
Person or group of Persons acting in concert, of
more than twenty-five percent (25%) of any
Provider (which person or group of persons is
hereinafter referred to as "Controlling Person").
"Control" or "Controlling Interest" as used herein
may be held simultaneously by more than one
Person or group of Persons.
"FCC" means the Federal Communications
Commission or any successor thereto.
"Franchise" means the rights and obligation
extended by the City to a Provider to own, lease,
construct, maintain, use or operate a System in
the Rights-of-Way within the boundaries of the
City. Any such authorization, in whatever form
granted, shall not mean or include: (i) any other
permit or authorization required for the privilege
of transacting and carrying on a business within
the City required by the ordinances and laws of
the City; (ii) any other permit, agreement or
authorization required in connection with
operations on Rights-of- Way or public property
including, without limitation, permits and
agreements for placing devices on or in poles,
conduits or other structures, whether owned by
the City or a private entity, or for excavating or
performing other work in or along the Rights-of-
Way.
"Franchise Agreement" means a contract
entered into in accordance with the provisions of
this Ordinance between the City and a
Franchisee that sets forth, subject to this
Ordinance, the terms and conditions under which
a Franchise will be exercised.
"Gross Revenue" includes all revenues of a
Provider that may be included as gross revenue
within the meaning of Chapter 26, Title 11, Utah
Code Annotated, 1953, as amended.
"Infrastructure Provider" means a Person
providing to another, for the purpose of
providing Telecommunication Services to
customers, all or part of the necessary System
which uses the Rights-of-Way.
"Open Video Service" means any video
programming services provided to any Person
through the use of Rights-of-Way, by a Provider
that is certified by the FCC to operate an Open
Video System pursuant to sections 651, et seq.,
of the Telecommunications Act, regardless of the
System used.
"Open Video System" means the system of
cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides, optic
fiber, microwave, laser beams, and any
associated converters, equipment, or facilities
designed and constructed for the purpose of
producing, receiving, amplifying or distributing
Open Video Services to or from subscribers or
locations within the City.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
"Operator" means any Person who provides
Service over a Telecommunications System and
directly or through one or more Persons owns a
Controlling Interest in such System, or who
otherwise controls or is responsible for the
operation of such a System.
"Ordinance" or "Telecommunications
Ordinance" means this Telecommunications
Ordinance concerning the granting of Franchises
in and by the City for the construction,
ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a
Telecommunications System.
"Person" includes any individual, corporation,
partnership, association, joint stock company,
trust, or any other legal entity, but not the City.
"Personal Wireless Services Facilities" has
the same meaning as provided in Section 704 of
the Act (47 U.S.C. 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes
what is commonly known as cellular and PCS
Services that do not install any System or portion
of a System in the Rights-of- Way.
"Provider" means an Operator, Infrastructure
Provider, Reseller, or System Lessee.
"APSC" means the Public Service Commission,
or any successor thereto.
"Reseller" refers to any Person that provides
local exchange service over a System for which a
separate charge is made, where that Person does
not own or lease the underlying System used for
the transmission.
"Rights-of-Way" means the surface of and the
space above and below any public street, public
utility easement, sidewalk, alley, or other public
way of any type whatsoever, now or hereafter
existing as such within the City.
"Signal" means any transmission or reception of
electronic, electrical, light or laser or radio
frequency energy or optical information in either
analog or digital format.
"System Lessee" refers to any Person that leases
a System or a specific portion of a System to
provide Services.
"Telecommunications" means the transmission,
between or among points specified by the user,
of information of the user's choosing (e.g., data,
video, and voice), without change in the form or
content of the information sent and received.
"Telecommunications System" or "System"
means all conduits, manholes, poles, antennas,
transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic
devices, equipment, wire and appurtenances
owned, leased, or used by a Provider, located in
the Rights-of-Way and utilized in the provision
of Services, including fully digital or analog,
voice, data and video imaging and other
enhanced Telecommunications Services.
Telecommunications System or Systems also
includes an Open Video System.
"Telecommunications Service(s)" or
"Services" means any telecommunications
services provided by a Provider within the City
that the Provider is authorized to provide under
federal, state and local law, and any equipment
and/or facilities required for and integrated with
the Services provided within the City,
Telecommunications System or Systems also
includes an Open Video System.
"Wire" means fiber optic Telecommunications
cable, wire, coaxial cable, or other transmission
medium that may be used in lieu thereof for
similar purposes.
History, 01/15; Ord. 15-09, 11/2015
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
Chapter 3. Franchise Required
29-3-1 Non-Exclusive Franchise
29-3-2 Every Provider Must Obtain
29-3-3 Nature of Grant
29-3-4 Current Providers
29-3-5 Nature of Franchise
29-3-6 Regulatory Approval Needed
29-3-7 Term
29-3-1 Non-Exclusive Franchise. The City is
empowered and authorized to issue nonexclusive
Franchises governing the installation,
construction, and maintenance of Systems in the
City's Rights-of-Way, in accordance with the
provisions of this Ordinance. The Franchise is
granted through a Franchise Agreement entered
into between the City and Provider.
29-3-2 Every Provider Must Obtain. Except
to the extent preempted by federal or state law,
as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent
jurisdiction, including any appeals, every
Provider must obtain a Franchise prior to
constructing a Telecommunications System or
providing Telecommunications Services using
the Rights-of-Way, and every Provider must
obtain a Franchise before constructing an Open
Video System or providing Open Video Services
via an Open Video System. Any Open Video
System or Service shall be subject to the
customer service and consumer protection
provisions applicable to the Cable TV companies
to the extent the City is not preempted or
permitted as ultimately interpreted by a court of
competent jurisdiction, including any appeals.
The fact the particular Telecommunications
Systems may be used for multiple purposes does
not obviate the need to obtain a Franchise for
other purposes. By way of illustration and not
limitation, a cable operator of a cable system
must obtain a cable franchise, and, should it
intend to provide Telecommunications Services,
over the same System, must also obtain a
Telecommunications Franchise.
29-3-3 Nature of Grant. A Franchise shall not
convey title, equitable or legal, in the Rights-of-
Way. A Franchise is only the right to occupy
Rights-of-Way on a non-exclusive basis for the
limited purposes and for the limited period stated
in the Franchise; the right may not be subdivided,
assigned, or subleased. A Franchise does not
excuse a Provider from obtaining appropriate
access or pole attachment agreements before
collocating its System on the property of others,
including the City's property. This section shall
not be construed to prohibit a provider from
leasing conduit to another Provider, so long as
the Lessee has obtained a Franchise.
29-3-4 Current Providers. Except to the
extent exempted by federal or state law, any
Provider acting without a Franchise on the
effective date of this ordinance shall request
issuance of a Franchise from the City within 90
days of the effective date of this Ordinance. If
such request is made, the Provider may continue
providing service during the course of
negotiations. If a timely request is not made, or if
negotiations cease and a Franchise is not granted,
the Provider shall comply with the provisions of
Chapter 29-9-4.
29-3-5 Nature of Franchise. The Franchise
granted by the City under the provisions of this
Ordinance shall be a nonexclusive Franchise
providing the right and consent to install, repair,
maintain, remove and replace its System on, over
and under the Rights-of-Way in order to provide
Services, pursuant to all local requirements
outlined in this Ordinance.
29-3-6 Regulator Approval Needed. Before
offering or providing any Services pursuant to
the Franchise, a Provider shall obtain any and all
regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or
licenses for the offering or provision of such
Services from the appropriate federal, state and
local authorities, if required, and shall submit to
the City upon the written request of the City
evidence of all such approvals, permits,
authorizations or licenses.
29-3-7 Term. No Franchise issued pursuant to
this Ordinance shall have a term of less than five
(5) years or greater than fifteen (15) years. Each
Franchise shall be granted in a nondiscriminatory
manner.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
Chapter 4. Compensation and Other Payments
29-4-1 Compensation
29-4-2 Timing
29-4-3 Fee Statement and Certification
29-4-4 Future Costs
29-4-5 Taxes and Assessments
29-4-6 Interest on Late Payments
29-4-7 No Accord and Satisfaction
29-4-8 Not in Lieu of Other Taxes or Fees
29-4-9 Continuing Obligation and Holdover
29-4-10 Costs of Publication
29-4-1 Compensation. As fair and reasonable
compensation for any Franchise granted pursuant
to this Ordinance, a Provider shall have the
following obligations:
(1) Application Fee. In order to offset the cost to
the City to review an Application for a Franchise
and in addition to all other fees, permits or
charges, a Provider shall pay to the City, at the
time of Application, a non-refundable
Application fee as set forth from time to time by
City Resolution.
(2) Franchise Fees. The Franchise fee, if any,
shall be set forth in the Franchise Agreement.
The obligation to pay a Franchise fee shall
commence on the Completion Date. The
Franchise fee is offset by any business license
fee or business license tax enacted by the City.
(3) Excavation Permits. The Provider shall also
pay fees required for an excavation permit as
provided in City Code Chapter 25-9, Permit.
29-4-2 Timing. Unless otherwise agreed to in
the Franchise Agreement, all Franchise Fees
shall be paid on a monthly basis within forty-five
(45) days of the close of each calendar month.
29-4-3 Fee Statement and Certification.
Unless a Franchise Agreement provides
otherwise, each fee payment shall be
accompanied by a statement showing the manner
in which the fee was calculated and shall be
certified as to its accuracy.
29-4-4 Future Costs. A Provider shall pay to
the City or to third parties, at the direction of the
City, an amount equal to the reasonable costs and
reasonable expenses that the City incurs for the
services of third parties (including but not limited
to attorneys and other consultants) in connection
with any renewal or Provider-initiated
renegotiation, or amendment of this Ordinance or
a Franchise, provided, however, that the parties
shall agree upon reasonable financial cap at the
outset of negotiations. In the event the parties are
unable to agree, either party may submit the issue
to binding arbitration in accordance with the
rules and procedures of the American Arbitration
Association. Any costs associated with any work
to be done by the Public Works Department to
provide space on City owned poles shall be
borne by the Provider.
29-4-5 Taxes and Assessments. To the extent
taxes or other assessments are imposed by taxing
authorities, other than the City on the use of the
City property as a result of a Provider's use or
occupation of the Rights-of-Way, the Provider
shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata
share of such taxes, payable annually unless
otherwise required by the taxing authority. Such
payments shall be in addition to any other fees
payable pursuant to this Ordinance.
29-4-6 Interest on Late Payments. In the
event that any payment is not actually received
by the City on or before the applicable date fixed
in the Franchise, interest thereon shall accrue
from such date until received at the rate charged
for delinquent state taxes.
29-4-7 No Accord and Satisfaction. No
acceptance by the City of any fee shall be
construed as an accord that the amount paid is in
fact the correct amount, nor shall such
acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a
release of any claim the City may have for
additional sums payable.
29-4-8 Not in Lieu of Other Taxes or Fees.
The fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any
tax, fee or other assessment except as specifically
provided in this Ordinance, or as required by
applicable law. By way of example, and not
limitation, excavation permit fees and fees to
obtain space on the City owned poles are not
waived and remain applicable.
29-4-9 Continuing Obligation and Holdover.
In the event a Provider continues to operate all or
any part of the System after the Term of the
Franchise, such operator shall continue to
comply with all applicable provisions of this
Ordinance and the Franchise, including, without
limitation, all compensation and other payment
provisions throughout the period of such
continued operation after the term, including, but
not limited to, damages and restitution.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
29-4-10 Costs of Publication. A Provider shall
assume any publication costs associated with its
Franchise that may be required by law.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
Chapter 5. Franchise Applications
29-5-1 Franchise Application
29-5-2 Application Criteria
29-5-3 Franchise Determination
29-5-1 Franchise Application. To obtain a
Franchise to construct, own, maintain or provide
Services through any System within the city, to
obtain a renewal of a Franchise granted pursuant
to this Ordinance, or to obtain the City approval
of a transfer of a Franchise, as provided in
Subsection 7.1.2, granted pursuant to this
Ordinance, an Application must be filed with
City on the form attached to this Ordinance as
Exhibit A, which is hereby incorporated by
reference. The Application form may be changed
by the Clinton City Manager so long as such
changes request information that is consistent
with this Ordinance. Such Application form, as
amended, is incorporated by reference.
29-5-2 Application Criteria. In making a
determination as to an Application filed pursuant
to this Ordinance, the City may, but shall not be
limited to, request the following from the
Provider:
(1) A copy of the order from the PSC granting a
Certificate of Convenience and Necessity.
(2) Certification of the Provider's financial ability
to compensate the City for Provider's intrusion,
maintenance and use of the Rights-of-Way
during the Franchise term proposed by the
Provider;
(3) Provider’s agreement to comply with the
requirements of Chapter 6 of this Ordinance.
(4) Prior to making any attachments to poles, the
Provider shall be willing to enter into a pole
attachment agreement with the City, if the City
deems it reasonably necessary.
29-5-3 Franchise Determination. The City, in
its discretion, shall determine the award of any
Franchise on the basis of these and other
considerations relevant to the use of the Rightsof-
Way, without competitive bidding.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
Chapter 6. Construction and Technical
Requirements
29-6-1 General Requirements
29-6-2 Quality
29-6-3 Licenses and Permits
29-6-4 Relocation of the System
29-6-5 Protect Structures
29-6-6 No Obstruction
29-6-7 Safety Precautions
29-6-8 Repair
29-6-9 System Maintenance
29-6-10 Trimming of Trees
29-6-1 General Requirements. No Provider
shall receive a Franchise unless it agrees to
comply with each of the terms set forth in this
Section governing construction and technical
requirements for its System, in addition to any
other reasonable requirements or procedures
specified by the City or the Franchise, including
requirements regarding locating and sharing in
the cost of locating portions of the System with
other Systems or with City utilities. A Provider
shall obtain an excavation permit, pursuant to the
excavation ordinance, before commencing any
work in the Rights-of-Way.
29-6-2 Quality. All work involved in the
construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade and
removal of the System shall be performed in a
safe, thorough and reliable manner using
materials of good and durable quality. If, at any
time, it is determined by the FCC or any other
agency granted authority by federal law or the
FCC to make such determination, that any part of
the System, including, without limitation, any
means used to distribute Signals over or within
the System, is harmful to the public health, safety
or welfare, or quality of service or reliability,
then a Provider shall, at its own cost and
expense, promptly correct all such conditions.
29-6-3 Licenses and Permits. A Provider shall
have the sole responsibility for diligently
obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all
permits, licenses or other forms of approval or
authorization necessary to construct, maintain,
upgrade or repair the System, including but not
limited to any necessary approvals from Persons
and/or the city to use private property,
easements, poles and conduits. A Provider shall
obtain any required permit, license, approval or
authorization, including but not limited to
excavation permits, pole attachment agreements,
etc., prior to the commencement of the activity
for which the permit, license, approval or
authorization is required.
29-6-4 Relocation of the System.
(1) New Grades or Lines. If the grades or lines of
any Rights-of-Way are changed at any time in a
manner affecting the System, then a Provider
shall comply with the requirements of the
excavation ordinance and City Engineering and
Standards Specifications.
(2) The City Authority to Move System in case
of an Emergency. The City may, at any time, in
case of fire, disaster or other emergency, as
determined by the City in its reasonable
discretion, cut or move any parts of the System
and appurtenances on, over or under the Rightsof-
Way of the City, in which event the City shall
not be liable therefore to a Provider. The City
shall notify a Provider in writing prior to, if
practicable, but in any event as soon as possible
and in no case later than the next business day
following any action taken under this Chapter.
Notice shall be given as provided in Section
11.4.
(3) A Provider Required to Temporarily Move
System for Third Party. A Provider shall, upon
prior reasonable written notice by the City or any
Person holding a permit to move any structure,
and within the time that is reasonable under the
circumstances, temporarily move any part of its
System to permit the moving of said structure. A
Provider may impose a reasonable charge on any
Person other than the City for any such
movement of its Systems.
(4) Rights-of-Way Change - Obligation to Move
System. When the City is changing a Rights-of-
Way and makes a written request, a Provider is
required to move or remove its System from the
Rights-of-Way, without cost to the City, to the
extent provided in the excavation ordinance. This
obligation does not apply to Systems originally
located on private property pursuant to a private
easement, which property was later incorporated
into the Rights-of-Way, if that private easement
grants a superior vested right. This obligation
exists whether or not the Provider has obtained
an excavation permit.
29-6-5 Protect Structures. In connection with
the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or
removal of the System, a Provider shall, at its
own cost and expense, protect any and all
existing structures belonging to the City. A
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
Provider shall obtain the prior written consent of
the City to alter any water main, power facility,
sewage or drainage system, or any other
municipal structure on, over or under the Rightsof-
Way of the City or its designee on a
reimbursable basis. A Provider agrees that it
shall be liable for the costs incurred by the City
to replace or repair and restore to its prior
condition in a manner as may be reasonably
specified by the City, any municipal structure or
any other Rights-of-Way of the City involved in
the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or
removal of the System that may become
disturbed or damaged as a result of any work
thereon by or on behalf of a Provider pursuant to
the Franchise.
29-6-6 No Obstruction. In connection with the
construction, maintenance, upgrade, repair or
removal of the System, a Provider shall not
unreasonably obstruct the Rights-of-Way of
fixed guide way systems, railways, passenger
travel, or other traffic to, from or within the City
without the prior consent of the appropriate
authorities.
29-6-7 Safety Precautions. A Provider shall, at
its own cost and expense, undertake all necessary
and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its
work sites, including the placing and
maintenance of proper guards, fences, barricades,
security personnel and suitable and sufficient
lighting, and such other requirements prescribed
by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A Provider shall
comply with all applicable federal, state and
local requirements including but not limited to
the National Electric Safety Code.
29-6-8 Repair. After written reasonable notice
to the Provider, unless, in the sole determination
of the City, an eminent danger exists, any Rightsof-
Way within the City which are disturbed or
damaged during the construction, maintenance or
reconstruction by a Provider of its System may
be repaired by the City at the Provider's expense,
to a condition as good as that prevailing before
such work was commenced. Upon doing so, the
City shall submit to such a Provider an itemized
statement of the cost for repairing and restoring
the Rights-of-Way intruded upon. The Provider
shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the
statement, pay to the City the entire amount
thereof.
29-6-9 System Maintenance. A Provider shall:
(1) Install and maintain all parts of its System in
a non-dangerous condition throughout the entire
period of its Franchise.
(2) Install and maintain its System in accordance
with standard prudent engineering practices and
shall conform, when applicable, with the
National Electrical Safety Code and all
applicable other federal, state and local laws or
regulations.
(3) At all reasonable times, permit examination
by any duly authorized representative of the City
of the System and its effect on the Rights-of-
Way.
29-6-10 Trimming of Trees. A Provider shall
have the authority to trim trees, in accordance
with all applicable utility restrictions, ordinance
and easement restrictions, upon and hanging over
Rights-of-Way so as to prevent the branches of
such trees from coming in contact with its
System. Notification to the owner(s) of the
property(s) must be given as directed by the City,
prior to tree trimming.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
Chapter 7. Franchise and License Non-
Transferrable
29-7-1 Notification of Sale
29-7-2 Event of Sale
29-7-1 Notification of Sale.
(1) Notification and Election. When a Provider
is the subject of a sale, transfer, lease,
assignment, sublease or disposed of, in whole or
in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by
ordinary sale, consolidation or otherwise, such
that it or its successor entity is obligated to
inform or seek approval of the PSC, the Provider
or its successor entity shall promptly notify the
City of the nature of the transaction[s]. The
notification shall include either:
(a) The successor entity's certification that the
successor entity unequivocally agrees to all of
the terms of the original Providers Franchise
Agreement, or
(b) The successor entity's Application in
compliance with Chapter 5 of this Ordinance.
(2) Transfer of Franchise. Upon receipt of a
notification and certification in accordance with
Subsection 7.1.1(a), the City designee, as
provided in Subsection 9.1.1, shall send notice
affirming the transfer of the Franchise to the
successor entity. If the City has good cause to
believe that the successor entity may not comply
with this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement,
it may require an Application for transfer. The
Application shall comply with Chapter 5.
29-7-2 Events of Sale. The following events
shall be deemed to be a sale, assignment or other
transfer of the Franchise requiring compliance
with Section 7-1 above:
(1) The sale, assignment or other transfer of all
or a majority of a Provider's assets to another
Person;
(2) The sale, assignment or other transfer of
capital stock or partnership, membership or other
equity interests in a Provider by one or more of
its existing shareholders, partners, members or
other equity owners so as to create a new
Controlling Interest in a Provider;
(3) The issuance of additional capital stock or
partnership, membership or other equity interest
by a Provider so as to create a new Controlling
Interest in such a Provider; or,
(4) The entry by a Provider into an agreement
with respect to the management or operation of
such Provider or its System.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
Chapter 8. Oversight and Regulation
29-8-1 Insurance, Indemnity and Security
29-8-2 Oversight
29-8-3 Maintain Records
29-8-4 Confidentiality
29-8-5 Provider’s Expense
29-8-6 Right of Inspection
29-8-1 Insurance, Indemnity, and Security.
Prior to the execution of a Franchise, a Provider
will deposit with the City a cash bond as required
by the terms of the Franchise, and shall obtain
and provide proof of the insurance coverage
required by the Franchise. A Provider shall also
indemnify the City, its officers, agents, officials
and employees harmless from any action, causes
of action, claims for relief which can be set forth
in or through a complaint or otherwise that may
arise out of the acts or omissions, negligent, or
otherwise of Provider, Provider's officers,
officials, agents or employees, the City, or its
officers, officials, agents or employees or any
person or persons. All of Provider's system or
services shall be installed, maintained and
serviced by Provider. Any property, personal
injury or actual damage, injury or harm caused
by Provider's System or Service to any person,
person's property or entity shall be the sole
responsibility of Provider and Provider agrees to
indemnify and hold City harmless from all
actions, causes of action, complaints or legal
actions, whether said harm is caused by Provider
or an unknown third-party.
29-8-2 Oversight. The City shall have the right
to oversee, regulate and inspect periodically the
construction, maintenance, and upgrade of the
System, and any part thereof, in accordance with
the provisions of the Franchise and applicable
law. A Provider shall establish and maintain
managerial and operational records, standards,
procedures and controls to enable a Provider to
prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of
the City at all times throughout the Term, that a
Provider is in compliance with the Franchise. A
Provider shall retain such records for not less
than the applicable statute of limitations.
29-8-3 Maintain Records. A Provider shall at
all times maintain:
(1) On file with the City, a full and complete set
of plans, records and "as-built" hard copy maps
and, to the extent the maps are placed in an
electronic format, they shall be made in
electronic format compatible with the City's
existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed
installations and the types of equipment and
Systems installed or constructed in the Rights-of-
Way, properly identified and described as to the
types of equipment and facility by appropriate
symbols and marks which shall include
annotations of all Rights-of-Ways where work
will be undertaken. As used herein, as-built maps
includes file construction prints. Maps shall be
drawn to scale. "As-built" maps, including the
compatible electronic format, as provided above,
shall be submitted within 30 days of completion
of work or within 30 days after completion of
modification and repairs. As-built maps are not
required of the Provider who is the incumbent
local exchange carrier for the existing System to
the extent they do not exist.
(2) Throughout the term of the Franchise, a
Provider shall maintain complete and accurate
books of account and records of the business,
ownership, and operations of a Provider with
respect to the System in a manner that allows the
City at all times to determine whether a Provider
is in compliance with the Franchise. Should the
City reasonably determine that the records are
not being maintained in such a manner, a
Provider shall alter the manner in which the
books and/or records are maintained so that a
Provider comes into compliance with this
Section. All financial books and records which
are maintained in accordance with the
regulations of the FCC and any governmental
entity that regulates utilities in the State of Utah,
and generally accepted accounting principles
shall be deemed to be acceptable under this
Section.
29-8-4 Confidentiality. If the information
required to be submitted is proprietary in nature
or must be kept confidential by federal, state or
local law, upon proper request by a Provider,
such information shall be classified as a
Protected Record within the meaning of the Utah
Government Records Access Management Act
(GRAMA), making it available only to those
who must have access to perform their duties on
behalf of the City, provided that a Provider
notifies the City of, and clearly labels the
information which a Provider deems to be
confidential, proprietary information. Such
notification and labeling shall be the sole
responsibility of the Provider.
29-8-5 Provider's Expense. All reports and
records required under this Ordinance shall be
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
furnished at the sole expense of a Provider,
except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance
or a Franchise.
29-8-6 Right of Inspection. For the purpose of
verifying the correct amount of the franchise fee,
the books and records of the Provider pertaining
thereto shall be open to inspection or audit by
duly authorized representatives of the City at all
reasonable times, upon giving reasonable notice
of the intention to inspect or audit the books and
records, provided that the City shall not audit the
books and records of the Provider more often
than annually. The Provider agrees to reimburse
the City the reasonable costs of an audit if the
audit discloses that the Provider has paid ninetyfive
percent (95%) or less of the compensation
due the City for the period of such audit. In the
event the accounting rendered to the City by the
Provider herein is found to be incorrect, then
payment shall be made on the corrected amount
within thirty (30) calendar days of written notice,
it being agreed that the City may accept any
amount offered by the Provider, but the
acceptance thereof by the City shall not be
deemed a settlement of such item if the amount is
in dispute or is later found to be incorrect.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
Chapter 9. Rights of City
29-9-1 Enforcement and Remedies
29-9-2 Force Majeure
29-9-3 Extended Operation and Continuity of
Services
29-9-4 Removal or Abandonment of
Franchise Property
29-9-1 Enforcement and Remedies.
(1) Enforcement - City Designee. The City is
responsible for enforcing and administering this
Ordinance, and the City or its designee, as
appointed by the City Manager, is authorized to
give any notice required by law or under any
Franchise Agreement.
(2) Enforcement Provision. Any Franchise
granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall contain
appropriate provisions for enforcement,
compensation, and protection of the public,
consistent with the other provisions of this
Ordinance, including, but not limited to, defining
events of default, procedures for accessing the
Bond/Security Fund, and rights of termination or
revocation.
29-9-2 Force Majeure. In the event a
Provider's performance of any of the terms,
conditions or obligations required by this
Ordinance or a Franchise is prevented by a cause
or event not within a Provider's control, such
inability to perform shall be deemed excused and
no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a
result thereof. For the purpose of this section,
causes or events not within the control of a
Provider shall include, without limitation, acts of
God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances,
failure or loss of utilities, explosions, acts of
public enemies, and natural disasters such as
floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires.
29-9-3 Extended Operation and Continuity
of Services.
(1) Continuation After Expiration. Upon either
expiration or revocation of a Franchise granted
pursuant to this Ordinance, the City shall have
discretion to permit a Provider to continue to
operate its System or provide Services for an
extended period of time not to exceed six (6)
months from the date of such expiration or
revocation. A Provider shall continue to operate
its System under the terms and conditions of this
Ordinance and the Franchise granted pursuant to
this Ordinance.
(2) Continuation by Incumbent Local
Exchange Carrier. If the Provider is the
incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall be
permitted to continue to operate its System and
provide Services without regard to revocation or
expiration, but shall be obligated to negotiate a
renewal of good faith.
29-9-4 Removal or Abandonment of
Franchise Property.
(1) Abandoned System. In the event that: (a) the
use of any portion of the System is discontinued
for a continuous period of twelve (12) months,
and thirty (30) days after no response to written
notice from the City to the last known address of
Provider; (b) any System has been installed in
the Rights-of-Way without complying with the
requirements of this Ordinance or Franchise; or
(c) the provisions of Section 3.4 are applicable
and no Franchise is granted, a Provider, except
the Provider who is an incumbent local exchange
carrier, shall be deemed to have abandoned such
System.
(2) Removal of Abandoned System. The City,
upon such terms as it may impose, may give a
Provider written permission to abandon, without
removing, any System, or portion thereof,
directly constructed, operated or maintained
under a Franchise. Unless such permission is
granted or unless otherwise provided in this
Ordinance, a Provider shall remove within a
reasonable time the abandoned System and shall
restore, using prudent construction standards,
any affected Rights-of-Way to their former state
at the time such System was installed, so as not
to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant,
structures and equipment, a Provider shall refill,
at its own expense, any excavation necessarily
made by it and shall leave all Rights-of-Way in
as good condition as that prevailing prior to such
removal without materially interfering with any
electrical or telephone cable or other utility
wires, poles or attachments. The City shall have
the right to inspect and approve the condition of
the Rights-of-Way cables, wires, attachments
and poles prior to and after removal. The
liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of
this Ordinance and any security fund provided in
a Franchise shall continue in full force and effect
during the period of removal and until full
compliance by a Provider with the terms and
conditions of this Ordinance is approved by the
City.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
(3) Transfer of Abandoned System to City.
Upon abandonment of any System in place, a
Provider, if required by the City, shall submit to
the City a written instrument, satisfactory in form
to the City, transferring to the City the ownership
of the abandoned System.
(4) Removal of Above-Ground System. At the
expiration of the term for which a Franchise is
granted, or upon its revocation or earlier
expiration, as provided for by this Ordinance, in
any such case without renewal, extension or
transfer, the City shall have the right to require a
Provider to remove, at its expense, all aboveground
portions of a System from the Rights-of-
Way within a reasonable period of time, which
shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180)
days. If the Provider is the incumbent local
exchange carrier, it shall not be required to
remove its System, but shall negotiate a renewal
in good faith.
(5) Leaving Underground System.
Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set
forth in this Ordinance, upon the written
approval of the City a Provider may abandon any
underground System in place so long as it does
not materially interfere with the use of the
Rights-of-Way or with the use thereof by any
public utility, cable operator or other person.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
Chapter 10. Obligation to Notify
29-10-1 Publicizing Work
29-10-1 Publicizing Work. When performing
work on private property, after securing approval
as required in 29-6-3, and before entering onto
any private property, Provider shall make a good
faith attempt to contact the property owners in
advance, and describe the work to be performed.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
Chapter 11. General Provisions
29-11-1 Conflicts
29-11-2 Severability
29-11-3 New Developments
29-11-4 Notices
29-11-5 Exercise of Police Power
29-11-1 Conflicts. In the event of a conflict
between any provision of this Ordinance and a
Franchise entered pursuant to it, the provisions of
this Ordinance in effect at the time the Franchise
is entered into shall control.
29-11-2 Severability. If any provision of this
Ordinance is held by any federal, state or local
court of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as
conflicting with any federal or state statute, or is
ordered by a court to be modified in any way in
order to conform to the requirements of any such
law an all appellate remedies with regard to the
validity of the Ordinance provisions in question
are exhausted, such provision shall be considered
a separate, distinct, and independent part of this
Ordinance, and such holding shall not affect the
validity and enforceability of all other provisions
hereof. In the event that such law is subsequently
repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise
changes, so that the provision in question shall
return in full force and effect and shall again be
binding on the City and the Provider, provided
that the City shall give the Provider thirty (30)
days, or a long period of time as may be
reasonable required for a Provider to comply
with such a rejuvenated provision, written notice
of the change before requiring compliance with
such provision.
29-11-3 New Developments. It shall be the
policy of the City to amend this Ordinance, upon
Application of a Provider, when necessary to
enable the Provider to take advantage of any
developments in the field of Telecommunications
which will afford the Provider an opportunity to
more effectively, efficiently, or economically
serve itself or the public.
29-11-4 Notices. All notices from a Provider to
the City required under this Ordinance or
pursuant to a Franchise granted pursuant to this
Ordinance shall be directed to the officer as
designated by the City Manager. A Provider shall
provide in any Application for a Franchise the
identity, address and phone number to receive
notices from the City. A Provider shall
immediately notify the City of any change in its
names, address, or telephone number.
29-11-5 Exercise of Police Power. To the full
extent permitted by applicable law either now or
in the future, the City reserves the right to adopt
or issue such rules, regulations, orders, or other
directives that it finds necessary or appropriate in
the lawful exercise of its police powers.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
BLANK PAGE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 29 Telecommunications Rights-Of-Way
Chapter 12. Federal, State and City
Jurisdiction
29-12-1 Construction
29-12-2 Ordinance Applicability
29-12-3 Other Applicable Ordinances
29-12-4 City Failure to Enforce
29-12-5 Construed According to Utah Law
29-12-1 Construction. This Ordinance shall be
construed in a manner consistent with all
applicable federal and state statutes.
29-12-2 Ordinance Applicability. This
Ordinance shall apply to all Franchises granted
or renewed after the effective date of this
Ordinance. This Ordinance shall further apply, to
the extent permitted by applicable federal or state
law to all existing Franchises granted prior to the
effective date of this Ordinance and to a Provider
providing Services, without a Franchise, prior to
the effective date of this Ordinance.
29-12-3 Other Applicable Ordinances. A
Provider's rights are subject to the police powers
of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances
necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the
public. A Provider shall comply with all
applicable general laws and ordinances enacted
by the City pursuant to its police powers. In
particular, all Providers shall comply with the
City zoning and other land use requirements.
29-12-4 City Failure to Enforce. A Provider
shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply
with any of the provisions of this Ordinance or
any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance
by reason of any failure of the City to enforce
prompt compliance.
29-12-5 Construed According to Utah Law.
This Ordinance and any Franchise granted
pursuant to this Ordinance shall be construed and
enforced in accordance with the substantive laws
of the State of Utah.

ADMINISTRATION AND PERMITS 1
DEFINITIONS 2
REGULATIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL ZONES 3
PARKING AND LOADING SPACE VEHICLE TRAFFIC AND ACCESS REGULATIONS 4
CONDITIONAL USES 5
RESERVED 6
RESERVED 7
CONDOMINIUM DEVELOPMENT 8
NON-CONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 9
BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS 10
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES 11
AGRICULTURAL ZONE (A-1) 12
AGRICULTURAL ESTATES ZONE (A-E) 13
RESIDENTIAL, SINGLE-FAMILY 14
RESIDENTIAL, MULTI-FAMILY (R-M) 15
RESERVED 16
PLANNED COMMERCIAL ZONES (CP-1 & CP-2) 17
LIGHT MANUFACTURING (MP-1) 18
PERFORMANCE STANDARD ZONE (PZ) 19
CENTRAL BUSINESS DISTRICT (CBD) 20
ZONING MAP 21
PATIO HOMES ZONE (PH) 22
KIOKS, MOBILE STORES, SWAP MEETS, SIDEWALK AND PARKING LOT SALES 23
AMENDMENTS TO THE ZONING ORDINANCE 24
REV. June 10, 2020
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Administration and Permits Chapter 1
Page 1-1
Chapter 1. Administration and Permits
28-1-1 Short Title
28-1-2 Purpose, Interpretation and Conflict
28-1-3 Changes and Amendments 88
28-1-4 Public Hearings 88
28-1-5 Building Permit Required 183
28-1-6 Certificate of Occupancy Required
28-1-7 Territory Annexed to the City
28-1-8 Administration and Enforcement
28-1-9 Fees and Assessments
28-1-10 Issuance of Licenses and Permits by City
Officials
28-1-12 Violation A Nuisance
28-1-13 Violation A Misdemeanor
28-1-1 Short Title. This ordinance shall be known
as the Zoning Ordinance of the City of Clinton, Utah.
28-1-2 Purpose, Interpretation and Conflict.
(1) Purpose. This Ordinance is designed and enacted
for the purpose of promoting the health, safety,
morals, convenience, order, prosperity and welfare of
the present and future inhabitants of the City of
Clinton, including among other things, the lessening
of congestion and other dangers, providing adequate
light and air, classification of land uses and
distribution of land development and utilization,
protection of the tax base, securing economy in
governmental expenditures, fostering the City's
commercial and industrial growth, and the protection
of both residential and non-residential development.
(2) Interpretation. In interpreting and applying the
provisions of this ordinance, requirements contained
herein are declared to be the minimum requirements
for the purposes set forth.
(3) Conflict. This ordinance shall not nullify the
more restrictive provisions of covenants, agreements,
other ordinances, or laws, but shall prevail
notwithstanding such provisions which are less
restrictive.
28-1-3 Changes and Amendments. 88 This zoning
ordinance, including the maps, may be amended from
time to time by the City Council after review and
recommendation by the Planning Commission and
with the requirements of public hearing outlined
elsewhere in this ordinance. All proposed changes
and amendments shall be proposed by or submitted
to the Planning Commission for its recommendation,
which, within ninety days, shall be forwarded to the
City Council for its consideration. Failure of the
Planning Commission to submit a recommendation
within the prescribed time shall be deemed approval
by such commission of the proposed change or
amendment. The City Council shall approve, amend,
and approve or overrule the recommendation of the
Planning Commission by a majority vote of its
members within ninety days following the final vote
of the Planning Commission. The Council may
chose to return a proposal to the Commission for
further consideration with cause and stipulation of
the items that the Council request by reconsidered,
however the Council may not return a proposal for
the same consideration more than once.
28-1-4 Public Hearings. 88 Public hearings that are
required by this ordinance shall be accomplished as
outlined herewith.
(1) Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance. At least
fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of such
hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality.
(2) Application for Changes to Property Zoning. At
least fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of
such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of
general circulation in the municipality. Additionally,
a two (2) foot by two (2) foot sign which, in
contrasting letters announces a public hearing, a
phone number at the city offices where additional
information may be obtained, and a copy of the
public hearing. Lettering will be of contrasting color
to the background and “Public Notice” will be three
(3) inches tall, the phone number will be one and
one-half (1 ½ ) inch tall letters. The copy of the
public notice will be type written on an 8 ½” x 11”
piece of paper contained in a weather resistant,
transparent cover. A minimum of one (1) sign shall
be placed on each frontage of the subject property.
(3) Application for Conditional Uses. The Planning
Commission shall call a Public Hearing on any
Conditional Use request. Notice of such Public
Hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the municipality at least seven (7) days
prior to said public hearing.20 Notification of such
review shall be sent to the applicant and all property
owners within a 300-foot radius of the property
under review. Said notification shall not be less than
seven (7) days prior to the Conditional Use
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Administration and Permits Chapter 1
Page 1-2
application and input from said parties.
(4) Application for Non- Residential Site Plan and
Architectural Approval. Uses proposed requiring a
site plan review outlined in section 3.10 and 18.5 of
this ordinance. At least fifteen (15) days notice of
the time and place of such hearing shall be published
in a newspaper of general circulation in the
municipality. Additionally, a sign as outlined in 2
above shall be placed on the property.
(5) Tabled or Continued Hearings. When a public
hearing or action as a result of a public hearing
required by the Planning Commission or City
Council is tabled or continued to another meeting the
Commission or Council will stipulate a date when the
item will be re-addressed. Public Notice of pending
action shall be all that is required until final action is
taken by the Planning Commission or Council as
necessary as long as the hearing is opened to the
public and the Commission or Council tables or
continues to another meeting.
28-1-5 Building Permit Required. 183
(1) Permits Required: Except as specified in this
ordinance no building or structure regulated by the
Technical Building Codes shall be erected,
constructed, enlarged, altered, repaired, moved,
improved, removed, converted or demolished unless
a separate permit for each building or structure has
been obtained from the building official.
(2) Work Exempt From Permit:
(a) Accessory to residential uses in a residential zone:
placement of a one-story detached accessory
structure provided the floor area does not exceed 200
square feet. Accessory to uses regulated by the
International Building Code: placement of a onestory
detached accessory structure provided the floor
area does not exceed 120 square feet. 101
(b) Fences not over 6 feet high.
(c) Movable cases, counters and partitions not over 5
feet 9 inches high.
(d) Retaining walls that are not over 4 feet in height
measured from the bottom of the footing to the top of
the wall unless supporting a surcharge or impounding
or have the potential for impounding Class I, II or
III-A liquids.
(e) Platforms, walks and driveways not more than 30
inches above grade and not over any basement or
story below.
(f) Painting, papering and similar finish work.
(g) Window awnings supported by an exterior wall
of Group R, Division 3, and Group u Occupancies
when projecting not more than 54 inches.
(h) Prefabricated swimming pools accessory to a
Group R, Division 3 Occupancy which are less than
2 feet deep and are emptied daily.
(3) Full Code Compliance: Unless otherwise
exempted, separate plumbing, electrical and
mechanical permits will be required for the aboveexempted
items where required by the applicable
Technical Building Codes.
(4) Exemption from the permit requirements outlined
above shall not be deemed to grant authorization for
any work to be done in any manner in violation of
the provisions of the applicable Technical Building
Codes.
(5) Structures constructed without a Building Permit
or Compliance Permit are declared a Nuisance.
Enforcement of the Nuisance may be accomplished
as follows:
(a) Stop Work Order and order to remove the
structure as established in the applicable building
codes adopted by the State or City.
(b) Issuance of a citation as outlined in 18-1-7 of the
Clinton City Code of Ordinances.
(c) Issuance and recording of a Certificate of Non-
Compliance with the Davis County Recorder’s
Office against the property outlining the violations(s)
and intent of the Certificate is to notify all potential
parties interested in the property that the violation(s)
must be corrected for the property to be in
compliance with the Clinton City Code.
28-1-6 Certificate of Occupancy Required. No
land shall be used or occupied and no building
hereafter structurally altered or erected, shall be used
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Administration and Permits Chapter 1
Page 1-3
or changed in use until a Certificate of Occupancy
shall have been issued by the Building Inspector
stating that the building or structure or the proposed
use thereof, or the use of land complies with the
provisions of this ordinance. A like certificate shall
be issued for the purpose of maintaining, renewing,
changing or extending a nonconforming use. A
Certificate of Occupancy either for the whole or part
of a building or structure shall be applied for
coincidentally with the application for a Building
Permit and shall be issued within ten days after the
erection or structural alteration of such building or
structure, or part thereof, shall have been completed
in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance.
28-1-7 Territory Annexed to the City. At the
time of the annexation of new territory to the City of
Clinton, the City Council shall classify such territory
for zoning purposes according to the zones
established by this Ordinance.
28-1-8 Administration and Enforcement. The
Community Development Director or his/her
designated representative is hereby charged with the
administration and enforcement of the provisions of
this Ordinance to include but not be limited to:
(1) Permit: A permit for the construction of or
alteration of any building or structure, nor the issue
of any Certificate of Occupancy for a change in the
use of a structure or parcel of land, if such
construction or alteration or change would be in
violation or would involve a violation of any of the
provisions of this Ordinance or any other ordinance
of the City of Clinton or of any law of the State of
Utah.
(2) Enforcement: The inspection of buildings in
course of construction, alteration or repair, and any
change in the use of land. If, in the course of such
inspection or otherwise, it shall come to his/her
attention that any use or contemplated use of land is
in violation of the provisions of this Ordinance,
he/she shall issue his written order to the person
responsible therefore, ordering and directing such
person to cease and desist such construction,
alteration, repair or use. He/she shall report
violations of this Ordinance to the City Attorney for
prosecution and make complaint thereof before the
court or courts having jurisdiction of such violation.
(3) Police Assistance: Obtain the assistance of the
Police Department whenever in his/her opinion, such
assistance is necessary in the investigation of a
suspected violation of this Ordinance.
(4) Rules and Regulations: Reasonable rules and
regulations necessary or desirable in the
administration of this Ordinance may be established.
Three copies of such rules and regulations shall be
filed with the City Recorder and such rules and
regulations shall become effective when so filed.
28-1-9 Fees and Assessments. The City Council
may, by resolution, prescribe an exact payment of
reasonable fees and assessments to cover the expense
of reviewing applications for city action regulated by
this ordinance to include but not limited to:
conditional use permits; zoning changes; examining
plans; issuing building permits; licenses; inspecting
uses; and issuing Certificates of Occupancy and may
determine the method of collecting such fees.
28-1-10 Issuance of Licenses and Permits by City
Officials. All departments, officials and public
employees of the City of Clinton, Utah, which are
vested with the duty or authority to issue permits or
licenses shall conform to the provisions of this
Ordinance and shall issue no such permit or license
for uses, buildings, or purposes where the same
would be in conflict with the provisions of this
Ordinance. Any permit inadvertently issued in
conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance shall be
null and void.
28-1-11 Violation A Nuisance. Any structure made
or existing illegally, and any use of land in violation
of any provision of this Ordinance is hereby deemed
a public nuisance and may be abated by appropriate
proceedings.
28-1-12 Violation A Misdemeanor. Any person,
firm, or corporation, whether as principal, agent,
employee or otherwise, violating or causing or
permitting the violation of any of the provisions of
this Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine
or not more than two hundred ninety-nine dollars or
by imprisonment for a term not exceeding six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Such
person, firm or corporation shall be deemed guilty of
a separate offense for each and every day during
which any portion of any violation of this Ordinance
is committed, maintained, continued, or permitted by
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Administration and Permits Chapter 1
Page 1-4
such person, firm or corporation, and shall be
punishable as herein provided.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Definitions Chapter 2
Page?2?1
Chapter 2. Definitions 181, 217
28-2-1 Application of Chapter
28-2-2 Definitions
28-2-1 Application of Chapter. The words and
terms defined in this Chapter shall have the meanings
indicated. Words used in the present tense include
the future and words in the singular number include
the plural and words in the plural include the
singular. Words not included herein but defined
elsewhere in the ordinance shall be construed as
termed therein. The word "shall" is mandatory.
28-2-2 Definitions.
“Accessory Building Large Lot” 169, 199 means a
building, larger than 200 square feet, with a
minimum setback of forty (40) feet from any portion
of the primary building on the lot that is at least onehalf
acre in size and at least twenty (20) feet from any
residential building on adjoining lots.
“Accessory Building, Residential” 67, 88, 198, 199
means a building, larger than 200 square feet,
designated for use other than a residence constructed
on a lot containing a residential structure. A
Residential Accessory Building shall be constructed
of materials complementary in color to the primary
building on the lot and buildings on surrounding lots.
“Agriculture” means the tilling of the soil, the
raising of crops, horticulture and gardening, but not
including keeping or raising domestic animals and
fowl, except household pets, and not including any
agricultural industry or business, such as fruit
packing plants, fur farms, animal hospitals or similar
uses.
“Airstrip (private)” means a specially prepared
surface for the taking-off and landing operations of
aircraft, constructed solely for personal use by the
landowner(s).
“Alley” means a public thoroughfare less than
twenty-six (26) feet wide.
“Animal Unit (Agricultural & Residential)” 170
means the keeping of not more than the below-stated
number of domestic animals:
(1) One head of: horse or cow; or
(2) Three head of: pig or sheep; or
(3) Five head of the following small, non-carnivorous
animals: rabbits, hamsters, or other similar small
animals.
“Attached Dwelling” 126 means a one-family
dwelling attached to two or more other one-family
dwellings by common vertical walls.
“Barber/Beautician Shop ” 163 A Barber/Beautician
shop will also include the following other types of
uses, however this does not constitute a complete list,
but an attempt to further define it: pedicures &
manicures, tanning beds, hair removal, massages, or
any other similar use.
“Basement” means any floor level below the first
story in a building, except that a floor level in a
building having only one floor level shall be
classified as a basement unless such floor level
qualifies as a first story as defined herein.
“Boarding House” 4 means a dwelling with guest
rooms where, with or without compensation, meals
and lodging are provided for at least two and not
more than fifteen people.
“Buildable Area” means the total area of a lot
exclusive of any easements granted for a public right
of way.
“Building” means any structure having a roof
supported by columns or walls, for the housing or
enclosure of persons, animals, or chattels.
“Building, Accessory” means a detached
subordinate building or a portion of the main building
on a lot, the use of which is customarily incidental to
that of the main or principal building.
“Building, Height of” means the vertical distance
above a reference datum measured to the highest
point of the coping of a flat roof or to the deck line or
a mansard roof or to the average height of the highest
gable of a pitched or hipped roof. The reference
datum shall be selected by either of the following,
whichever yields a greater height of building:
(1) The elevation of the highest adjoining sidewalk or
ground surface within a 5-foot horizontal distance of
the exterior wall of the building when such sidewalk
or ground surface is not more than 10 feet above
lowest grade.
(2) Any elevation 10 feet higher than the lowest
grade when the sidewalk or ground surface described
in Section 2.3.8.1 is more than 10 feet above lowest
grade.
(3) The height of a stepped or terraced building is the
maximum height of any segment of the building.
“Building, Main” means a building in which is
conducted the principal use of the lot on which it is
located.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Definitions Chapter 2
Page?2?2
“Building, Public” means a building owned and
operated, or owned and intended to be operated by a
public agency of the United States of America, of the
State of Utah, or any of its subdivisions, or of the
City of Clinton.
“Camping Trailer” A trailer, camper, or motor
home designed or used for sleeping by persons while
traveling, but not intended as a permanent attachment
to public utilities. 119
“Carport” 192, 199 means a private, covered area for
parking motor vehicles with two or more open sides.
A carport with a distance between support structures
less than 20-feet shall be designated as a single
carport. A carport with a distance between support
structures equal to or more than 20 feet shall be
designated as a double carport.
(1) Carport Attached: the carport and dwelling
having a roof or wall in common. Ref. §28-3-
25(1)(5)
(2) Carport accessory: located behind a dwelling with
adequate access for a motor vehicle. Ref §28-3-25(5)
(3) Carport Detached: located adjacent to a dwelling
and fronting a common street. Ref. §28-3-25(5)
“Cattery” 126 means an establishment for boarding,
breeding, buying, grooming, or selling cats for profit.
“Check Cashing” 165 means a check or assignment
of wages for consideration or extending a deferred
deposit loan and shall include any other similar types
of businesses licensed by the state of Utah pursuant
to the check cashing registration act. The term
“check cashing” shall not include fully automated
standalone services, such as automated teller
machines, located inside of an existing building, so
long as the automated service incorporates no signage
in the windows or outside of the building.
“Condominium Project” means a real estate
condominium project where ownership of a single
unit in a multi-unit project, together with an
undivided interest in common in the common areas
and facilities of the property, is transferred; a plan or
project whereby four or more apartments, rooms,
office spaces, or other units in existing and proposed
apartments or commercial or industrial buildings or
structures are separately offered or proposed to be
offered for sale and meeting all requirements of the
"Condominium Ownership Act" of the State of Utah.
Structures shall conform to all area, yard, frontage
and height regulations of the zone in which they are
located.
“Corral” means a permanent fenced enclosure other
than a building and less than one-acre in area for the
confinement of animals.
“Court” means an unoccupied open green space,
other than yard, on the same lot with a building or
buildings, which is bounded on two or more sides by
the walls of such building or buildings.
“Coverage, Building” means the percentage of the
lot area covered by the main and accessory buildings.
“Dairy” means a commercial establishment for the
manufacture, processing, or sale of dairy products.
“Day Care Center” means any building or structure
other than an occupied residence furnishing care,
supervision, and guidance for three or more children
per day for periods less than 24 hours per day. The
term "day care center" is inclusive of kindergartens,
preschools, nursery schools, and all other similar
facilities specializing in the education and/or care of
children prior to their entrance into the first grade,
other than facilities owned and/or operated by the
public school system.
“Day Care Center, Family” 20, 26, 106, 125 means any
non-commercial, private premises being used by the
owners/residents for:
(1) the caring of a minimum of one (1) but not more
than eight (8) children, in accordance with Utah Rule
430-90, Child Care Centers. With the operators
licensed by the Utah State Department of Health,
Bureau of Licensing;
(2) a preschool of no more than eight (8) students at
any time; or (iii) a learning center where lessons such
as music, dance. Tutoring, painting or similar topics
are taught.
“Day Care Center, Family Group” 20, 106 means any
non-commercial, private premises being used by the
owners/residents for the caring of up to but not more
than twelve (12) children, in accordance with Utah
Rule 430-90, Child Care Centers. With operators
licensed by the Utah State Department of Health,
Bureau of Licensing.
“Dwelling” 126 means a building that contains one or
two dwelling units used, intended, or designed to be
build, used, rented, leased, let or hired out to be
occupied, or that are occupied for living purposes.
(ICC Building Code).
“Dwelling, Group” means two (2) or more
dwellings placed upon a single lot and fronting on an
interior open court, the group being considered as one
building for the purpose of front, side, and rear yard
requirements.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Definitions Chapter 2
Page?2?3
“Dwelling, Multiple-Family” means a building
designed to be occupied by three (3) or more
families.
“Dwelling Unit” 67, 126 means a single unit providing
complete independent living facilities for one or more
persons, including permanent provisions for living,
sleeping, structure, or vegetation.
“Dwelling Unit Footprint” 67, 126 means the finished
floor area, measured by taking the outside
dimensions of a single family dwelling unit contained
within the vertically projected outline of the living
space within the surrounding exterior walls. Such
space is not to include an attached garage, unfinished
basement, covered patios or carports or any type of
detached structure.
“Dwelling Unit Single-Family” 67, 118 Any building
which contains living facilities, including provisions
for sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation as
required by the Building Code for not more than one
family, or a congregate residence of 10 or less
persons on a separate lot and not sharing any
common wall. (Ref. UBC/IBC)
“Dwelling, Single-Family Row House” means a
building built directly against an adjoining building
without an open space between, and containing a
one-family dwelling unit extending from basement to
roof. Each such single-family attached dwelling shall
be considered one structure, for purposes of front,
rear, and side yard requirements.
“Dwelling, Two-Family” means a building arranged
or designed to be occupied by two (2) families, the
structure having only two (2) dwelling units.
“Dwelling Unit, Immediate Family” 172 means a
single dwelling unit, with or without cooking
facilities, within the same building as the main
dwelling unit designed EXCLUSIVELY for use by
one or two immediate family members AND THEIR
DEPENDENTS, For the purpose of this ordinance,
"immediate family" shall include and be limited to:
father, mother, grandfather, grandmother, son,
daughter, grandson, granddaughter, brother, sister of
the property owner of record. In addition, the main
dwelling unit MUST be owner-occupied and meet the
following stipulations:
(1) The unit must be connected to the main dwelling
area.
(2) This unit SHALL not be rented out.
(3) There shall only be one (1) life sustaining utility
connections (i.e. water, sewer, electrical, gas).
(4) There shall be 24 hour access between the main
residence and this unit.
(5) There shall only be one (1) dedicated exterior
door access into this unit, this is not intended to
exclude access to a patio that is not visible from any
public way.
(6) A city inspection of the accessibility between the
main residence and this unit shall be conducted at
least every five (5) years or upon a legitimate
compliant, or change of ownership.
(7) A document identifying the nature of this unit
SHALL be recorded with the county.
(8) There shall only be one (1) address displayed for
the entire structure and one (1) mailbox.
“Family” 8, 67,158 means an individual or two or more
persons related by blood or marriage or a group of
not more than five persons (excluding servants) who
need not be related by blood or marriage living
together in a single family dwelling unit. (Ref
UBC/IBC)
“Family Food Production” means the keeping of
domestic animals and fowl for the production of food
for the sole use of the family occupying the premises
as provided for in the applicable zone.
“Fence, Solid” 199 means a Fence that is intended to
significantly block the view of items that are behind
or enclosed within the Fence. An example of the
minimum standard is considered to be a chain link
fence with solid slats.
“Floor Area” means the area included within the
surrounding exterior walls of a building or portion
thereof, exclusive of vent shafts and courts. The
floor area of a building, or portion thereof, not
provided with surrounding exterior walls shall be the
usable area under the horizontal portion of the roof or
floor above (Ref. UBC/IBC)
(1) Exception: Dwelling Unit: For the purpose of
this ordinance the area of a dwelling unit not
provided with surrounding exterior walls shall not be
included in this calculation.
“Final Grade” 126 means (1) the grade of the
finished surface, as of a canal bed, roadbed, top of
embankment, or bottom of excavation; (2) any
surface prepared for the support of construction,
paving, landscaping, surfacing or layout of conduit.
“Fowl Unit (Agricultural)” 170 means the keeping of
not more than the below-stated number of fowl:
(1) Fifty each of the following classes of fowl:
chickens, pheasants, and pigeons provided that there
may be a combination of said fowl but not to exceed
200 on residential lots of one acre or more. An
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Definitions Chapter 2
Page?2?4
additional 200 may be allowed on the lot provided
they are less than five months old. Or
(2) Ten each of the following classes of fowl: ducks,
geese, and turkeys provided that there may be a
combination of said fowl but not to exceed 20 on any
lot of one acre or more, regardless of number of fowl
units permitted thereon.
“Fowl Unit (Residential chickens)” 170 means the
keeping of not more than six (6) chickens (hens only)
“Frontage” 217 means all the property fronting on
one side of the street between intersecting or
intercepting streets, or between a street and a rightof-
way, waterway, end of dead-end street, or political
subdivision boundary, measured along the street line.
An intercepting street shall determine only the
boundary of the frontage of the side of the street
which it intercepts. Frontage for lots in a cul-de-sac
or knuckle of a street, which are irregular in shape,
can use the front setback line to meet the
development standards.
“Garage, Private” 21, 104, 148, 169, 183, 198,199 means an
enclosed space for the storage of one or more motor
vehicles. A garage with an exterior width of less than
20 feet shall be designated as a single garage. A
garage with an exterior width of 20 feet or greater
shall be designated as a double garage. For the
purpose of these regulations a private garage will fall
into one (1) of three (3) categories:
(1) Garage Attached: the garage and dwelling having
a roof or wall in common.
(2) Garage Accessory: located behind a dwelling
with adequate access for a motor vehicle. Ref. §28-
3-25 (2).
(3) Garage Detached: located adjacent to a dwelling
and fronting a common street. Ref §28-3-25 (3)
“Garage, Public” means a building or portion
thereof, other than a private garage, designed or used
for servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring, selling, or
storing vehicles.
“Garage and Yard Sales” 174 means a garage sale,
also known as a yard sale, rummage sale, tag sale,
attic sale, moving sale, junk sale or an estate auction,
is an informal, irregularly scheduled event for the
sale of used goods by private individuals.
(1) Typically the goods in a garage sale are one (1) or
more of any “new”, “like-new”, “gently used”, or just
unwanted items from the household.
(2) The sales venue is typically a garage, driveway,
carport, front yard, porch, or occasionally, the interior
of a house.
(3) The sale is conducted by a legal resident of the
premises, and the legal resident MUST conduct and
be present during all hours of each individual garage
sale.
(4) Garage sales are not to occur more than eight (8)
days in any calendar year, no more than three (3)
consecutive days in any one (1) event.
(5) Hours of operation shall be limited to 8 am to 8
pm.
“Grade” 126 means:
(1) The degree of rise or descent of a sloping surface,
as of a street, channel, trench, pipe or lot;
(2) The ground level around a building, structure, or
vegetation.
“Hard Surface” 35 means a permanent, impervious
surface such as concrete, asphalt, or concrete pavers.
Pavers shall be approved by the Building Official.
“Home Business” 35 means a general term referring
to any commercial activity that is conducted by a
person in residential structures existing on the same
lot where such person resides. Examples of home
businesses are:
(1) Home Offices
(2) Home Occupations
(3) Family Day-Care Centers
(4) Family Group Day-Care Centers
“Home, Display” 175 also called a Show Home:
means a house within a housing subdivision that is
decorated and furnished to show different living
spaces and features of the builder to prospective
home buyers, where NO business is conducted on
site, but at a different location.
“Home, Model” 175 means a house within a housing
subdivision that is decorated and furnished to show
different living spaces and features of the builder to
prospective home buyers, where business is
conducted on site in an office.
“Home Office” 35 means a home office is an
accessory use so located and conducted that the
average neighbor, under normal conditions, WOULD
NOT be aware of its existence. The use of a portion
of a dwelling as an office, studio or work room for
businesses which are customarily conducted in the
home and are incidental to the primary use as a home
or residence. Home offices shall be in compliance
with the regulations and provisions contained in
Chapter 6 of this ordinance.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Definitions Chapter 2
Page?2?5
“Home Occupation” means a home occupation is an
accessory use so located and conducted that the
average neighbor, under normal conditions, WOULD
be aware of its existence. The use of a portion of a
dwelling as an office, studio or work room for
occupations which are customarily conducted in the
home and are incidental to the primary use as a home
residence. Home occupations shall be in compliance
with the regulations and provisions contained in
Chapter 6 of this ordinance.
“Household Pets” means animals or fowl ordinarily
permitted in the house and kept for company or
pleasure, such as dogs, cats, and canaries, but not
including a sufficient number of dogs to constitute a
kennel as defined in this Ordinance.
“Impervious Surface” 9 Impervious surfaces are
those which do not absorb water. They consist of all
buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks,
and any other areas of concrete or asphalt.
“Impervious Surface Ratio” 9 means a measure of
the intensity of land use which is determined by
dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces on a
lot by the total lot area.
“ Impervious Surface Ratio, Residential Rear
Yard” 118 means a measure of the intensity of land
use which is determined by dividing the total area of
all impervious surfaces in the rear yard by the total
area of the rear yard.
“Industry” 19 means productive action using
mechanical power and machinery to process products
from semi-processed or raw materials.
“Industry, Light” 19 An industry where all industrial
processes are located inside a building and no raw
materials or finished products are stored outside.
Noise, odors, smoke wastes, and heavy truck traffic
generated by such use shall be less than or
comparable to uses classified as commercial in
nature. No industrial use where toxic, explosive, or
flammable materials are processed shall be classified
as light industry.
“Kennel” means the land or buildings used in the
keeping of three (3) or more dogs, at least four (4)
months old.
“Landscape or Landscaping” 148 The installation
of living plant material (i.e. turf grasses or turf type
fescues, ground cover, annual and perennial
flowering plants, vines, shrubs, and trees) planted
directly on the property and kept free from all hard
surfaces. The following may also de defined as
landscaping when they are combined with installed
living material:
(1) Water features (i.e. pools, fountains, falls and
streams) and sculptures;
(2) Paving materials (i.e., bricks, pavers, flagstone,
textured concrete) used to create a useful open space,
ad color or texture to the design, and create visual
interest provided that such material in the front yard
setback are used only as trim or edging and not used
as patios, sports surfaces, or areas where vehicles can
be parked;
(3) Existing natural vegetation of shrubs (e.g.,
wood’s rose, willows, currant, sagebrush) or trees
(e.g., box elder, gamble oak, maple or birch).
“Landscaping, Non-living” 148 Rocks, gravel,
mulches, wood chips or other non-living materials
typically used in landscaping may be used as ground
covers under plant materials. Such materials used
solely as ground cover, without plants above, will not
cover more that ten (10) percent of the ground area
required to be landscaped. If more than ten (10)
percent is desired, approval must be given by the
planning staff based on the criteria in § 3.20.3 for
Commercial developments and § 3.21.3 for
residential dwellings of this title.
“Living Space” 67 means finished space in a
dwelling unit for living, sleeping, eating, cooking,
sanitation, or unit mechanical and plumbing systems.
Does not include cellars, crawl spaces, unfinished
basements, or other areas not devoted to dwelling
use.
“Living Space, Minimum” 67 means the smallest
living space permissible within an indicated dwelling
unit.
“Lodging House” means a building where lodging
only is provided for compensation to two (2) or more,
but not exceeding fifteen (15) persons.
“Lot” 35 means a parcel of land whose boundaries
have been established by some legal instrument such
as a recorded deed or a recorded map and which is
recognized as a separate legal entity for purposes of
transfer of title.
“Lot, Building” 35, 69, 161 means a parcel of land
occupied or to be occupied by a main or group of
buildings (main and accessory), together with such
yards, open spaces, lot width and lot area as required
by this ordinance and having frontage upon a public
street in which frontage does not include any part of
the temporary end or dead end of a street designed
for a through street without development of a cul-desac.
Except for private streets approved as part of a
Performance Subdivision in accordance with 28-19.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Definitions Chapter 2
Page?2?6
“Lot, Commercial” 69 means a parcel of land
occupied or to be occupied by a main building or
group of buildings as part of an approved site plan
and plat processed through the Planning Commission
as a commercial development. Such development is
to include all parking and open spaces required by
this ordinance and the Subdivision Ordinance and
each parcel is to have complete access and right-ofway
to a public street by means of a Declaration of
Restrictions which is to be recorded, with the county
recorders office against all properties within the
development at the time of recordation of the plat.
“Lot, Corner” means a lot abutting on two
intersecting streets. The property owner may
designate the front yard on one street. The other
street frontage then becomes the exterior side yard.
The property owner may then designate the interior
side yard and the rear yard.
“Lot, Interior” means a lot other than a corner lot.
“Lot Development Standards” means the
established regulations concerning lot areas, yard
setbacks, building height, lot coverage, open green
space and any other special regulations deemed
necessary to accomplish the purpose of this
Ordinance as indicated in 28-1-2.
“Manufactured Housing” 38 means a transportable
factory built housing unit constructed on or after June
15, 1976, according to the Federal Home
Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1975
(HUD Code), in one or more sections, which, in the
traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or
40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on
site, is 400 or more square feet, and which is built on
a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a
dwelling with a permanent foundation when
connected to the required utilities, and includes the
plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical
systems. All manufactured homes constructed on or
after June 15, 1976, shall be identifiable by the
manufacturer's data plate bearing the date the unit
was manufactured and a HUD label attached to the
exterior of the home certifying the home was
manufactured to HUD standards.
“Mobile Home” 38 means a transportable factory
built housing unit built prior to June 15, 1976, in
accordance with a state mobile home code which
existed prior to the Federal manufactured Housing
and Safety Standards Act (HUD Code).
“Mobile Home Park” means a parcel of land which
has been planned and improved for the placement of
mobile homes for residential use.
“Nonconforming Building” means a building or
structure or portion thereof lawfully existing at the
time any applicable zoning regulation or regulations
become effective, the design, erection, use, height,
area, and yard dimensions of which do not conform
to the provisions of such regulation or regulations.
“Nonconforming Use” means the prior lawful use of
land which subsequently is prohibited by zoning
regulations pertaining to the zone in which the
building or land is situated.
“Open Green Space” means an open space suitable
for relaxation or landscaping. It shall be unoccupied
and unobstructed by buildings and/or hard surfaces
such as asphalt, cement and packed gravel, except
that such open green space may be traversed by
necessary sidewalks.
“Open Space Easement” means an easement
granted to the City of Clinton by the developer on
and over land in that subdivision which provides and
guarantees that the designated common open space
and recreation land is permanently reserved for and
can be used only for open space and recreation
purposes in accordance with plans and specifications
approved by the Planning Commission and City
Council at the time of approval of the development.
“Parking Lot” means an open area, other than a
street, used for parking of more than four (4)
automobiles and available for public use, whether
free, for compensation, or as an accommodation for
clients and customers.
“Parking Space” 126 means the space within a
building, lot or parking lot for parking or storage of
one (1) vehicle or trailer in compliance with the
requirements of 28-4.
“Pasture” means a grassed area of land of one (1)
acre or more in size used for the grazing of animals.
“Patio Covers” 95 means patio covers are one-story
structures not exceeding twelve (12) feet in height
intended to provide protection against the elements
over a patio, deck, or porch.
“Patio House” 126 means a one-family, typically onestory,
dwelling located on and along at least one sidelot
line, with a court or patio area enclosed by fences
or walls.
“Patio or Deck or Porch” 95 means a structure either
at grade or elevated attached or unattached to a
residence designed for outdoor activities associated
with a residential use.
“Preschool, Residential Neighborhood” 17, 179,
means any non-commercial, private premises being
used by the owners/residents for the instruction and
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Definitions Chapter 2
Page?2?7
care of up to eight (8) children, related and unrelated,
between the ages of three (3) and six (6) years of age
for up to three (3) hours at any one time, conducted
no more than five (5) times per week and where
meals are not served. Children under the age of six
(6), of the owner/resident, shall be included in the
number of children allowed in the preschool.
“Public Utility Substation” 95 means a structure,
site, area, or similar facility associated with a utility
such as telecommunications, power, sanitary sewer,
water, or similar utility that is constructed on site and
intended to supplement or increase the capability of
the utility. Substations are generally: built on site,
within an enclosed area or constructed as part of an
overall facility site; taller than 6-feet; large enough or
intended for a person to enter; or any combination of
these items. Examples of a Public Utility Substation
could be but are not limited to pumping stations,
cellular phone towers, power substations, and
telecommunication structures larger than otherwise
defined in this ordinance.
“Retail” 71 means the sale of goods or articles
individually or in small quantities directly to the
consumer.
“Right-of-Way” means any street, alley or similar
parcel of land essentially unobstructed from the
ground to the sky, which is deeded, dedicated or
otherwise permanently appropriated to the public for
public use.
“Setback” 95, 104, 190, 220 means the measurement taken
from the property line to the outer surface of the
building wall at its furthermost extension toward the
lot line. Building wall does not include any
cantilevered exterior walls, bays, or bump-outs
extending beyond the foundation of two feet or less.
Such setback encroachments are not permitted in the
side yards of the PH Zone.
(1) Unenclosed porches, located within the front yard
setback, with or without a patio cover shall be
excluded from such setback measurement if the porch
conforms to each of the following three sub-sections.
(a) Total length does not exceed 15% of the length of
the dwelling (excluding attached garages).
(b) Does not protrude into an excess of 15% of the
required front yard setback distance.
(c) Any roof covering must conform to a. and b.
(2) Unenclosed, rear or side porches shall be
excluded from setback measurement if the porch
conforms to each of the following sub-stations.
(a) Total width of the patio, deck, or porch does not
extend into the required side-lot setback on one side
of the dwelling. The patio, deck, or porch shall not
extend at any point extend above grade within any
required side-lot setback.
(b) Total impervious surface ratio, established
elsewhere in this ordinance is not exceeded.
(c) Rear setback of the porch is not less than one-half
of the required setback.
(d) Design shall be such that run-off does not flow
onto adjoining property
(e) Any roof covering shall not infringe upon
minimum side lot setback requirements.
(f) Unenclosed covered detached porches shall meet
the requirements of an accessory building. For the
purpose of this section unattached means not directly
attached to the dwelling.
(3) Enclosed, rear, or side porches shall conform to
the setback requirements for the main dwelling when
attached or for accessory buildings when unattached.
“Sexually Oriented Business” 71 shall be defined as
provided in Title 19, Chapter 2, of the Clinton
Municipal code.
“Shed” or “Yard Shed” 169, 219 means an enclosed
space or covered area outside of an enclosed space
less than 200 square feet, not including eves, for the
storage of yard tools and supplies, motorized yard
equipment, and household items, etc.. Includes
greenhouses, play houses, forts, and other play
structures. Does not include landscape features such
as pergolas, arbors, or other skeleton type structures.
“Shed Temporary” 169 means an enclosed space
used for temporary storage of household goods. An
example of a temporary shed is a commercial product
called a “Pod”.
“Sight Triangle” 126 means the triangular area at the
intersection of two streets or a street(s) and drive
designed for increased traffic flow into a commercial,
light manufacturing, office or similar area formed by
measuring a distance of 40 feet along both lot lines
back from the point of intersection of said lines.
Where no lot line exists or where the lot line is less
than 9 ½ feet from the back of the curb measuring
distance shall be 49 ½ feet from the back of curb or
edge of asphalt. At no time shall the sight triangle be
less than 40 feet from the planned right-of-way line
for a street.
“Sign” means a presentation of words, letters,
figures, designs, pictures, or colors publicly displayed
so as to give notice relative to a person, a business, an
article or merchandise, a service, an assemblage, a
solicitation or a request for aid; also the structure or
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Definitions Chapter 2
Page?2?8
framework or any natural object on which any sign is
erected or is intended to be erected or exhibited or
which is being used or is intended to be used for sign
purposes. All signs in Clinton City shall be in
compliance with the regulations and provisions of the
Clinton City Sign Ordinance.
“Stable, Private” means a detached, accessory
building for the keeping of horses owned by the
occupants of the premises, and not kept for
remuneration, hire or sale.
“Stable, Public” means a stable other than a private
stable.
“Story” means that portion of a building included
between the upper surface of any floor and the upper
surface of the floor next above, except that the
topmost story shall be that portion of a building
included between the upper surface of the topmost
floor and the ceiling or roof above. If the finished
floor level directly above a usable or unused underfloor
space is more than six (6) feet above grade as
defined herein for more than 50 percent of the total
perimeter or is more than twelve (12) feet above
grade as defined herein at any point, such usable or
unused under-floor space shall be considered as a
story.
“Story, First” means the lowest story in a building
which qualifies as a story, as defined herein, except
that a floor level in a building having only one floor
level shall be classified as a first story, provided such
floor level is not more than 4 feet below grade, as
defined herein, for more than 50 percent of the total
perimeter, or more than eight (8) feet below grade, as
defined herein, at any point.
“Story, Half” means a story with at least two (2) of
its sides situated in a sloping roof, the floor area of
which does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the floor
immediately below it.
“Street” means a public thoroughfare, dedicated,
abandoned, or condemned for public use, which
affords the principal means of access to abutting
property and is more than twenty-six (26) feet wide.
“Street Major” 199 means a Collector, Minor
Arterial, or Principal Arterial street as indicated in the
Clinton City Transportation Master Plan.
“Street Private” 69 means a private thoroughfare, as
part of a Performance Subdivision developed as
outlined in this ordinance and the Subdivision
Ordinance for private use providing access to and
from a public thoroughfare. Private streets are to be
outlined on the approved final plat and recorded with
the final plat of the subdivision. The recording of a
private street is to grant access to all land owners
with frontage on the private street and the city for
access to all city facilities within a development.
(ref. lane, private)
“Structure” means anything constructed or erected,
the use of which requires location on the ground, or
attachment to something having location on the
ground.
“Structural Alterations” means any change in
supporting members of a building, such as bearing
walls, columns, beams or girders.
“Swimming Pool” 13 means any artificial or semiartificial
container, whether outdoors or indoors, and
whether above or below the surface of the ground, or
both, used or intended to be used to contain a body of
water for swimming by any person or persons,
together with all permanent structures, equipment,
appliances, and other facilities used or intended for
use in and about the operation, maintenance, and use
of such pool.
“Technical Building Codes” means the building
and construction codes adopted by the state such as
the Uniform Codes or the International Codes as
stipulated by the Uniform Building Codes
Commission.
“Telecommunication Structure” 95 means a
structure, site, area, or similar facility associated with
the electrical, telecommunications or similar industry
that is constructed off site and is transported to a
location to be installed. Unless otherwise stated in
this ordinance a Telecommunication Structure is
generally considered to be over four feet tall but less
than or equal to six (6) feet tall or covers an area
equal to or less than 120 feet in footprint.
“Town House” 126 means a single-family dwelling
unit constructed in a group of three or more attached
units in which each unit extends from foundation to
roof and with open space on at least two sides, and
each unit is located on a separately recorded lot.
“Twin Homes” 126 means a building consisting of
two single family dwelling units in which each unit
has its own direct access to the outside, no unit is
located over another, each unit is located on a
separately recorded lot and with open space on at
least three sides. Not to be confused with a duplex
where the building is located on one lot.
“Use” means the specific purpose for which land or a
building is designed, arranged, intended, or for which
it is or may be occupied or maintained.
“Use, Accessory” means a subordinate use
customarily incidental to and located upon the same
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Definitions Chapter 2
Page?2?9
lot occupied by the main use and devoted exclusively
to the main use of the premises.
“Use, Conditional” means a use or occupancy of a
building, or use of land, permitted only when
authorized upon issuance of a Conditional Use Permit
and subject to the limitations and conditions specified
therein as provided in 28-5, intended to allow
compatible integration of uses which may be suitable
only in certain locations within a particular zone, or
only upon certain conditions and/or design criteria
being achieved.
“Use, Permitted” means any use lawfully occupying
land or buildings as authorized in the zone
regulations and for which no Conditional Use Permit
is required.
“Visual Clearance Triangle” 126 see Sight Triangle
“Width of Lot” The distance between the side lot
lines measured along the minimum front yard setback
line.
“Yard” means an open space on a lot, other than a
court, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground
upward by buildings, except as otherwise provided
herein.
“Yard, Front” means an open space extending the
full width of the lot measured between the front lot
line and the closest part of the main building, which
open space is unoccupied and unobstructed from the
ground upward except as specified elsewhere in this
ordinance.
“Yard, Rear” 3 means an open space between a
building and rear lot line, unoccupied and
unobstructed from ground upward and extending
across the full width of the lot, except as specified
elsewhere in this Ordinance. On lots that are other
than rectangular in shape, the required minimum rear
yard may be an average of the distances measured
from the rear corners of a dwelling to the nearest
point of the rear lot line; however, the shortest
distance used in determining the average may not be
less than twenty (20) feet.
“Yard, Side” means an open space extending from
the front yard to the rear yard between a building and
the nearest side lot line, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward except as specified
elsewhere in this Ordinance. A side-yard on the
street side of a corner lot shall be known as an
exterior side yard.
(1) On lots where the side lot lines are not parallel,
the required minimum side-yard on one side only
may be an average of the distances measured from
the side corners of the structure to the nearest point of
the side lot line. However, the shortest distance used
in determining the average may not be less than 8
feet in a side yard requiring a ten (10) foot setback
and may not be less than six (6) feet in a side yard
requiring an 8 foot setback. This method of averaging
does not apply to the exterior side yard.14
“Zero Lot Line” 126 The configuration of a building
on a lot such that one or more of the building’s sides
located on and along the lot line.
“Zone” The geographical area of the City within
which the zoning regulations are uniform
Historic Changes to Chapter (see chapter 24 for
details)
3, 4, 8, 9, 13, 14, 17, 19, 20, 21, 26, 35, 38, 67, 69,
71, 88, 95, 104, 106, 118, 119, 125, 126, 148, 161,
162, 163, 165, 169, 170, 172, 174, 175, 179,
181,198,199, 219, 220
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?1
Chapter 3. Regulations Applicable to all
Zones
28-3-1 Applicability
28-3-2 Additional Use Regulations
28-3-3 Additional Area Regulations
28-3-4 Additional Yard Regulations, 181
28-3-5 Additional Height Regulations
28-3-6 Fence Regulations
28-3-7 Lighting
28-3-8 Public Utility Substations
28-3-9 Special Provisions Relating to the
Keeping of Animals and Fowl 148, 170
28-3-10 Site Plan and Architectural Approval 147,
150
28-3-11 Private Swimming Pools, Tennis
Courts, and Skateboard Ramps 13, 134, 149,
181
28-3-12 Above Ground Storage of
Flammable, Combustible Liquids 29, 101, 167
28-3-13 Mail Box 35, 82
28-3-14 Codes and Standards 183
28-3-15 Additional Standards 150, 183
28-3-16 Sexually Oriented Business 71
28-3-17 Agriculture Protection Area 83
28-3-18 Telecommunication Structures 95
28-3-19 Outdoor Storage 134
28-3-20 Required Commercial Landscaping 137
28-3-21 Required Residential Landscaping 148
28-3-22 Financial Guarantee Requirements 137
28-3-23 Residential Facility for Elderly
Persons 134
28-3-24 Residences for Persons with a
Disabilty 134
28-3-25 Garage, Accessory Building, Shed,
Carport - Single Family Dwelling 169, 183,
192, 198, 199, 213
28-3-26 Model and Display Homes 175
28-3-1 Applicability. The regulations hereinafter
set forth in this Chapter qualify or supplement, as the
case may be, the Zone regulations contained
elsewhere in this Ordinance.
28-3-2 Additional Use Regulations. The
requirements of this Ordinance as to minimum
building site area shall not be construed to prevent
the use for a single-family dwelling of any lot or
parcel of land existing as a legal conforming lot prior
to the adoption of this Ordinance or to subsequent
zone changes.
28-3-3 Additional Area Regulations.
(1) Every dwelling unit shall be located and
maintained on a “buildable lot” as defined in this
Ordinance.67
(2) In determining compliance with the minimum lot
area standards for each zone, buildable area shall be
used in all areas, with the following exception:
(a) If a portion of a lot or parcel of land which meets
the minimum lot area requirements of a respective
zone is acquired for public use in any manner,
including dedication, condemnation or purchase, and
such acquisition reduces the area below such
minimum requirements, the remainder of such lot or
parcel shall nevertheless be considered as having the
required minimum lot area if all of the following
conditions are met:
(i) Such lot or parcel contains a rectangular space of
at least thirty (30) by forty (40) feet exclusive of
applicable front and side yard requirements, and
exclusive of one-half of the applicable rear yard
requirements, and such rectangular space is usable
for a principal use or structure.
(ii) The remainder of such lot or parcel of land has an
area of at least 75% of the required lot area of the
zone in which the lot or parcel is located.
(iii) The remainder of such lot or parcel of land has
access to a public street with a width of not less than
twenty-six (26) feet.
28-3-4 Additional Yard Regulations.
(1) No required yard or other open space around an
existing building or which is hereafter provided
around any building for the purpose of complying
with the provisions of this Ordinance, shall be
considered as providing a yard or open space on an
adjoining lot whereon a building is to be erected or
established.
(2) On any lot under a separate ownership from
adjacent lots and of record at the time of the initial
enactment of this provision and such lot having a
smaller width than required for the Zone in which it
is located, the following regulations shall apply:
(a) For interior lots, each side yard may be equal to
but not less than the same percentage of the required
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?2
side yard width as the lot is of the required lot width,
provided that in no case shall the smaller of the two
side yards be less than five feet or the larger less than
eight feet.
(b) On corner lots, each side yard may be equal to but
not less than the same percentage of the required side
yard width as the lot is of the required lot width,
provided that in no case shall the side yard on the
street side be less than fifteen feet and the other side
yard shall not be less than five feet in all Residential
Zones.
(3) Every part of a required yard shall be open to the
sky unobstructed except for accessory buildings in a
rear yard, and except for the ordinary projections of
skylights, sills, belt courses, roof eaves, cornices and
other ornamental features.
(4) Side-yards shall remain free of buildings except
as otherwise noted in this ordinance. A hard surface
(asphalt, cement) may be permitted on one side yard
for additional parking or movement of motor vehicles
into the rear-yard; hard surfaced area shall be
designed to drain onto the landscaped area of the lot
on which they are located or directly into the frontage
street, in no instance shall drainage be onto an
adjoining lot. The opposite side-yard shall remain
clear of impervious surfaces. On corner lots street
side side-yards shall not have a hard surface area
extending more than 12-feet from the dwelling; all
drive access distances from corners shall be compiled
with for access to this area.20, 118
(5) No space needed to meet the width, yard, area,
coverage, parking or other requirements of this
Ordinance for a lot or building may be conveyed
away from such lot or building, except as permitted
by the Board of Adjustment, and any attempted
conveyance or lease in violation hereof shall be void.
(6) No parcel of land which has less than the
minimum width and area requirements for the zone in
which it is located may be cut off from a larger parcel
of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future,
of building or development as a lot, except by permit
of the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
(7) Front-yards shall remain free of impervious
surfaces except as allowed in 28-4 for parking and
access to covered parking or as allowed in 28-3-4 (4)
above. Minor landscape features shall not cover
more than 5% of the available front yard. 118
(8) Every Dwelling on a Lot: Every dwelling
structure shall be located and maintained on a
separate lot having no less than the minimum area,
width, depth, and frontage required by this Title for
the zone in which the dwelling structure is located,
except that group dwelling complexes or other more
flexible requirements as permitted by this Title, may
vary from this requirement. 118, 181
(9) Lot Standards: Except for more flexible
requirements such as those pertaining to planned
residential unit developments, group dwellings, or as
may be otherwise provided in this Title, every lot
within the City shall have such area and the required
frontage upon a dedicated public or approved private
street as is required by this Title, before a building
permit may be issued. 118
(10) Approval of Culinary Water Supply and Sewage
Disposal Required: Where either a supply of piped
culinary water under pressure and piped secondary
water under pressure, approved for use by the
municipality or a connection to an approved sanitary
sewer system is not available, no building permit
shall be issued for main buildings, or other buildings
which would utilize such facilities until the proposed
plan for sewage disposal and the proposed source of
water supply has been approved by the Davis County
Board of Health and Clinton City. 118
(11) No obstructions in Flood Plain: No building,
structure, fence, or other obstruction may be
constructed within any portion of Zone A as defined
on the FEMA Flood Insurance Map. No such flood
plains as defined by FEMA may be otherwise
reduced in effectiveness in any manner by the
dumping of garbage, other refuse, or earth, or by
leveling or obliterating it otherwise. 118
28-3-5 Additional Height Regulations.
(1) Penthouse or roof structures for the housing of
elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar
equipment required to operate and maintain a
building, and fire or parapet walls, skylight, towers,
steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, and
water tanks, wireless or television masts, theater lots,
silos or similar structures may be erected above the
height limits prescribed in the Zone Height
Regulations, but no space above the height limit shall
be allowed for the purpose of providing additional
floor space.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?3
(2) No dwelling unit shall be erected to a height less
than ten feet, and no accessory building in a
residential zone shall be erected to a height greater
than twenty-five feet.
28-3-6 Fence Regulations.
(1) No fence or other similar structure shall be
erected in any required front yard of a dwelling to a
height in excess of four feet; nor shall any fence or
other similar structure be erected in any side or rear
yard to a height in excess of six (6) feet.
EXCEPTION: where otherwise stipulated in this
ordinance, e.g. 28-19.88
(2) On corner lots, the following restrictions shall
apply:16
(a) No fence or other similar structure shall be
erected in any required front yard of a dwelling to a
height in excess of four (4) feet.
(b) No solid fence, shrubs, or other obstructions to
view between the heights of two feet and seven feet
shall be allowed within visual clearance triangle.126
(c) On rear and exterior side yards bordering a street,
no fence or similar structure shall be erected to a
height in excess of six feet.
(3) Where a fence is erected upon a retaining wall or
for other reasons there is a difference in the elevation
of the surface of the land on either side of a fence, the
height of the fence shall be measured from a point
half-way between the top of the retaining wall and
the land on the lower side or from the average
elevation of the surface of the land on either side of a
fence, but nothing herein contained shall be
construed to restrict a fence to less than four feet in
height measured from the surface of the land on the
side having the highest elevation.
(4) On public property, when it is determined to be
necessary for public safety, a fence no higher than six
feet may be erected in a yard bordering a street or
front yard of an adjoining lot, provided that:
(a) The fence is constructed of materials that do not
create a barrier to vision, i.e. chain link.
(b) The fence is not constructed on any portion of a
public right-of-way.
(c) The Planning Commission makes the
determination that the fence is necessary for the
public safety.
(5) Residential yard fences and fences placed for
protection of private property shall not be placed
upon public property or in a public right-of-way.
Fences shall be placed a minimum of one foot from
sidewalks. Fences on public property shall be placed
with concerns for public safety as determined by the
Planning Commission.38
(6) Fences shall not be of hazardous or potentially
dangerous materials or construction such as barbed
wire, razor wire, electrified, etc. except in agricultural
uses, as permitted in this ordinance or as otherwise
approved in the site plan approval process in
commercial, performance, or light manufacturing
areas. Hazardous or potentially dangerous materials
shall not be allowed in any residential uses within the
city.38
(7) The materials used in a constructed fence are
limited to materials made of wood, metal, concrete,
masonry, stone or vinyl. The materials used to
construct the fence shall be of dimensions and design
commonly intended for typical fence construction
and shall not be materials or reused materials that
have been designed for another function and are now
being used to create a fence.148
28-3-7 Lighting.
(1) Exterior Lighting: No spotlight or floodlight shall
be installed in any way which will permit the direct
rays of such light to penetrate into any residential
zone or onto any property used for residential
purposes.
(2) Lights Not To Constitute Traffic Hazard: No
light, sign, or other advertising structure as regulated
by this Ordinance shall be erected at the intersection
of any street in such a manner as to obstruct free and
clear vision; or at any location where, by reason of
the position, shape or color, it may interfere with,
obstruct the view of, or be confused with any
authorized traffic sign, signal, or device; or which
makes the use of the words "STOP", "LOOK",
"DANGER", or any other word, phrase, symbol or
character in such a manner as to interfere with,
mislead or confuse traffic.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?4
28-3-8 Public Utility Substations. In all
residential zones, public utility substations shall meet
the following requirements:
(1) Lot Area: Each public utility substation in a
residential zone shall be located on a lot not less than
two thousand square feet in area.
(2) Yards: Each public utility substation in a
residential zone shall be provided with a yard on each
of the four sides of the building not less than five feet
in width, except that for such stations located on lots
fronting on a street abutted by one or more residential
lots, the front yard, side yards, and rear yard shall
equal those required for a single-family residence in
the same zone.
(3) Street Access: Each public utility substation in a
residential zone shall be located on a lot which has
adequate access from a street, alley or easement.
(4) Site to be Approved: The location and appearance
of public utility substation in a residential zone shall
be subject to approval by the Planning Commission,
through issuance of a "Conditional Use Permit".
28-3-9 Special Provisions Relating to the
Keeping of Animals and Fowl. 148, 170, 208
(1) Animals and Agricultural Fowl170
(a) All pens, corrals, feeding troughs, barns, stables
and other similar buildings or enclosing structures
shall be located not less than 150 feet from a public
street except on corner lots the setback from one
street may be reduced to not less than 75 feet.
(i) These types of buildings or structures shall be
constructed of materials that are typically associated
with the use. The architecture of these building shall
be similar to those typically found throughout the
state.148
(b) Temporary feeding troughs, i.e. those moved at
least ten feet from one location to another at not more
than ten-day intervals may be located not closer than
50 feet from a public street.
(c) All such buildings, enclosing structures, pens,
corrals, troughs and permanent concentrated feeding
areas shall be located not less than 100 feet from all
dwellings on adjoining lots, and not less than 30 feet
from dwellings on the same lot.
(d) All land except seeded pasture used for winter
feeding and pasturing shall be plowed or deep disked
at least once immediately following the close of the
period permitted herein.
(e) Future residential areas to be protected. In any
residential zone and in any parcel of an agricultural
zone, sharing a common boundary with a residential
zone, placement of a barn, corral, trough, etc. shall be
limited in location so as to not preclude through
Section 3.9.3 above, future rights of adjacent
property owners to develop residential land uses. In
cases where existing structures listed in Section 3.9.3
would preclude residential development, the 100 foot
separation may be waived provided ample protection
of the health and safety of the dwelling occupants is
provided. Ample protection shall be determined by
the Planning Commission.
(2) Residential Chickens170, 208
(a) All coops, and enclosed areas (chicken run) shall
be located in the rear yard and shall be located not
less than fifteen (15) from property line and not less
than thirty five (35) feet from all dwellings on
adjoining lots.
(i) Coops shall be a minimum of 2 sq.-ft per chicken
(A) Coops shall be constructed of materials that are
typically associated with the use and shall be
predator-resistant, covered & ventilated.
(ii) Chickens shall be confined within a secure
outdoor enclosed area. The enclosed area shall be no
larger than 150 sq.-ft.
(iii) Chickens shall not be permitted to roam outside
the coop or enclosed area.
(b) Chickens shall be rendered flightless, or the
enclosed area shall be covered.
(c) Coops & Enclosed areas shall be maintained in a
neat and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned as
necessary to prevent any odor detectable at a property
line.
(d) Feed shall be stored in and dispensed from rodent
and predator-proof containers.
(e) Chickens shall be hens (female) no roosters
(males) are allowed.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?5
(f) Chickens shall not be kept on a residential lot or
parcel unless the person keeping chickens first
registers with the City.
(i) The registrant shall acknowledge the rules set
forth in this section and shall, as a condition of filing
the registration, agree to comply with such rules.
(ii) The cost of filing a registration shall be as shown
on the consolidated Fee Schedule adopted by the
Municipal Council.
(iii) The registration shall be good for one (1) year
and SHALL be renewed annually. Registration is
due by April 15th.
(g) Violations are subject to provisions within this
title.
(h) Chickens kept as provided in this section shall not
be deemed to be household pets as defined in Section
2.02 of this title.
(i) Compliance with UCA 4-4 as well as rule R58-6.
(3) Household Pets134, 208
(a) Household pets shall be limited to the keeping of
not more than two (2) dogs and one (1) un-neutered
cat or three (3) neutered cats, or combination thereof,
four months old or older.
(b) Kennel licenses are issued by Davis County
Animal Control where permitted by this ordinance
and based upon issuance of a conditional use permit
by the Clinton City Planning Commission.
(c) In addition to the two (2) permitted dogs, one
seeing-eye, search and rescue, or other aid dog may
be allowed under the following circumstances:
(i) A conditional use permit is issued by the Planning
Commission. In addition to the typical items
considered by the Planning Commission for a
conditional use, the following shall also be reviewed:
(A) The location and size of any outdoor pens, runs,
or enclosures;
(ii) The owners demonstrated ability to keep the
additional dog in a clean and healthy environment,
and in a manner that is not contrary to the general
health and welfare of the citizenry;
(iii) That the dogs will be kept in accordance to all
Davis County Health and Davis County Animal
Control requirements; and
(iv) The premises may be subject to inspection
annually by the Community Development
Department.
(v) The aid dog is certified to serve in the capacity
intended by the independent and qualified agency.
Aid dogs that are in the process of being trained shall
have not more than 6 (six) months to become
certified unless a longer period is granted by the
Planning Commission. The certification of the aid
dog is subject to inspection annually by the
Community development Department. Failure to
obtain the certification in the prescribed time period,
and maintenance of it thereafter, shall result in the
revocation of the Conditional Use Permit; and
(vi) The owner of the aid dog owns and was keeping
two dogs or combination thereof prior to obtaining
the aid dog.
(d) If after receiving a permit for the third dog, either
of the two (2) non-certified dogs becomes absent
from the premises, for whatever reason, said dog
shall not be replaced.
(e) Show, hunting, or other dogs not trained and
certified to give aid to the physically or mentally
impaired, or serve in search and rescue efforts, shall
not qualify for the keeping of the third dog.
(f) A residence may have a total of six (6) small
animals, in addition to the dogs and cats listed in subsection
1 above, or fowl customarily kept within the
home, such as hamsters, guinea pigs, parakeets,
canaries, rabbits etc. Said animals shall be for family
use only and not raised for commercial purposes.
(g) Animals normally associated with being kept
outdoors and/or normally associated with agricultural
areas such as horses, cows, goats, sheep, pigs,
rabbits, chickens, ducks, geese or other farm animals,
shall not be allowed as household pets, except for
rabbits.
(h) Conditional use permits for kennels or catteries
shall not be issued for agricultural property directly
adjacent to a residential (R-1-X) zone. Conditional
use permits within the A-1 zone for kennels and
catteries shall be limited to no more than ten (10)
animals.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?6
28-3-10 Site Plan and Architectural Approval.147,
150
(1) A site plan and architectural approval shall be
required of all uses in Commercial, Manufacturing,
Performance, and R-M Zones prior to issuance of a
building permit; and for all Conditional Use
applications upon submission to the Planning
Commission.
(2) A site plan shall include the following items:
(a) Site plan, drawn to scale, showing main and
accessory building relationships with one another,
open space on the site, buildable areas of lots,
required buffer spaces, easements, rights-of-way, and
all other information necessary for approval of the
site plan.28
(b) Height and bulk of building(s) [elevation
drawing(s)]
(c) Provision for off-street parking spaces and
provisions for the ingress and egress of traffic, also
the traffic circulation within the site. Dwellings in
single family, conventional subdivisions, shall
comply with 28-3-15 (15) 150
(d) Display of any signs in accordance with the
Clinton City Sign Ordinance.
(e) Landscaping.147
(i) Landscape Plan: As part of any proposed
development, the owner or developer shall submit a
landscape plan to the Community Development
Department for approval. All landscaping plans shall
demonstrate conformance with the applicable
requirements contained in this Section.
(ii) Landscape Objectives: Landscaping should
substantively satisfy the following objectives to the
extent that they apply to the specific site:
(A) Landscaping should be encouraged that will
serve the function of enhancing the visual
environment by:
(1) Adding visual interest through texture, color, size
and shape, etc;
(2) Enhancing perspective by framing views,
complementing architecture, screening and creating
points of interest and activity; and
(3) Defining and screening parking areas and
associated access lanes from adjacent residential
zones and public rights of way.
(B) Landscaping, combined with other design
elements, shall be encouraged that will serve the
function of ensuring public safety by:
(1) Guiding the circulation of cars and people;
(2) Controlling access to parking lots;
(3) Making traffic diverters prominent; and
(4) Defining the relative importance of streets by
varying the species, height and location of
landscaping.
(C) Landscaping should be encouraged that will
serve the function of minimizing the nuisance of
noise and glare. Landscaping should be encouraged
that will service the function of conserving energy
by:
(1) Shading hot summer sun; and
(2) Blocking cold winter winds.
(D) Care should be taken to integrate the project to
the site. Landscaping is one tool in carrying out this
thoughtful consideration of the land. Sensitivity to
topography and useful existing vegetation should be
used in determining building location and special
uses. The total landscape should be harmonious with
the overall neighborhood concept.
(E) Preservation of existing landforms and mature
trees is usually desirable.
(F) Visual variety should be the aim of landscaping
treatment. Landscaping should be used to break up
large expanses of pavement.
(G) Species that are a public nuisance or that cause
excess litter should be avoided.
(H) Landscaping and other design elements, such as
pavers, lighting, seating, etc., as deemed appropriate,
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?7
should enhance the visual environment by creating a
visually obvious and definite entry point or entry
corridor, en-framing views, complementing the
architecture, screening objectionable views and
creating points of interest.
(iii) General Requirements:
(A) Landscaping shall be installed in all areas not
occupied by buildings, parking, storage, future
phased plan areas or access-ways, as well as the area
of the public right of way defined by a curb or gutter
shall be landscaped utilizing ground covers, turf,
trees and/or shrubs.
(B) When shrubs or ground covers other than turf are
used for landscaping, the spacing, type and size of
plants used shall be such that seventy five percent
(75%) of all landscaped areas shall be covered with
living material within three (3) years of planting.
(C) Planting beds shall be covered with rock or wood
mulch to a minimum depth of three inches (3").
(D) Plant material shall be species that are regionally
appropriate and suitable for the site specific planting
conditions, including available moisture, shade, salt
tolerance, wind exposure and soil pH.
(E) The maximum allowable cut or fill slope is two
feet (2') horizontal distance for one foot (1') of rise.
Slopes steeper than two to one (2:1) will require
retaining walls or other types of approved slope
stabilization methods.
(F) No plant material greater than twenty four inches
(24") in height shall be located within twenty-feet
(25') of a curb cut or drive approach.
(iv) Size of Landscape Materials at Time of Planting:
Unless specified elsewhere in this Code:
(A) Deciduous shade trees shall have a minimum
caliper size of two inches (2") as defined by industry
standards.
(B) Evergreen trees shall be a minimum of six (6)
feet tall.
(C) Shrubs shall be of a size generally known in the
landscape industry as requiring at least a one (1)
gallon container.
(v) Installation and Maintenance:
(A) Landscaping shall be installed prior to occupancy
of any unit in the structure. In the case of inclement
weather that prevents the installation of the required
improvements, the time completion of the
improvements may be extended, in writing, upon the
approval of the applicable reviewing body or
designee. However, in no case shall the time for
completion be extended beyond June 1 immediately
following the completion date. A financial guarantee
according to 28-3-22 of this Title shall be required
prior to issuing building permits.
(B) All landscaping, fencing, walls and other
buffering/screening materials shall be maintained in a
good, healthy, weed-free, effective condition by the
owner. Diseased or dead plant material shall be
removed and replaced by June 1 if due to winterkill
or October 1 if the plant material dies during summer
months. Deteriorated or ineffective fencing material
shall be removed and replaced within three (3)
months of notice of correction.
(C) Landscaping materials shall be contained so as
not to obstruct any portion of the public sidewalk or
street pavement.
(D) All landscaping shall be protected from
automobile overhang, by use of a curb or a wheel
bumper.
(vi) Irrigation System Design:
(A) Irrigation systems shall be designed to avoid or
minimize overspray of water onto paved surfaces or
structures.
(B) Landscaped areas shall be irrigated with an
underground irrigation system, not including singlefamily
residential dwellings. Areas with existing
natural vegetation of shrubs or trees are not required
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?8
to be irrigated unless site improvements have altered
the historic drainage pattern or soil absorption
patterns so as to reduce the amount of available water
so the planting cannot exist in its natural state.
(vii) Tree Preservation:
(A) Existing trees that are in a healthy condition and
have a minimum caliper of four inches (4") as
measured by industry standards shall be considered
"significant", and shall be preserved to the extent
reasonably feasible. Existing trees and shrubs within
areas that can be developed may be used to satisfy
the landscaping requirements of this Section. All
required landscape plans shall accurately identify the
locations, species, size, condition and proposed
disposition of all significant trees.
(B) Species that are a public nuisance or that causes
excess litter should be avoided.
(C) Existing trees that will remain and their root
systems shall receive adequate water to ensure
survival, and shall be protected from damage, soil
contamination and compaction within the drip line
during construction through the use of barricades or
fencing.
(viii) Street Trees: When the public street frontage
has existing curbs or is required to install curbs as
part of the development improvements, street trees
shall be required to be installed in the parkway. Trees
shall be spaced based upon the species or as
established in the site plan review. If the space in the
parkway is less than four feet (4') wide the required
trees shall be placed outside of the parkway but
within twenty five feet (25') of the curb line and may
be arranged in a formal or informal manner. 183
(f) Fencing, walls, hedges, or other similar devices
constructed to meet City Ordinances.
(g) Architectural plans.
(h) Evaluation of infrastructure to include sanitary
sewer, culinary water, secondary water, and storm
water as established in the Clinton City
Comprehensive Plan.28
(i) Evaluation of buffers/fencing next to primary and
secondary arterials as established in the Clinton City
comprehensive Plan. Buffers/fencing should be
required in rear lots abutting these arterials adequate
to suppress noise and ensure safety of residents
within their yards.28
(j) Width to depth ratio of lots. Dwelling lots within
conventional subdivisions shall not have a width to
depth ration greater than 1:4. Single family dwelling
lots within the Performance Zone shall not have a
width to depth ratio grater than 1:2.5.28
(3) Expiration Date: Unless specifically stated by the
Planning Commission during the site plan approval
motion a site plan approval shall expire six months
from the date of Commission motion if a building
permit has not been issued.119
(4) In considering any site plan hereunder, the
Planning Commission shall endeavor to assure safety
and convenience of traffic movements both within
the area covered and in relation to access streets,
harmonious and beneficial relation among the
buildings and uses in the area covered, and a
satisfactory and harmonious relationship between
such areas and contiguous land, buildings and
adjacent neighborhoods.
28-3-11 Private Swimming Pools, Tennis Courts,
and Skateboard Ramps.13, 134, 149
(1) Swimming Pool (private). 181
(a) No such pool shall be allowed in any district
except as an accessory use and unless it complies
with the following conditions and requirements:
(i) It is an accessory use to a main building and is
located within the side or rear yard thereof.
(ii) It is intended and is to be used solely for the
enjoyment of the occupants and guests of the
principal use of the property on which it is located.
(iii) It may not be located closer than five (5) feet to
any property line of the property on which it is
located.
(iv) It shall not be less than twenty (20) feet from any
neighbor’s residence, or twelve (12) feet from any
side lot line of an adjacent vacant lot.
(v) It shall not be less than fifteen (15) feet from any
neighbor’s non livable area of their residence, which
includes, but is not limited to, the garage, carport, or
storage areas.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?9
(vi) The swimming pool shall be walled or fenced to
a minimum height of six (6) feet. The fence shall be
constructed to limit any individual from accessing the
pool area. The fence shall comply with all current
building and county codes. All gates on said fence
shall be self closing and fitted with a self latching
device located on the interior side of the gate.
(vii) Any pool lighting shall be installed and directed
in such a manner as to not cause disturbance to
neighboring residents.
(viii) Where a swimming pool is completely enclosed
in a building, the location requirements for accessory
and main buildings shall apply.
(ix) All owners and operators of any artificially
created or constructed pool of water, including, but
not limited to, fish ponds, lily ponds, bird baths and
swimming and wading pools shall comply with Davis
County Code § 8.12.010.
(2) Tennis Court (private). 181
(a) No tennis court shall be allowed in any district
except as an accessory use and unless it complies
with the following conditions and requirements:
(i) It is an accessory use to a main building and is
located within the side or rear yard thereof;
(ii) It is intended and is to be used solely for the
enjoyment of the occupants and guests of the
principal use of the property on which it is located;
(iii) It may not be located closer than five (5) feet to
any property line of the property on which it is
located. It shall not be less than (20) feet from any
neighbors residence, or twelve (12) feet from any
side lot line of an adjacent vacant lot.
(iv) Any court lighting shall be installed and directed
in such a manner as to not cause disturbance to
neighboring residents.
(3) Skateboard Ramp (private). 181
(a) No skateboard ramp shall be allowed in any
district in the City except as an accessory use and
unless it complies with the following conditions and
requirements:
(i) It is an accessory use to a main building and is
located within the side or rear yard thereof;
(ii) It is intended and is to be used solely for the
enjoyment of the occupants and guests of the
principal use of the property on which it is located.
No commercial or advertised use of the ramp shall be
permitted and no donations or contributions shall be
solicited or received for use of or attendance at ramp
activities;
(iii) It may not be located closer than twenty (20) feet
to any property line of the property on which it is
located. It shall not be less than twenty (20) feet
from any neighbors residence, or twelve (12) feet
from any side lot line of an adjacent vacant lot;
(iv) The hours of operation shall be from 8:00 a.m.
to 9:00 p.m.;
(v) Ramp lighting shall not be installed more than 6
feet above ground level and shall be directed in such
a manner as to not cause disturbance to neighboring
residents;
(vi) The ramp shall be of such a scale and design and
constructed of materials which will minimize noise,
vibration, and other nuisance factors commonly
associated with ramp usage. Portions of the ramp
may be located below ground level, but in no case
shall any portion of the ramp exceed six (6) feet in
height above ground level, excluding handrails. The
ramp shall comply with all pertinent sections of the
International Residential Code and all zoning
requirements of accessory structures and a building
permit shall be obtained;
(vii) A set of written rules adopted to insure safe and
reasonable usage and operation of the ramp shall be
posted at all times and enforced by the owner of the
property on which the ramp is located; and
(viii) The ramp must be inside an enclosure or within
an enclosed yard.
28-3-12 Above Ground Storage of Flammable,
Combustible Liquids.29, 101, 167, 198
(1) Location: Prior to locating or installing
aboveground tanks for Class I, Class II, and Class III
liquids, the applicable requirements of Chapter 34 of
the International Fire Code must be satisfied and a
Fire Department Permit and Applicable Building
Permit shall be obtained. In addition to the
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?10
aforementioned requirements above ground tanks
shall only be permitted in zones, A-1, A-E, MP-1 and
CP-2 Zones (Ref. Table 3-12-1). Uses in the
Performance Zone that are not residential in nature
may, upon site plan review by the Planning
Commission petition for storage; storage shall meet
the requirements of the CP-2 Zone.
(a) Storage of Flammable and Combustible Liquids
in a Residential Zone: Storage and issue of permits
for storage of flammable and combustible liquids
shall be in accordance with the requirements outlined
in the International Fire Code.
(b) Fire Department Permit: Application for a Fire
Department Permit shall be on forms provided by the
Clinton City Fire Department. Approval and
issuance of a permit shall be as set forth in Section
105.6 and 105.7 of the International Fire Code.
(2) Use of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LP GAS):
(a) Storage, handling and Transportation of LP-Gas:
Prior to storage and or installation of LP-Gas
equipment, the applicable requirements of Chapter 38
of the International Fire Code must be satisfied and a
Fire Department Permit and Applicable Building
Permit shall be obtained. In addition to the
aforementioned requirements storage and or
installation of LP-Gas equipment shall only be
permitted in zones, A-1, MP-1 and CP-2 Zones.
Uses in the Performance Zone that are not residential
in nature may, upon site plan review by the Planning
Commission petition for storage; storage shall meet
the requirements of the CP-2 Zone.
(b) Use of LP-Gas in Residential Zones:
(i) The use of LP-Gas shall be limited to recreational
use, minor maintenance and construction. Spare
bottles shall not be stored in buildings other than
those approved.
(ii) The use of LP-Gas to support medial devises
shall be allowed with the following conditions:
(A) Max tank size shall not exceed 100 gal of water.
(B) Must be a minimum of ten (10) feet behind the
house
(C) Can not be any closer than ten (10) feet from any
property line
(D) Meet all applicable requirements of the
International Fire Code (IFC) § 3809 or it’s successor
(E) Obtain a permit from the Community
Development Department.
(F) Obtain a permit from the Fire Department
(G) The tank must be removed when the need to
support a medical device is no longer required and/or
when the permit holder vacates the residence.
(c) Storage outside of Building/Cylinder Exchange:
Storage of portable LP-Gas containers awaiting use
or resale, the applicable requirements of the
International Fire Code Section 3809 must be
satisfied.
(i) Storage quantities
(ii) Distances to doors (10 feet), distances to vehicle
fuel dispensers.
(iii) Distances to combustible material.
TABLE 3.12.1 A-1 A-E
MP-
1
CP-
2
Temporary
Construction
Site Storage
Class 1 Liquid
Protected
Above-Ground
Tanks
Yes
a,b
Yesc Yes Yes Yesb
Class II & III
Liquid
Protected
Above-Ground
Tanks
Yes
a,b
Yesc Yes Yes Yesb
Distance From
Combustibles
Evaluated with site plan and fire department
requirements
Distance From
Property Line
Evaluated with site plan and fire department
requirements
Drainage and
containment
Tanks
Based upon fire department permit
Permit From
Fire
Department
Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
a In A-1 Zone, will not be allowed on lots smaller than 2
acres.
b Gravity Fill tank, not to exceed 1,100 gallon tanks.
c In A-E Zone, will only be allowed in golf courses or similar
recreational areas with a minimum of 100 acres.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?11
(d) Permit Required: Site approval and issuance of a
permit as set forth in this ordinance and in Section
105.6 and 105.7 of the International Fire Code.
(e) Parking and Garaging: Parking of LP-Gas tank
vehicles shall comply with Section 3811.2 and
3811.3 of the International Fire Code.
28-3-13 Mail Box.35, 82 Placement of Mailboxes
within the City right-of-way shall conform to the
guidelines of the U.S. Postal Service and these
criteria:
(1) General requirements;
(a) Height. The bottom of the open mailbox shall be
40 – 42 inches above the curb or where no curb is
placed 46 - 48 inches above the edge of the roadway.
(b) Set Back. The front of the mailbox shall be even
with the back of the curb or where no curb is placed,
the front of the mailbox shall be 48 inches behind the
paved surface of the roadway.
(c) Multiple Mailboxes on One Stand. When more
than one box is placed on one stand or structure,
boxes shall not be more than 12 inches apart.
(d) Address lettering and Placement. Address
lettering shall be at least one (1) inch in height and
placed on the side visible to the carrier as he
approaches. If boxes are placed so that it is difficult
to read the address on the approach, then the address
lettering shall be placed on the front of the box door.
(e) Clear Area. It is the responsibility of the box user
to ensure clearance of the approach used by the mail
carrier. Snow, vehicles, trash receptacles and other
obstructions shall all be kept clear of boxes.
(f) Box Support. Box support should be sufficiently
strong to support the box(es), however; it shall not
present a hazard to traffic or pedestrian travel. The
mailbox and its support shall not exceed more than
24” in depth; this is to avoid interfering with
pedestrian traffic on the sidewalk.
(2) Requirements specific to residential subdivisions:
(a) Cul-de-sac lots. Lots within a cul-de-sac shall
have a single stand erected outside of the “bulb” of
the cul-de-sac to service all lots within the cul-de-sac
as well as the lots directly adjoining the cul-de-sac.
Gang boxes shall not be located as to block the sight
triangle at intersections of streets.
(b) Adjoining lots: Curbside delivery will be served
with mailboxes that are located two to a property
line.
EXCEPTION: to 28-3-13 (2) (b) above: Where an
odd number of lots exist on one side of a street one
single mailbox will be permitted. The location of this
mailbox will be determined during the preliminary
plat review process outlined in the Subdivision
Ordinance of the City of Clinton 28-5-15 (1).
28-3-14 Codes and Standards.183 Any dwelling or
other structure which is designed or intended for
human habitation, which is to be located in Clinton
City outside of a Mobile Home Park, Mobile Home
Subdivision or Manufactured Home Subdivision or
P.R.U.D., must meet the appropriate construction
codes adopted by the State of Utah or specifically
adopted by the City, or if it is a Manufactured home,
it must meet the standards of, and be certified under
the National Manufactured Housing and Standards
Act of 1974 and must prominently display an
Insignia approved by the United States Dept. of
Housing and Urban Development and must not have
been altered in violation of such codes.
28-3-15 Additional Standards.150, 183 In addition to
the above Codes and Standards, the following
requirements shall also be met:
(1) The dwelling must be taxed as real property. If
the dwelling is a manufactured home, an affidavit
must be filed with the State Tax Commission
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated §59-2-602. A copy
of the affidavit of affixture shall be provided to the
city building official prior to issuance of a certificate
of occupancy.
(2) The dwelling must be permanently connected to
and approved for all required utilities.
(3) The Dwelling have a minimum two car garage,
(minimum 20' x 20') attached to or detached from the
primary structure. 198
(4) The dwelling must be permanently connected and
attached to a site permanent foundation which meets
appropriate construction codes adopted by the State
of Utah or specifically adopted by the City. If
manufactured housing, I.C.B.O. Guidelines for
Manufactured Housing Installations shall be met.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?12
The space beneath any dwelling shall be enclosed at
the perimeter in accordance with such guidelines, and
constructed of materials that are weather resistant and
aesthetically consistent with concrete or masonry
type foundation materials. Porches and landings for
ingress and egress to the dwelling must be built in
accordance with the appropriate construction codes
adopted by the State of Utah or specifically adopted
by the City. All manufactured home running gear,
tongues, axles and wheels must be removed at the
time of installation and stored out of sight.
(5) At least sixty percent of the roof of the dwelling
must be pitched at a minimum of two to twelve
(2:12) and shall have a roof surface of wood shakes;
asphalt, composition, wood shingles; concrete;
fiberglass, metal or slate tiles; or built-up gravel
materials or other materials approved by the
appropriate construction codes adopted by the State
of Utah or specifically adopted by the City.
(6) The dwelling shall have exterior siding material
consisting of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco,
masonite, or metal or vinyl lap or other material
meeting the appropriate construction codes adopted
by the State of Utah or specifically adopted by the
City. The roof overhang must not be less than six
inches, not including rain gutters. The roof overhang
requirements shall not apply to areas above porches,
alcoves and other appendages which together do not
exceed twenty-five percent of the length of the
dwelling.
(7) The width of the dwelling shall be at least twenty
feet (20), excluding eves at the narrowest part of its
first story for a length of at least twenty feet (20)
exclusive of any eves or garage. The width shall be
considered the lesser of the two primary dimensions.
If the width of the dwelling faces a street and is less
than one half (1/2) of the length, the required offstreet
parking shall be in a 2 car garage attached to
the length of the dwelling. Factory built or
manufactured homes shall be multiple transportable
sections at least ten feet wide unless transportable in
three or more sections, in which case only one
section need be ten feet wide.
(8) The Clinton City Community Development
Director, as the Building Official in concert with the
Clinton City Planning Commission may, approve
deviations from one or more of the developmental or
architectural standards provided herein on the basis
of a finding that the architectural style proposed
provides compensating design features and that the
proposed dwelling will be compatible and
harmonious with existing structures in the vicinity.
Together, they may also require other deviations to
achieve the overall goals and purposes of this
ordinance. These requirements may be appealed to
the Board of Zoning Adjustment pursuant to the
provisions of 28-9 of this ordinance.
(9) The dwelling must meet the minimum square
footage requirements pursuant to the provisions set
forth in the site development standards outlined for
each zone within this ordinance.
(10) Replacement of an existing nonconforming
manufactured home on a lot outside a mobile home
park or mobile home subdivision shall comply with
all requirements herein.
(11) Required off-street parking spaces shall be side
by side (see 28-4-2).
(12) In order to protect the city roadways at the
points of access onto lots all approaches onto a lot
where a structure is being developed shall be hard
surfaced the full width of the approach from the edge
of existing roadway to the property line. As a
minimum the hard surfaced area shall be the same
design as the street onto which the access enters. A
standard approach with curb, gutter, and sidewalk
will fulfill this requirement.61
(13) Due to the generally level terrain of the city and
in order to prevent overflow from city streets running
into dwellings elevations on residential sites, the top
of any exterior foundation shall extend above the
elevation of the street gutter, or design elevation of a
gutter at the point of discharge or the inlet of an
approved drainage device a minimum of 12 inches
plus 2 percent. Driveway approaches, where there is
no established sidewalk shall be established at the
property line at an elevation 8.5 inches above the
flow-line of the gutter or designed gutter elevation.
All driveways which go to a garage attached to a
dwelling shall be hard surfaced from the garage to
property line with a positive grade away from the
structure. All openings into a basement or crawl
space, (vents, windows, doors etc.) shall be protected
from storm water infiltration from the outside
through positive site design, (window wells, positive
grade, elevation above grade).61
(14) Regulations for New Commercial
Construction:123
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?13
(a) Commercial development within the Clinton City
Central Business District shall be designed and
evaluated during the site plan review in accordance
with the Clinton City Central Business District
Design Standards and Guidelines, Chapter 20 of this
Ordinance.
(15) Special Provisions for Development Adjacent to
Arterial, Sub Arterial, and Collector Streets.150
Subdivisions developing adjacent to an arterial, subarterial
or collector street, as established in the
Clinton City Transportation Master Plan shall be
designed within the following guidelines.
(a) Residential lot access shall not be allowed from
an arterial street.
(b) Residential lot access from a sub-arterial and
collector streets shall be severely restricted during the
sketch plat and preliminary plat approval processes.
Where permitted the lots shall be of sufficient width,
per 28-4-15 (5), for and have a circular drive access
installed.
(c) Rear yards shall be buffered from the arterial,
sub-arterial or collector with a solid decorative,
durable fence (e.g. vinyl, block, concrete slide in
panel).
(d) Rear yard setback may be reduced from 35-feet to
30-feet where a 5-foot landscape buffer is placed
between the property line adjacent to the arterial, subarterial
or collector streets and the decorative fence.
Landscape buffer shall be the responsibility of a
professionally managed homeowners association.
(e) The buffer easement will not be utilized for
structures or other use which would interfere with the
possible development of a landscape buffer.
(f) Buffer easements may be used in conjunction with
the public utility and drainage easement required in
the Clinton City Subdivision Ordinance.
(g) Accessory building setback shall be measured
from the interior edge of the buffer where a buffer is
established between the street and rear yard.
(h) For restrictions on double frontage lots reference
§ 4.15.6
28-3-16 Sexually Oriented Business.71
(1) Purpose: The City council finds that there is a
compelling interest in restricting sexually oriented
businesses due to convincing documented evidence
that a concentration of sexually oriented businesses
and adult businesses have a deleterious effect on both
the existing business and the surrounding residential
areas adjacent to such sexually oriented businesses,
causing increased crime and a diminution in property
values. To respond to these concerns and an increase
in public concern, the City Council has enacted this
ordinance to restrict sexually oriented businesses as
follows:
(2) Qualification of Location:81, 126 Where the zoning
permits the establishment of a Sexually Oriented
Businesses as stipulated in the Zoning Ordinance of
the City of Clinton, the following shall apply:
(a) Sexually Oriented Businesses as defined in this
ordinance shall be allowed only in a MP-1 (Light
Manufacturing) Zone as outlined in this code.
(b) No Sexually Oriented Business shall be
established within 600 feet of any civic buildings,
public or private school, church, library, public
playground or park, or 400 feet of any residences,
residential zones, retail establishments and/or as
outlined elsewhere in this code. This distance is to be
measured from the nearest entrance/exit of the
business by following the shortest ordinary
pedestrian route, where sidewalks and crosswalks are
available, or the shortest vehicular travel route along
a public thoroughfare when no sidewalks and
crosswalks are available, to the property boundary of
the above listed protected locations. In no case shall
the above protected locations be any closer than 400
feet measured in a straight line from the nearest
entrance/exit of the business to the nearest property
boundary of the protected location. In no case shall
the property on which a Sexually Oriented Business
is located, be directly adjacent to a property where a
protected location is situated.
(3) Sign Restrictions: The use of signs by a sexually
oriented business shall comply with all requirements
of the Clinton City Sign Ordinance.
28-3-17 Agriculture Protection Area.83
(1) Application for establishment of new or
amendment to existing agricultural protection areas.
All applications shall be filed with the Clinton City
Recorder and contain the following. Filing of the
required information may be in letter format or on
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?14
applications provided by the City, if available with
attachments as necessary to provide the required
information.
(a) The proposal shall be signed by a majority in
number of all owners of real property and the owners
of a majority of the land area in agricultural
production within the proposed agriculture protection
area.
(b) The proposal shall contain a copy of the county
plats identifying the boundaries of the land proposed
to become part of an agriculture protection area
showing all adjoining streets and all dimensions of
the property(s) being included in the proposed area.
(c) The proposal shall contain a legal description,
obtained from the county recorders office or prepared
by a Utah licensed surveyor of each property
proposed to be within the area. Description shall
include the acreage of each parcel and total acreage
of the entire area.
(d) The proposal shall indicate the current zoning of
each parcel to be within the area and the properties
surrounding the proposed area.
(e) The proposal shall outline the extent and nature of
existing or proposed farm improvements within the
area.
(f) The proposal shall outline a brief history of the
agriculture use of the property covering the most
recent five years.
(g) The proposal shall list the types of agriculture
production to be allowed within the area and any
limits on the types of agriculture production to be
allowed within the area.
(h) The proposal shall contain the tax parcel numbers
or account numbers identifying each parcel and the
names of the owners of each parcel.
(i) The proposal shall list all non agriculture uses to
be within the area.
(j) Included with the application shall be the
necessary fee, as established by resolution, from time
to time by the Clinton City Council.
(2) The total area to be established as an agriculture
protection area shall not be less than 50 acres with a
maximum of five acres being of non-agricultural use.
(3) Property within an agriculture protection area is
to be contiguous.
(4) The official date of application with the City shall
not be established until a complete application, with
all required attachments and applicable fees is filed
with the city recorder.
(5) City owned property and/or established rights-ofway
shall not be included within an agriculture
protection area without approval of the City Council.
28-3-18 Telecommunication Structures.95
(1) Application for installation of telecommunication
structures. All applications shall be made in the form
of a Clinton City Excavation Permit filed with the
Community Development Department. The City
may not issue an excavation permit until all
application procedures are complete and any fees
associated with the permit have been paid unless
other arrangements for payment have been made and
approved by the Community Development Director.
Filing of the required fees will be with an application
and is to include attachments as necessary to provide
all the required information.
(2) Exemption from excavation permits. Any
installation design that has been approved as part of
and during the required development approval
process is exempted from 1 above.
(3) The Community Development Director or his
representative has review and approval authority over
site plans for telecommunication equipment.
Applicants that do not agree with the decision of the
Department Director may appeal that decision to the
Planning Commission as a Conditional Use Permit.
(4) Multiple structures may be placed on one site
provided each structure meets the definition of a
telecommunication structure and the entire site area
meets all requirements of this ordinance.
(5) Telecommunication equipment shall only be
located on easements dedicated as part of a recorded
plat or acquired through lawful procedures.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?15
(a) All sites acquired through means other than the
recording of a plat shall be large enough to facilitate
the structures independent of any recorded “Public
Utility and Drainage Easements”.
(b) A copy of all easements shall be included with the
application to the City, after they are recorded with
the County Recorder’s Office or prior to commencing
any construction where the easement is secured after
the application is reviewed by the City.
(c) Telecommunication equipment shall be located
and designed in such a way that they do not block
surface drainage through a public utility and drainage
easement.
(6) Location:
(a) It is desired that location of telecommunication
equipment be considered during the evaluation of all
development design elements.
(b) Telecommunication equipment shall not be
located within a right-of-way in such a way that it
will obscure the line of sight vision of pedestrians or
vehicle operators.
(c) In residential zones telecommunication equipment
shall not be located:
(i) in a front lot set-back area if the equipment is over
four-feet (4’) tall or if the total footprint of equipment
in this area to be larger than twelve (12) square feet;
(ii) in the sight triangle area of a corner lot if it does
not meet the requirements outlined elsewhere in this
ordinance;
(iii) in the side-lot set-back area if the equipment has
a total area greater than 120 square-feet or obscures
the access through any part of a required side-lot;
(iv) if the equipment causes the lot to have an
impervious surface ratio higher than permitted by this
ordinance; or
(v) if the equipment exceeds any limitations for
structures located on a residential lot as stated
elsewhere in this ordinance.
(d) Equipment located behind the front of a house on
a residential lot shall be fenced from view from
adjacent property. Equipment located on corner lots,
in the area that is considered the rear yard shall have
a six foot solid fence located on the property lines, a
gate may be placed in the fence for ease of access to
the equipment from the adjacent public right-of-way.
Gates are not to swing into any public right-of-way.
(e) Telecommunication Equipment located in zones
other than residential shall be situated as shown on
approved site plans. During the review process the
following will be evaluated:
(i) sight triangle at intersections and driveways;
(ii) location of equipment within required buffer
areas adjacent to residential zones;
(iii) landscaping and changes in required landscape
area;
(iv) impervious surface ratio;
(v) fencing; and
(vi) location in relation to other structures on the site.
(f) Telecommunication equipment located in
underground vaults shall be evaluated as part of the
application and site plan review. The location of
underground vaults or similar structures may be
esthetically desirable to above ground structures and
may be considered where above ground structures are
not allowed. Underground vaults will meet the
following requirements:
(i) where not in a paved right-of-way landscaping
shall be placed over the vault;
(ii) access to the vault shall be in the paved right-ofway
or in a landscaped area, access shall not be
gained through an opening in a sidewalk, path, or
other pedestrian route; and
(iii) other public utilities shall not be affected by the
location of the vault.
28-3-19 Outdoor Storage.134 In addition to
requirements found elsewhere in the Clinton Codes
and laws of the state of Utah, all outdoor storage shall
be done under the requirements of this Section.
(1) No yard or other open space around an existing
building, or which is hereafter provided around any
building for the purpose of complying with the
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?16
provisions of this Title, shall be used for the storage
of junk, trash, building materials, debris, inoperable
vehicles or commercial equipment, fuel, and no other
land shall be used for such purposes except as
specifically permitted in this Code.
(2) All outdoor storage facilities, except for
agricultural products, shall be enclosed by a fence or
wall at least six (6) feet in height and impervious to
sight. No items may be stacked higher than the fence
or wall of the enclosure unless expressly exempted
elsewhere in this Title.
(3) No materials or waste shall be deposited upon any
property in such form or manner that they may be
transferred off such property by natural causes or
forces. All materials or wastes which might cause
fumes or dust, or which constitute a fire hazard, or
which may be edible by, or otherwise be attractive to
rodents or insects may not be stored outdoors unless
put in closed containers.
(4) Open storage of hay or other agricultural products
shall be located not less than forty (40) feet from a
public street, and fifty (50) feet from any residence
on adjoining property; except, that any accessory
building containing such products shall be located as
required for all agricultural accessory building
containing such products shall be located as required
for all agricultural properties have the same zone.
(5) Outdoor storage in the MP-1 zone may exceed the
height of six feet (6’) when all surrounding properties
have the same zone.
(6) All automobile repair shops and reconditioning
shops shall have all vehicles kept for repair for more
than one day, stored in an area screened from the
view of any adjacent property or street. Such
screening shall be accomplished by placing said
vehicles within an area surrounded by a solid, view
obstructing fence or wall at least six feet (6’) in
height; fence placement shall be reviewed and
approved by the Planning Commission during the site
review. The Planning Commission may require
higher fences or walls where deemed appropriate.
The storage area may not be used as a junkyard. No
items stored in the enclosed area may be stacked
higher than the fence or wall of the enclosure. Such
facilities shall also meet the parking lot requirements
of Chapter 4 of this Title.
(7) Vehicles, machinery, or equipment that stand
above the height of six feet (6’) do not need to be
screened above six feet (6’), except as required by the
Planning Commission or elsewhere in this Title.
(8) The storage of licensed, registered, registration
exempt and operable personal autos, recreational
vehicles, and utility trailers is permitted in residential
zones and screening is not required. Storage of these
vehicles shall be subject to other requirements of this
Code.
28-3-20 Required Commercial Landscaping.137
When an area is required to be landscaped under the
terms of this Title, the requirements shall be met by
the installation and maintenance of improvements as
set forth in 28-3-10 and below:
(1) General Requirements:
(a) All plantings shall be maintained in a healthy and
attractive condition.
(b) Landscaping materials shall be contained so as
not to spill into the public right of way.
(c) All areas not occupied by buildings, parking,
storage, future phased plan areas or access-ways,
shall be landscaped; as well as the area within the
public right of way between the curb and gutter and
sidewalk shall be landscaped, unless the area falls
along a gateway or entry corridor as designated in the
general plan.
Public right of way defined by a curb or gutter can be
landscaped utilizing ground covers, trees and shrubs
instead of turf. When shrubs or ground covers are
used for landscaping, the spacing, type and size of
plants used shall be such that seventy five percent
(75%) of all landscaped areas shall be covered with
living material within three (3) years of planting.
(d) For all uses except single-family dwellings, all
landscaping shall be serviced by an acceptable
underground sprinkling or irrigation system.
(2) Gateway and Entry Corridor Rights Of Way:
(a) For areas at an entry point or along an entry
corridor, the area within the public right of way
between the curb and gutter and sidewalk may be
fully landscaped, or may invoke a combination of
landscaping, pavers and other design elements to
create the desired visual impact. The use of
landscaping and pavers at entry points and along
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?17
entry corridors should substantively satisfy the
following objectives:
(i) Landscaping, combined with pavers and other
design elements such as lighting, seating, etc., as
deemed appropriate, should enhance the visual
environment by creating a visually obvious and
definite entry point or entry corridor through use of a
texture, color, size and shape, etc., enhancing
perspective by framing views, complementing
architecture, screening, and creating points of interest
and activity;
(ii) Landscaping, combined with other design
elements, shall be encouraged that will serve the
function of ensuring public safety by:
(A) Guiding the circulation of cars and people;
(B) Controlling access to parking lots;
(C) Making traffic diverters prominent; and
(D) Defining the relative importance of streets by
varying the species, height and location of
landscaping.
(iii) Landscaping combined with other design
elements should minimize maintenance to ensure
these points of first impression are maintained at an
optimum level.
(b) Care should be taken to integrate the design of the
entry point or entry corridor to the surrounding areas
in a way that maximizes the assets of the area while
still maintaining the desired continuity and visual
impact.
(c) Visual continuity and overall design shall control
the balance of landscaping and other design elements.
However, whenever possible, landscaping shall be
used.
(3) More Than Ten Percent Nonliving Ground Cover:
When considering if more than ten percent (10%) of
nonliving ground cover shall be allowed the
following principles shall be in place in the
landscaping or landscaping design:
(a) The overall landscaping on the property enhances
the visual environment by:
(i) Adding visual interest through texture, color, size
and shape, etc., and
(ii) Enhancing perspective by framing views
complementing architecture, screening and creating
points of interest and activity;
(b) The design includes elements which work with
existing topography and is designed in such a way as
to make softened transitions from the landscaping of
adjoining properties to the property in question;
(c) Plant species that are a public nuisance or that
cause excess litter should be avoided;
(d) The other aspects of water wise design are
included on the properties which are:
(i) An overall landscape design for the entire
property,
(ii) Mulches are used in planting bed areas,
(iii) Turf areas are used in high use areas of the lot,
(iv) Plants are selected and installed which are
appropriate for the physical condition of site specific
locations, and
(v) The landscaping is kept free of weeds and junk
materials.
(4) General Maintenance: All landscaped areas,
whether required or otherwise, shall be kept and
maintained in accordance with all of the following
standards:
(a) Landscaped areas shall be kept free of litter and
debris.
(b) Landscaped areas shall be weeded on a regular
basis.
(c) Trees and shrubs shall be pruned so as to avoid
damage to other improvements, structures or utility
lines.
(d) Dead branches or dead trees, shrubs or other plant
materials are removed from the property.
(e) Lawns are mowed on a regular basis according to
the growth habit of the type of turf grass used.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?18
(f) All plant materials shall be adequately watered to
maintain a healthy condition as by the typical color of
the plant under normal growing conditions; provided
that when water use restrictions are imposed by the
city or applicable secondary water provider during
times of drought, no violation shall occur as long as
the owner or occupant is watering within such
restrictions.
(g) Required trees, shrubs or other plant materials
that have died shall be removed and must be
replaced.
(5) Landscaping shall be installed in all areas not
occupied by buildings, parking or access-ways and
according to the approved plot plan. Landscaping
shall be installed prior to occupancy of any unit in the
structure. In the case of inclement weather that
prevents the installation of the required
improvements, the time completion of the
improvements may be extended, in writing, upon the
approval of the applicable reviewing official or body,
or designee. However, in no case shall the time for
completion be extended beyond June 1 immediately
following the completion date. A financial guarantee
according to 28-3-22 of this Chapter shall be required
prior to issuing building permits.
28-3-21 Required Residential Landscaping.148; 187
(1) All front & side yards that are visible from public
view (excluding fenced rear yards), shall be
landscaped; as well as the area within the public right
of way between the curb and gutter and sidewalk
otherwise known as “park-strip”.
(a) The park strip may be covered with landscaping
or non-living landscaping. However, if concrete is
placed in the park strip area around the water meter
ring, fire hydrants and similar utilities, the area
surrounding the item shall be separated with
expansion joint material or other approved material
on each side of the item from the remainder of the
concrete. This joint material shall be located one foot
from the largest edge of the item on each side,
extending from sidewalk to curb, thus facilitating
removal of the concrete around the item without
damage to the adjacent concrete in the park strip. In
no case will the City be required to replace any
concrete or other material that it may remove.
Caution should be exercised not to place items in the
park strip that could be a hazard to pedestrian or
vehicular traffic.
(b) Additional information related to structures, trees,
excavation, height limitations, and maintenance
requirements associated with the right-of-way and
park strip can be found in Title 25, Chapters 15 and
16.
(2) Existing and New Residential Uses:
(a) Existing single-family residential uses which have
either not installed landscaping or residential uses
where the landscaping no longer exists, must install
landscaping according to these regulations and shall
be installed within eighteen (18) months from the
enactment of this provision.
(b) For all single-family homes that are constructed
after the enactment of this provision, landscaping
must be installed within eighteen (18) months after
the initial occupancy of the home.
(3) Residential Landscaping: More than Ten Percent
Nonliving Landscaping Ground Cover:
When considering if more than ten percent (10%) of
nonliving landscaping ground cover shall be allowed
within the front and/or side yard setbacks that are
visible from public view, the following principles
shall be in place in the landscaping or landscaping
design:
(a) Such materials used solely as ground cover,
without plants above, will not cover more than ten
percent (10%) of the ground area required to be
landscaped. If more than ten percent (10%) is
desired, approval must be given by the planning staff.
(b) The overall landscaping on the property enhances
the visual environment by:
(i) Adding visual interest through native or natural
textures, colors, size, shapes and materials etc., and
Fire Hydrant Curb
1 foot each
side
Sidewalk
Water Meter Light/Power Pole
etc.
Expansion
Material
Typical
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?19
(ii) Enhancing perspective by framing views
complementing architecture, screening and creating
points of interest and activity;
(c) The design includes elements which work with
existing topography and is designed in such a way as
to make softened transitions from the landscaping of
adjoining properties to the property in question;
(d) Plant species that are a public nuisance or that
cause excess litter should be avoided;
(e) The other aspects of water wise design are
included on the property which are:
(i) An overall landscape design for the entire
property,
(ii) Mulches are used in planting bed areas,
(iii) Turf areas are used in high use areas of the lot,
(iv) Plants are selected and installed which are
appropriate for the physical condition of site specific
locations, and
(v) The landscaping is kept free of weeds and junk
materials.
(f) If water-wise design is being used for landscaping
in the Front & side yard setbacks (visual from public
view) the park-strip shall also be included in the
overall design.
(g) Review of all plans will be done administratively,
however if the applicant does not agree with staff’s
review, the applicant can appeal to the Planning
Commission for a site plan review. Once the site
plan application has been filed, then it will be
scheduled for the next available Planning
Commission meeting.
28-3-22 Financial Guarantee Requirements.137
(1) Required: No site work shall be commenced, no
development improvements shall be made, or no
building permits shall be issued until the owner or
developer provides a sufficient financial guarantee to
ensure completion of the following "required
improvements":
(a) Any landscaping improvements, whether upon
public or private property, required under the
provisions of this Title, or under any condition
imposed under authority of the provisions of this
Title; or
(b) Any improvement to adjacent road surfaces,
curbs, gutters or sidewalks required under the
provisions of this Title; or
(c) Any improvement for storm drainage, sewer, or
water infrastructure required under the provisions of
this Title, or under any condition imposed under
authority of the provisions of this Title; or
(d) Common open space improvements, private
streets or private utilities for which a financial
guarantee is required under the subdivision Title of
this Code.
(2) Escrow Account, Agreement: A sufficient
financial guarantee shall be provided by the
establishment of a City escrow account for one
hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the estimated cost
of the above required improvements, based on the
actual cost estimate provided by the owner or
developer. The financial guarantee shall provide that
the required improvements be installed upon the
completion of the development or the account funds
may be called by the City to complete the
improvements.
(3) Warranty:
(a) All required improvements shall be warranted by
the property owner for two (2) years from the date of
final inspection approval by the city for all such
improvements.
(b) The City may, as a warranty, either retain fifteen
percent (15%) of the guarantee amount or require an
escrow equal to fifteen percent (15%) of the required
total improvement costs. The warranty shall be
established as set in Title 26; chapter 4.
(4) Effect of Noncompliance on Subsequent
Applications: No building permits shall be issued nor
development approvals given for any expansion,
amendment or subsequent phase of a development, if
the required improvements have not been installed in
accordance with prior permits or approvals for the
site. This prohibition may be waived, if the reviewing
official or body determines the following:
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?20
(a) The approval of the expansion, amendment, or
subsequent phase would result in the removal of the
previously required improvements; and
(b) Any previously required improvements which are
not affected by the proposed expansion, amendment
or subsequent phase have been installed; and
(c) Adequate escrow is provided for the previously
uninstalled required improvements, as well as for any
new required improvements imposed in regards to the
expansion, amendment or subsequent phase.
(5) Installation of Improvements; Completion:
Required improvements shall be installed and
completed before occupancy or use of any building,
structure or improvement approved in regards to the
site plan, permit or other development. In the case of
inclement weather that prevents the installation of the
required improvements, the time of the improvements
may be extended, in writing, upon approval of the
applicable reviewing official or body, or designee.
However, in no case shall the time for completion be
extended beyond June 1 immediately following the
completion date and no additional phases of any
development shall be permitted during such period of
extension.
(6) Replacement: If at any point during the warranty
period that all or any portion of the required
landscaping has been removed, stolen, dies or any
combination the landscaping will be replaced prior to
the release of all or any portion of the warranty.
(7) Release: The funds provided under the financial
guarantee shall not be released until an authorized
representative of the City has certified in writing that
the required performance is completed and that the
City releases its right to draw funds either in full or in
part. Upon expiration of the warranty period, the City
shall release the established security in whole or in
part by providing the issuer a certificate, signed by an
authorized representative of the City, that the City
releases its right to draw funds or to the extent
applicable. As portions of the required improvements
are completed for large developments, the owner or
developer may petition the City to reduce the amount
of the original financial guarantee. If the City
determines that the portions of the required
improvements that have been completed are in
compliance with City ordinances, the approved site
plan, and any conditions of approval, and that the
amount to be released is sufficient to justify the
administrative expense, the City may cause the
amount to be partially released; provided, that a
minimum of twenty percent (20%) is retained as
follows:
(a) Fifteen percent (15%) is retained until expiration
of the warranty period; and
(b) At least fifteen percent (15%) is retained to
ensure completion of any remaining required
improvements.
(8) Failure To Complete Required Improvements: In
those cases where the financial guarantee has been
provided and the required improvements have not
been installed as required, the City may, in its
discretion:
(a) Pursue any available criminal or civil remedies to
require the responsible party to complete the required
improvements;
(b) Declare the development in default and obtain
funds under the escrow agreement and complete, at
the City's discretion, all or a portion of the required
improvements either itself or through a third party;
(c) Assign its right to receive funds under the security
to any third party, including a subsequent owner of
the development, in whole or in part, in exchange for
the third party's or subsequent owner's promise to
complete the improvements for the development; or
(d) Exercise any other rights available under the law.
(9) Administrative Procedures: The Community
Development Director may establish procedures
consistent with this Section relating to the
administration of the financial guarantee, including,
but not limited to, fund management, release, default
and collection.
28-3-23 Residential Facility for Elderly
Persons.134 A residential facility for elderly persons
is a dwelling unit that offers living quarters to a
limited number of non-related elderly persons.
Residential facilities for elderly persons shall be
allowed as a permitted use in multi-family zoning
districts and a conditional use in single-family
zoning. A residential facility for elderly persons may
not operate as a business. A residential facility for
elderly persons may not be considered a business
because a fee is charged for food or for actual and
necessary costs of operation and maintenance of the
facility.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?21
(1) Residential facilities for elderly persons shall
comply with all of the following requirements:
(a) Compliance with the requirements of Utah State
Code and this chapter;
(b) Shall be owned by one of the residents or by an
immediate family member of one of the residents or
be a facility for which the title has been placed in
trust for a resident;
(c) Shall be consistent with existing zoning of the
desired location;
(d) Shall be occupied on a twenty-four (24) hour per
day basis by eight (8) or fewer elderly persons in a
family type arrangement;
(e) Shall meet all applicable building, safety, zoning
and health ordinances applicable to similar dwellings;
(f) Shall provide adequate off-street parking space as
per Chapter 4;
(g) Shall be capable of use as a residential facility for
elderly persons without structural or landscaping
alterations that would change the structure’s
residential character;
(h) No residential facility for elderly persons be
established within three-quarters (3/4) mile of
another residential facility for elderly persons or
residential facility for persons with a disability, as
defined by section 10-9-605 of the Utah State Code;
(i) No person being treated for alcoholism or drug
abuse shall be placed in a residential facility for
elderly persons; and
(j) Placement in a residential facility for elderly
persons shall be on a strictly voluntary basis and not
a part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or
treatment in a correctional facility.
(2) The use granted and permitted by this section is
non-transferable and terminates if the structure is
devoted to a use other than a residential facility for
elderly persons or if the structure fails to comply with
the ordinances adopted under this part.
(3) Discrimination against elderly person facilities
for elderly persons and persons with disabilities is
prohibited.
(4) Elderly Apartments, Each elderly apartment shall
meet all state and federal codes and have the
following minimum requirements:
(a) Non-skid bathtubs;
(b) Handicap accessible door ways;
(c) Bath facilities designed to accommodate
wheelchairs;
(d) Grab bars in showers, tubs, and near toilets;
(e) Central heating and cooling;
(f) Lever type door handles and water facets;
(g) Electrical receptacles to be at least twenty-four
inches (24”) above floor level;
(h) No stairs within apartments, and elevator access
for more than one-story dwelling buildings;
(i) Emergency signals in each apartment to a twentyfour
(24) hour manned facility; and,
(j) Elderly households shall be limited to three
persons per dwelling unit.
28-3-24 Residences for Persons with a Disabilty.134
A residential facility for persons with a disability (as
defined in Utah State Code Section 57-21-2) means a
residence in which more than one person with a
disability resides. Residential facilities for person
with a disability must conform to all of the following:
(1) Compliance with the requirements for Utah State
Code and this chapter;
(2) All applicable standards and requirements of the
Department of Human Services under Title 62A
Chapter 2, Licensure of programs and facilities;
(3) Meets all municipal building, safety, and health
ordinances applicable to similar dwellings and
complies with Title 57, Chapter 21, Utah Fair
Housing Act, and the Federal Fair Housing
Amendments Act of 1988, 42 U.S.C. Sec. 3601 et
seq.;
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?22
(4) Provides assurances that the residents of the
facility will be properly supervised on a twenty-four
(24) hour basis;
(5) Shall be occupied on a twenty-four (24) per day
by five (5) or fewer person in a family type
arrangement;
(6) Provides adequate off-street parking space;
(7) Is capable of use as a residential facility for
handicapped persons without structural or
landscaping alterations that would change the
structure’s residential character;
(8) Not be established or maintained within threequarters
(3/4) mile of another residential facility for
elderly persons or residential facility for persons with
a disability;
(9) Not allow a person being treated for alcoholism
or drug abuse be placed in a residential facility for
handicapped persons;
(10) Not allow a person who is violent to be placed in
a residential facility for handicapped persons;
(11) Require that placement in a residential facility
for handicapped persons be on a strictly voluntary
basis and not a part of, or in lieu of, confinement,
rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional facility;
(12) Obtain permits to facilitate inspections for
compliance with the building, safety and health
regulations that are applicable to similar structures;
and
(13) The responsibility to license programs or entities
which operate facilities for persons with a disability,
as well as to require and monitor the provision of
adequate services to persons residing in those
facilities, shall rest with the Department of Human
Services as provided in section 62A-2-1114 and Title
62A, Chapter 5, Services to People with Disabilities.
28-3-25 Garages, Accessory Buildings, Sheds,
Carports - Single Family Dwelling.104, 148, 169, 183, 192,
199, 198, 213
(1) Garage and Carport General Requirements:
These requirements apply to garages and carports.
(a) Structures shall meet the minimum set back
requirements established in this ordinance for the
zone.
(b) Eaves shall not extend into any setback
requirements established in this ordinance for the
zone by more than twelve (12) inches.
(c) All run-off from the roof, drive or any hard
surface associated with the structure shall be
designed to drain onto the building lot where the
structure is located.
(d) Adherence to the maximum impervious surface
ratio.
(e) Structures built within five (5) feet of a property
line shall not have openings, (windows, doors, etc.),
in the wall that is within the five (5) feet.
(f) Structures built within five (5) feet of a property
line shall have the wall constructed to meet the
requirements of the International Residential Code.
(g) A curb cut and appropriate apron shall be
established to meet the requirements of the city
standards and §28-4 of this ordinance.
(h) Construction shall meet the requirements of the
International Residential Code or International
Building Code as applicable.
(2) Garage Accessory199
(a) A Garage Accessory, as defined in this ordinance,
may serve to satisfy the parking requirements
established for a residence in Chapter 4 of this
ordinance providing that there is also a hard surface
drive from the street to the Accessory Garage.
(b) The minimum distance from any wall surface,
attached deck, awning, or other extension of the
dwelling to any wall surface or extension on the
Garage, shall not be less than ten (10) feet. The eves
of either structure shall not extend more than twelve
(12) inches into the required ten (10) foot separation.
(c) Structure shall be designed with the intended use
of storing vehicles designed for transportation or
recreation.
(d) Garage Accessory shall compliment the color
scheme of the existing dwelling. Significance of
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?23
colors shall be determined by the planning staff at the
time of plan review.198
(e) If the structure is not intended to meet the
requirements of Chapter 4 for a residence as stated in
(2) (a) (ii) it shall have a gravel drive, meeting the
requirements of §28-4-15 (4) (b), or hard surface
drive from the street to the garage unless the structure
is behind a 6-foot solid fence with gates then the
gravel or hard surface shall extend from the street to
behind the fence gates. 198, 199
(3) Garage Detached
(a) A Garage Detached, as defined in this ordinance,
may satisfy the parking requirements established for
a residence in Chapter 4 of this ordinance providing
that there is also a hard surface drive from the street
to the Detached Garage.
(b) The minimum distance from any wall surface,
attached deck, awning, or other extension of the
dwelling to any property line shall meet the
requirements established in this ordinance for the
applicable zone. The minimum distance from a wall
surface or any extension on the structure to the wall
surface or extension on the residence shall be a
minimum of ten (10) feet.
(c) Structure shall be designed with the intended use
of storing vehicles designed for transportation or
recreation.
(d) Garage Detached shall have the same
architectural features; utilize the same building
materials and same pattern as the existing dwelling.
Street view of the structure shall be similar in the use
of materials, brick, rock, etc., as the residence on the
lot. Sides and rear of the structure may utilize less
primary materials, siding, stucco, etc., found on the
residence. Equality of materials and features shall be
determined by the planning staff at the time of plan
review. Allowances may be made when considering
the availability of materials due to the age of the
original structure.
(4) Accessory Building The following requirements
apply to Accessory Buildings: 198, 199
(a) Structures shall meet the minimum setback
requirements established in this ordinance for the
zone.
(b) The structure shall be located in the rear yard
setback as defined in this ordinance with a minimum
distance from any wall surface, attached deck,
awning, or other extension of the dwelling to any
wall surface or extension on the structure, shall not
be less than ten (10) feet.
(c) Eaves shall not extend into any setback or
separation requirements established in this ordinance
for the zone by more than twelve (12) inches.
(d) All run-off from the roof, drive or any hard
surface associated with the structure shall be
designed to drain onto the building lot where the
structure is located.
(e) Adherence to the maximum impervious surface
ratio.
(f) A curb cut shall NOT be established to provide
access to the structure.
(g) Construction shall meet the requirements of the
International Residential Code or International
Building Code as applicable.
(h) Structure shall not be designed with the ability to
store vehicles intended for transportation or
recreation, access into the structure shall be less than
six (6) feet wide.
(i) Accessory Buildings or sheds, as defined in this
ordinance, do not meet the parking requirements of
Chapter 4 of this ordinance.
(j) Accessory Buildings shall compliment the color
scheme of the existing dwelling. Significance of
colors shall be determined by the planning staff at the
time of plan review.
(5) Sheds or Yard Sheds219. The following
requirements apply to small sheds less than 200
square feet in size, located on a lot in all of the
agricultural and residential (e.g. R1-X, PH, etc.)
zoning districts:
(a) Shed shall not be taller than 16 feet high and shall
not be taller than principal building.
(b) Shed shall be located in the side and/or rear
yards, and is not permitted in the front yard.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?24
(c) Shed shall not be closer than 3 feet to the rear or
side property line and located a minimum distance of
6 feet from the principal dwelling.
(d) Eaves shall not extend into any setback or
separation requirements established in this ordinance
for the zone by more than twelve (12) inches.
(e) All run-off from the roof or any hard surface
associated with the structure shall be designed to
drain onto the building lot where the structure is
located.
(f) If sheds are placed within existing easements
(Public Utilities, Drainage, or other recorded
Easements) in the rear and/or side yards, they will be
subject to utility companies’ rights to install,
maintain and operate their equipment above and
below ground and all other related facilities within
the established easements as may be necessary or
desirable in providing utility services, including the
right of access to such facilities and the right to
require removal of any obstructions including
structures, trees and vegetation that may be placed
within the easement. The Utility may require the lot
owner to remove all structures within the easement at
the lot owner’s expense or the utility may remove
such structures at the lot owner’s expense.
(6) Carport General Requirements 192, 199
(a) Carports associated with structures other than
single family dwellings shall be evaluated and
approved as part of the site plan approval process.
(b) Eaves shall be measured from the exterior wall
where one exists and from the exterior of support
posts where no wall exists.
(c) Carports shall have a hard surface, concrete or
asphalt, under the roof area.
(d) Any Carport shall have a solid wall, adjacent to
the closest property line, when located closer than ten
(10)-feet to an adjacent property line if no privacy
fence is present between the carport and adjacent
property.
(e) Carport Attached199, 213
(i) Attached carports intended to satisfy requirements
of Chapter 4 shall meet the minimum size
requirements to park a car of ten by twenty feet.
(f) Carport Accessory199
(i) The minimum distance from any wall surface,
attached deck, awning, or other extension of the
dwelling to any wall surface or extension on the
Carport, shall not be less than ten (10) feet. The eves
of either structure shall not extend more than twelve
(12) inches into the required ten (10) foot separation
(ii) Structure shall be designed with the intended use
of storing vehicles designed for transportation or
recreation.
(iii) Shall have a gravel drive, meeting the
requirements of §28-4-15(4)(b), or hard surface drive
from the street to the carport unless the structure is
behind a six (6)-foot solid fence with gates then the
gravel or hard surface shall extend from the street to
behind the fence gates.198
(g) Carport Detached199
(i) The minimum distance from any wall surface,
attached deck, awning, or other extension of the
dwelling to any wall surface or extension on the
structure, on the lot, shall meet the minimum setback
requirements established for a Detached Garage.
(ii) It shall have a hard surface drive from the street
to the structure.
(iii) Structure shall be designed with the intended use
of storing vehicles designed for transportation or
recreation.
(iv) Carport Detached shall have similar architectural
features and utilize similar colors and materials as on
the dwelling on the lot. In this case similar is
intended to be complementary to the design of the
dwelling
(7) Nonconforming Structures199
(a) Any Garage Accessory, Garage Detached,
Accessory Building, or Accessory Building Large
Lot that does not conform to the requirements of this
ordinance, that has been declared a nuisance or
unsafe for occupancy by authority of the City Code,
health code, or building codes, shall not be repaired
unless it is brought into significant compliance with
the requirements of this code. Any Garage
Accessory that is demolished shall not be
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Regulations Applicable to all Zones Chapter 3
Page?3?25
reconstructed unless it complies with the
requirements of this ordinance.
(b) Any Shed that does not conform to the
requirements of this ordinance, that has been declared
a nuisance or unsafe by authority of the City Code,
health code, or building codes, shall not be repaired
or reconstructed unless it is brought into significant
compliance with the requirements of this code.199
28-3-26 Model and Display Homes.175 Model and
Display Homes are permitted uses within all
residential zones within the City, under the following
guidelines:
(1) Model Homes
(a) A Model home can also have a sales office within
it.
(b) A Model home shall only be operated within the
approved platted subdivision within the city.
(c) A Model home shall only be operated for sales
within the city.
(d) A business license shall be obtained by the broker
from the city for operation of the model home.
(e) Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
(f) No exterior lighting other than what would be
considered conventional residential lighting shall be
installed on the lot.
(g) If the garage area has been built for an office area,
it will be retrofitted into a garage prior to the sale of
the model home. As well as a certificate of notice
will be recorded against the property indicating the
need to retrofit the garage.
(h) Adequate off street parking is provided, but no
more than typically allowed for a residential
dwelling.
(i) Full landscaping must be installed prior to
occupying the building as a model home. The
Community Development Director or an appointed
staff member may grant a one (1) time up to a sixmonth
extension for weather-related reasons.
(j) Signs shall comply with the Clinton City Sign
Ordinance.
(2) Display Homes
(a) No business shall be conducted on site.
(b) A Display home shall only be operated within the
approved platted subdivision within the city.
(c) Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to
8:00 p.m.
(d) No exterior lighting other than what would be
considered conventional residential lighting shall be
installed on the lot.
(e) Full landscaping must be installed prior to
occupying the building as a display home. The
Community Development Director or an appointed
staff member may grant a one (1) time up to a sixmonth
extension for weather-related reasons.
(f) Signs shall comply with the Clinton City Sign
Ordinance.
Historic Changes to Chapter (see chapter 24 for
details)
13, 20, 28, 29, 35, 38, 61, 67, 71, 81, 82, 83, 88, 95,
101, 104, 118, 119, 123, 126, 134, 137, 147, 148,
149, 150, 159, 167, 169, 170, 175, 181, 192, 198,199,
213, 219
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Parking Chapter 4
Page 4-1
Chapter 4. Parking and Loading Space
Vehicle Traffic and Access Regulations
(Parking) 100
28-4-1 Application of Chapter137
28-4-2 Off-Street Parking Required
28-4-3 Use of Front Yard for Parking Prohibited
28-4-4 Parking Space for All Residential
Dwelling Units148, 181
28-4-5 Parking Space for Commercial, Industrial,
and Institutional Uses
28-4-6 Computation of Parking Requirements
28-4-7 Location of Parking Facilities215
28-4-8 Maintenance of Parking Facilities
28-4-9 Accessible Parking Spaces158
28-4-10 Size of Parking Spaces123
28-4-11 Driving Isle Width123
28-4-12 Parking Lot Improvement
Requirements123
28-4-13 Loading Space Requirements
28-4-14 Authorization for Parking Space
Reduction or Combination
28-4-15 Access to Residential Property Including
Four or Less Dwellings150, 203, 204
28-4-16 Access to All Other Uses
28-4-17 Permits and Certificates of Occupancy
28-4-18 Parking Lot Landscaping137
28-4-1 Application of Chapter.147
(1) The requirements set forth in this chapter shall
apply and govern all use of buildings and use of land.
(2) When any addition to or enlargement of an
existing building or use increases the building or the
developed area of the use or the parking requirements
of the building or structure, the parking requirements
of this Code must be met. Moreover, if the addition,
enlargement, or change in use increases the building
or the developed area of the use, or the required
parking by ten percent (10%) or more, then the
parking for the entire building shall be brought into
conformance with all requirements of this Code,
including required number of spaces, access,
landscaping, lighting, screening, and other applicable
standards.
(3) Any change in the use of a building or lot which
increases the off-street parking as required under this
Code, shall be unlawful and a violation of this Code
until such time as the off-street parking complies
with the provisions of this Code.
(4) Nothing in this Code shall be deemed to deprive
the owners or operators of property generating a need
for parking the right to maintain control over such
property devoted to off-street parking not
inconsistent with this Code or to charge whatever
fees they deem appropriate to off-street parking
users.
28-4-2 Off-Street Parking Required. There shall
be provided at the time of the establishment of any
use of land, or time any main building or structure is
enlarged or increased in capacity, or upon a change
of use or occupancy, minimum off-street parking
spaces with adequate provisions for ingress or egress
by standard sized automobiles as provided and
described in this chapter.
28-4-3 Use of Front Yard for Parking
Prohibited.
(1) No portion of a front yard as required in this
Zoning Ordinance shall be used for the parking of
automobiles or other vehicles unless developed as a
public parking area in conjunction with a permitted
multi-family, commercial or industrial use.
(2) No portion of a required front yard, other than
driveways leading to a garage or properly located
parking area, shall be paved or improved so as to
encourage or make possible the parking of vehicles
therein. Hard surface driveways leading to a garage
or properly located parking area may be used as an
approved parking area for additional vehicles to meet
the requirements of this chapter.
28-4-4 Parking Space for All Residential
Dwelling Units.148, 198, 199 In all zones with a
permitted, conditional or nonconforming residential
use, in accordance with other sections of this chapter,
there shall be provided in the type of structure or
space indicated sufficient parking of automobiles. If
two (2) or more parking spaces are required the
parking spaces must be side-by-side with direct
access from a driveway or drive-lane. All required
parking shall be upon a hard surface with hard
surface access and properly located. For new
buildings or structures, additional units, or for the
enlargement or increase in capacity, floor area, or
guest rooms of an existing main building or structure,
there shall be the following minimum number of
permanently maintained parking spaces on the same
lot with the main building as follows:
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Parking Chapter 4
Page 4-2
(1) Apartments: For apartments, parking
requirements shall be as follows:
a At least fifty percent (50%) of all parking spaces
shall be enclosed or have an overhead covering.199
(2) Assisted Living Facility with Resident Drivers:
One and one quarter (1.25) stalls per unit plus one (1)
space for each employee on the highest shift.
(3) Assisted Living Facility no Resident Drivers: One
(1) stall for every Two (2) beds.
(4) Dwellings: In all zones where these type of
residential units are allowed there shall be provided:
Table 4.8.1 198, 199
Type of Unit Number of
Enclosed Spaces
Other Parking
Spaces
Single Family 2a Within an
enclosed
garage
Two Family 4
Three Family 6 2 additional
per unit
Four Family 8 2 additional
per unit
a Refer to the applicable Zone chapter for additional
requirements associated with the specific zone.
(5) Qualification: To meet the requirements of a
parking space required by this Title: a space shall
have a Hard Surface with Hard Surface access and
properly located with a minimum size of ten (10) feet
by twenty (20) feet.104, 199
(6) Conversion of Required Parking Space into
Living Space: In the event that an attached garage or
carport is to be converted into living space, the
parking spaces required by §28-4-4(4) shall be
relocated on site prior to the existing attached garage
or carport being converted into living space.
199Exception: Model home is outlined elsewhere in
this ordinance.
28-4-5 Parking Space for Commercial,
Industrial, and Institutional Uses. For new
buildings, changes in occupancy, enlargement or
increase in seating capacity, floor area, or guest
rooms of any existing building, a minimum number
of parking spaces shall be provided as follows:
(1) Assembly Areas: Dance halls, exhibition halls,
assembly halls, except when associated with a place
of worship: Three (3) spaces for every one hundred
square feet of assembly or dance floor area.
(2) Auditorium, Stadium or Theater: One (1) space
per three and one half (3.5) seats provided in areas of
assembly. 165
(3) Automobile and Machinery Sales and Service
Garages:
(a) Sales: One (1) space per 100 sq.-ft of floor area
or ten (10) spaces, which ever is greater and One (1)
space per employee at the highest shift.
(b) Service: Six (6) spaces per bay. Any vehicles
that are parked or stored over-night must be screened
from public view.
(4) Banks, Savings and Loans, Credit Union, Finance
Companies, Drive-in Banking: One (1) space per
employee at the highest shift plus one (1) space per
two hundred square feet of main floor area and one
(1) space per five hundred square feet of basement or
second floor area.
(5) Barber Shop/Beautician Shop: Three (3) spaces
per chair.
(6) Boarding and Rooming Houses, Hotels: One and
one-half (1.5) spaces for every two guests such
building is designed to sleep.
(7) Car Wash: Three (3) spaces in each approach
lane to each wash bay, plus one (1) per employee.
(8) Commercial Recreation:
(a) Billiard halls: Five (5) spaces min, plus two (2)
per table.
(b) Bowling alleys: Four (4) spaces per alley.
(c) Golf courses: Four (4) spaces per green + one (1)
per driving range tee.
Table 4.4.1 Number of
Parking Spaces a
Visitor Parking
Per Unit a
Unit Type
Studio 1.0 .25
1 Bedroom 1.5 .25
2 Bedroom 2.0 .25
3 Bedroom 2.0 .25
4 Bedroom 2.5 .25
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Parking Chapter 4
Page 4-3
(d) Swimming pools, etc.: Shall be determined by the
City based on an analysis of parking requirements for
similar uses or on anticipated parking demands.
(9) Day Care Center, Children's Nursery or Pre-
School: Four (4) spaces plus one (1) space per five
hundred square feet of floor area, plus one (1) space
per employee at the highest shift.
(10) Drive-in, Fast Food Establishments: One (1)
space per one hundred square feet of floor area but
not less than ten (10) spaces. For drive-up windows,
one (1) space in use plus four (4) in the approach
lane.
(11) Dry Cleaner: One (1) space per employee plus
five (5) spaces for customer use.
(12) Eating and Drinking Establishments: Cafes,
cafeterias, restaurants, lounges, night clubs, private
clubs or taverns: One (1) space for each one hundred
(100) square feet of gross floor space, or one stall for
every 3 seats, whichever is greater.
(13) Institutional Uses: Hospitals, sanatoriums,
convalescent hospitals: One (1) space for each twobed
capacity, plus one (1) space for every employee
at the highest shift.199
(14) Laundromat: One (1) space for each 200 square
feet of floor area.
(15) Library: Twenty (20) spaces for each floor open
to public uses.
(16) Liquor Store: One (1) space per 250 sq.-ft.
(17) Medical / Dental Laboratory / Research
Services: Five (5) spaces, plus one (1) space per
employee at the highest shift.
(18) Medical Clinics: (Doctors, dentists, optometrists,
psychiatrists, etc): Six (6) spaces per 1,000 sq.-ft for
the first 9,000 sq.-ft floor area, plus one (1) space per
200 sq.-ft after 9,000 sq.-ft of floor area.
(19) Mortuary: One (1) space for each forty square
(40) feet of floor area in assembly rooms, plus one
(1) space per company vehicle.
(20) Motel/Hotel: One (1) parking space for each
unit and one (1) space for every 200 square feet of
assembly area, plus one (1) space per employee at the
highest shift.
(21) Museum: One (1) space per 300 sq.-ft. of floor
space.
(22) Places of Worship: One (1) space for every four
seats in the auditorium; however, where a
church/temple building is designed with the intention
to be used by two congregations at the same time,
one and one-half (1.5) parking spaces shall be
provided for every four seats in the auditorium.
(23) Post Office: One (1) space per vehicle used by
the operation plus one space per employee at the
highest shift plus ten (10) spaces for customers.
(24) Professional Office: Legal, employment
insurance, travel, photo, real estate, etc.: One (1)
space for each two hundred (200) square feet of floor
area on the main floor, plus one (1) space for each
four hundred (400) square feet on any other floor
excluding storage area.
(25) Reception Center and Wedding Chapels: A
minimum of thirty (30) spaces or as outlined for
auditoriums, whichever is greater.
(26) Retail Stores and Shops: One (1) space for each
two hundred square feet of retail floor space.
(27) Schools:
(a) Elementary and Junior High: Two (2) spaces for
each classroom, plus one (1) space per administrator.
(b) Senior High: One (1) space for each four seats
provided in the auditorium or stadium, whichever is
greater.
(c) Public or private college or trade or vocational
school: one (1) space per 100 sq.-ft of building.
(d) Housing associated with such schools: One (1)
space per two (2) beds.
(28) Shopping Centers (regional): One (1) space for
each two hundred square feet leasable floor space.
(29) Warehousing/Manufacturing: One (1) space per
employee at the highest shift, plus one (1) space per
500 sq.-ft of floor area.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Parking Chapter 4
Page 4-4
(30) Wholesale Business: One (1) space per
employee at the highest shift, plus one (1) space per
500 sq.-ft of floor area.
(31) Other: Uses not listed above, or commercial
units with undetermined occupants at the time of
construction: To be assigned by the planning director
and approved by the Planning Commission being
guided by the requirements set forth herein for uses
which are similar to the proposed use.
28-4-6 Computation of Parking Requirements.
When the computation of required parking spaces
results in a fractional space, any fraction up to onehalf
shall be disregarded, and fractions including onehalf
and over shall require one parking space. Where
there is a combination of uses into one structure, each
use shall be calculated as a separate unit.
28-4-7 Location of Parking Facilities.215 Parking
space as required above shall be on the same lot with
the main building, except for when overflow parking
for an existing building is needed to meet no more
than fifty (50%) of the required off-street parking for
any commercial, industrial and institutional use,
structure or building which existed prior to December
12, 2017, which due to the size or location of the
parcel, cannot be provided on the premises, may be
provided on other property not more than five
hundred feet in distance from the building site
measured along the shortest available pedestrian rout
of access, and designated with a legal crosswalk for
safety when crossing a public street which is
designated as a local road as shown in the City’s
street plan. All exterior routes to parking facilities
containing accessible parking shall meet the
requirements of the International Building Code
adopted by the State. The building overflow parking
parcel shall have added to its recorded plat with the
County Recorder a statement saying ‘Restriction on
Property Use: Clinton City Code 28-4-8 requires that
this parcel be maintained for overflow parking for
Assessor parcel # (list number) in perpetuity unless
released from this restriction by the Clinton City
Council.’ The building parcel shall have added to its
plat: ‘overflow parking parcel # (Assessor number) is
tied to this parcel in perpetuity unless this connection
is released by the Clinton City Council.’
28-4-8 Maintenance of Parking Facilities. Space
for off-street parking located on site or on other
property to which it is accessory and required for a
particular use shall not thereafter be utilized for any
other purpose but shall be maintained in perpetuity as
long as the requirement for the off-street parking is
required.
28-4-9 Accessible Parking Spaces.158
(1) Designation of Spaces: The required number of
parking spaces designated for the handicapped shall
be provided according to this section. The spaces
required by this section shall be allocated from the
required parking stalls of this Chapter. In no way
does this designation apply to single-family homes.
(2) Required Spaces: The required number of parking
spaces intended for the physically handicapped shall
be provided at a rate based on the following:
Notwithstanding the chart above, medical offices
shall provide ten percent (10%) of their parking
spaces as accessible parking, hospitals shall provide
twenty percent (20%) of their parking spaces as
accessible parking and apartment buildings shall
provide two percent (2%) of their parking spaces as
accessible parking. The required spaces shall be
located to provide the least travel distance to
accessible facilities served. They shall be located,
where feasible, to allow those parking in the spaces
to access the associated building without crossing
vehicle traffic area. The distance between the most
remote principal entrance of a building and any one
space shall not exceed two hundred feet (200').
(3) Size: Required spaces have an adjacent access
aisle not less than eight feet (8') wide for the first
access aisle then five feet (5') wide for each
additional stall aisle. Two (2) adjacent spaces may
share a common access aisle. Such aisles shall
Total Parking
Spaces
Minimum Required Number of
Accessible Spaces
1-25 1
26-50 2
51-75 3
76-100 4
101-150 5
151-200 6
201-300 7
301-400 8
401-500 9
501-1,000 2% of total spaces
Over 1,000 20 spaces plus 1 space for every 100
spaces or fraction thereof over 1,000
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Parking Chapter 4
Page 4-5
provide an accessible route of travel to the building
or facility entrance. Boundaries of the required
parking spaces and aisles shall be marked to identify
the use of such spaces.
(4) Signage: Every parking space required by this
section shall be identified by a sign centered from
three (3) to five feet (5') above the ground at the head
of the required space. The sign shall be marked with
the international symbol of access. Such signage shall
not be less than twelve inches (12") in height. The
symbol shall be proportioned according to the figure
below. The lettering shall be not less than one inch
(1") nor more than two inches (2") in height and shall
be on a background of contrasting value.
(5) Surface: Parking spaces and access aisles shall
slope not more than one inch (1") in forty eight
inches (48") and shall be firm, stable, smooth and slip
resistant.
28-4-10 Size of Parking
Spaces.123 Each off-street
parking space shall be at least
nine feet by twenty feet for
diagonal or ninety degree spaces,
or nine feet by twenty-two feet for parallel spaces
exclusive of access drives or aisles; except that
commercial and industrial parking lots may have ten
percent of the parking spaces designated for small
cars which shall measure eight and one-half feet by
eighteen feet and five percent of the parking spaces
designated for motorcycles which shall measure four
feet by eight feet. (Parking spaces required to be
twenty feet deep by this section may be eighteen feet
deep where they abut a curb against a landscape area
where the back of curb is a minimum of two feet
from the property line and the landscaping is not
subject to vehicle damage or where the curb is
adjacent to a walking area a minimum of six feet
wide from the back of curb.)
28-4-11 Driving Isle Width.123 Minimum driving
isle width within a parking area is twenty-six (26)
feet.
28-4-12 Parking Lot Improvement
Requirements.123 Every parcel of land hereafter
used as a public or private parking area, including
commercial parking lots and automobile, farm
equipment, or other open-air sales lots shall be
developed and maintained in accordance with the
following requirements:
(1) Surface and Drainage: Lots shall be properly
graded for drainage, surfaced with concrete, asphaltic
concrete, asphalt, oil or any other dust-free, hard
surface and maintained in good condition, free of
weeds, dust, trash and debris;
(2) Screening: The sides and rear of any off-street
parking area for more than five vehicles which
adjoins a residential or institutional building, or is
contiguous to a residential zone, shall be effectively
screened by light-tight masonry wall or solid fence.
Such wall or fence shall be of a design, type and
height determined by the Planning Commission not
to exceed eight feet in height, and shall be maintained
in good condition. Advertising on walls and fences is
prohibited except as an integral architectural part of
the wall or fence and when approved by the Planning
Commission;
(3) Exits: Lots shall be provided with entrances and
exits so located as to minimize traffic congestion in
compliance with Sections 4.16 and 4.17 of this
ordinance;
(4) Wheel Bumpers: Lots shall be provided with
wheel or bumper guards at least eighteen inches from
a lot line, designated pedestrian walking area less
than six (6) feet wide, accessible route or building,
located so that no part of a parked vehicle will extend
beyond the parking space. 123
Lighting facilities shall be so arranged so that they
neither disturb occupants of adjacent residential
properties nor interfere with traffic.
(5) Signage and Striping: Lots shall be marked to
indicate the number of parking spaces and the pattern
of parking and circulation. Additionally, such areas
as fire lanes, no parking areas, accessible exterior
routes, and pedestrian walking areas shall be
appropriately marked. Interior traffic control signs
shall be installed and at exits to public streets stop
signs shall be installed. Other signage established
during the site plan approval process shall also be
installed.
(6) Application: All applications for a site plan
review, building permit or occupancy permit shall be
accompanied by a plot plan showing the required
parking spaces, with ingress and egress. Said plan
shall be reviewed and approved by the Planning
Commission as outlined in § 3-10 of this Title or as
directed by the Community Development Director.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Parking Chapter 4
Page 4-6
28-4-13 Loading Space Requirements. No
building shall be designed, erected, altered, increased
in capacity, used or occupied, and no land shall be
used or occupied for manufacturing, storage,
warehouse, goods display, vehicle sales, department
store, grocery, hotel, hospital, mortuary, laundry, dry
cleaning, or other uses similarly involving the receipt
or distribution, by vehicle, of materials or
merchandise, unless adequate off-street loading space
is provided therefore, excepting that off-street
loading space need not be provided for buildings or
uses actually occupied, operated, or used on the
effective date of the ordinance codified herein, where
no such space has been provided, unless such
buildings are thereafter enlarged, increased in
capacity, expanded or have change of occupancy.
(1) Loading Space Berth Requirements: Each use for
which off-street loading space is required shall
provide the number of loading berths necessary to
properly service that use, plus an area or means for
adequate ingress and egress to each berth. Where any
required or permitted loading dock or area is to be
constructed in conjunction with a proposed use which
is adjoining a residential zoning district, said loading
dock or area shall be screened from the adjoining
property by constructing a light-tight masonry wall or
solid fence at a height to be determined by the
Planning Commission but not exceeding eight feet. A
landscape buffer may also be specifically required by
the Planning Commission which shall be properly
maintained in perpetuity by the commercial/industrial
use.
(2) Loading Space Location: Off-street loading
space shall be located on the same site or lot as the
use for which it is provided. No loading space shall
be designed, arranged, or used where all or part of the
space would permit loading, unloading, or service
from a public street or sidewalk.
(3) Loading Space Maintenance: Off-street loading
facilities, either existing or hereafter provided, shall
not thereafter be decreased, but shall be maintained in
order to provide continuous use, if necessary.
28-4-14 Authorization for Parking Space
Reduction or Combination. The Board of Zoning
Adjustments may authorize reduction of off-street
parking and loading space as follows:
(1) Reduction in Parking Space: The Board of
Zoning Adjustments may authorize on appeal, a
reduction in the proportions required in this chapter if
it should find that in the particular case, the peculiar
nature of the buildings or premises, or the exceptional
situation or condition would mitigate the need for the
parking spaces as specified in this chapter.
(2) Combine Parking Space: When two dissimilar
uses are located adjacent to each other and the
demand for parking in conjunction with those uses
would not conflict, the Board of Zoning Adjustments
may authorize the use of such combined facilities
requiring the maximum number of parking spaces for
the larger use.
28-4-15 Access to Residential Property Including
Four or Less Dwellings.150, 203, 204 Access to parking
spaces and private garages used in conjunction with
dwellings shall be limited as follows:
(1) Proximity to Intersection: Driveways shall be
located a minimum of forty (40) feet from any street
intersection. Said measurement to be taken from the
point of intersection of the two converging front lot
lines lying tangent to and in the same direction as the
front lot lines, to the edge of the driveway.
(2) Proximity to Property Line: No driveway
approach shall be located closer than four and onehalf
(4 ½) feet to a side lot line of a lot as it is
projected to the back of the curb and gutter. This
measurement is to be taken to the beginning of the
flare or radius on the curb.
(3) Drainage: A driveway on private property may
be constructed up to the side or rear property line so
long as the driveway does not interfere with the
surface drainage of the lot or adjacent lots where
drainage easements are provided. The drainage from
the driveway must be kept within the property.
(4) Driveways and Accessory Parking: 173,199, 203, 204
(a) All driveways, streets, isles, etc. intended to
provide a means of access to parking spaces intended
to meet the requirements of this chapter shall be
paved with a hard surface and shall have a hard
surface approach designed to meet the requirements
of the Clinton City Engineering and Standard
Specifications. 199
(b) Accessory parking areas on a lot with a single
family residential unit with an established driveway
that meets the requirements of “a” above are allowed
within the front setback area of a lot based upon the
following criteria:
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Parking Chapter 4
Page 4-7
(i) An area if hard surface meeting the requirements
of a driveway; or,
(ii) An area constructed of three-quarter (3/4) inch
gravel a minimum of four (4) inches thick. If road
base is used as an underlining material sufficient
gravel shall be used to cover the road base; and
(iii) Except for corner lots the area shall be on the
side of the dwelling adjacent to an established
driveway; and
(iv) The area shall have a substantially durable
boarder, extending a minimum of one (1) inch below
the depth of the gravel. The intent of this boarder is
to prevent the migration of gravel from the parking
area to adjoining landscaped areas or property. An
example of a substantially durable boarder would be
railroad ties or concrete mow strip; and
(v) A drive access to the accessory parking area shall
be by an approach of concrete designed to meet the
requirements of the Clinton City Engineering and
Standard Specifications. Access shall not be by
jumping the curb, temporary ramps, or other means
of driving over the curb; and
(vi) The accessory parking area shall be kept weed
and vegetation free; and
(vii) The accessory parking area shall be for parking
of licensed vehicles, trailers, and boats, owned by the
resident, and not for storing project vehicles, vehicle
parts, or other storage; and
(viii) On corner lots, accessory parking shall not be
within the exterior side yard facing a street setback
area; and
(ix) The accessory parking area may extend from the
edge of the existing driveway to the property line.
(c) Additional accessory parking may be established
behind a solid fence, adjacent to the dwelling on the
same side as the driveway, constructed of a dust and
weed free gravel, or similar surface.
(d) Corner Lots where one of the streets is not a
Collector Street, as described in the Clinton City
Transportation Master Plan Update 2005-2030, or
where access to the lot has not been restricted by
ordinance or plat, access to the lot from a side street,
not associated with the drive to the garage, is allowed
and the following shall apply:
(i) Access to a corner lot from a Principal Arterial or
Minor Arterial is not allowed;
(ii) Access shall lead to a parking pad constructed of
hard surface or gravel (if gravel then as outlined in
“v” above) or an approved garage or accessory
building;
(iii) Access shall be a minimum of 10-feet behind the
dwelling on the lot;
(iv) Impervious surface ratio for the zone shall not be
exceeded; and
(v) Curb cut shall comply with the requirements
established by ordinance.
(5) Number of Approach: 134,149 Lots shall be limited
to one driveway approach except where a second
driveway approach is specifically approved by the
Community Development Director. Lots may have
two driveway approaches under the following
circumstances:
(a) Corner lots with frontages on two (2) local streets
may have two (2) driveway approaches, one on each
frontage totaling the maximum percentage set in
Table 4.15.7. Corner lots having a frontage of at
least 100 feet on a local may have two (2) driveway
approaches on a single frontage with the combination
of the two (2) approaches not exceed the percentage
set in Table 4.15.7 and shall be separated by 30 feet
measured from the two inside edges of the driveway
approaches.
(b) Inside lots with frontages on a local roads and
having a frontage of at least 100 feet, may have two
(2) driveway approaches on a single frontage, with
the combination of the two (2) approaches not to
exceed the percentage set in Table 4.15.7. The two
(2) approaches shall be separated by a minimum of
30 feet measured from the two inside edges of the
drive approaches.
(c) Inside lots with frontages on collector streets (800
North, 1300 North, 1800 North, 2300 North, 1000
West, 1500 West, 2000 West or 3000 West) having a
frontage of at least 100 feet or more may have two
(2) drive approaches on a single frontage with the
combination of the two (2) approaches not exceed
that set in Table 14.15.7. The two drive (2)
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Parking Chapter 4
Page 4-8
approaches shall be separated by a minimum of 50
feet measured from the two inside edges of the drive
approaches. However, lots with frontages on 1800
North and/or 2000 West, must first gain approval
from the Utah Department of Transportation
(UDOT).
(6) Double Frontage Lots: Lots that are double
fronted with one frontage on an arterial, minor
arterial or collector street, or corner lots with frontage
on an arterial, minor arterial or collector street, shall
not be allowed to have a drive approach on the higher
classification street. Upon approval by the
Community Development Director, corner lots with
frontages on two local streets may have a total of two
drive approaches; one on each frontage of the street
with a maximum width indicated in (7) below. Drive
approaches shall comply with the criteria in 28-4-1
(5) (a) – (c). above, and shall not create a traffic
hazard.
(7) Width of Drives:104 The width of residential
property driveway approaches is regulated as
follows: Width: The percentage of frontage indicated
in Table 4.15.7 above shall be inclusive of all drive
approaches allowed any one frontage of a lot. The
width of a drive approach shall be measured where
the approach attaches to the sidewalk or at a distance
four and one-half (4 ½) feet behind the curb. Any
flare or radius shall not be counted in the approach
width.
(8) Width: The percentage of frontage indicated in
(7) above shall be inclusive of all drive approaches
allowed any one frontage of a lot. The width of a
drive approach shall be measured where the approach
attaches to the sidewalk or at a distance four and onehalf
(4 ½) feet behind the curb. Any flare or radius
shall not be counted in the approach width.
(9) All park strip areas providing access from a
public way shall be Hard Surface.
28-4-16 Access to All Other Uses. Access to all
uses not listed hereinabove, including parking lots
and apartments, mobile home developments, business
and industrial uses, shall be limited as follows:
(1) Location of Driveway: Where access is provided
by one driveway or two or more connecting
driveways shall be as follows:
(a) Access shall be by not more than one driveway
for the first one hundred feet of frontage and one
additional driveway for each additional one hundred
fifty feet of frontage. For lots with more than one
hundred seventy-five feet and less than two hundred
fifty feet of frontage, two driveways may be allowed
by the Planning Commission.
(b) No two of these driveways shall be closer to each
other than fifty feet, and no driveway shall be closer
to a side lot line than twenty feet except as granted by
the Board of Zoning Adjustments upon
recommendation from the Planning Commission.
(c) Driveways are to be located in conformance with
Chapter 4 of the AASHTO book "Geometric Designs
of Highways and Streets", or as approved by the City
Engineer. In no case shall a driveway be located
closer than eighty feet from the point of intersection
of two arterial streets, or fifty feet from the
intersection of an arterial and other classification of
street. For all non-arterial streets this distance shall be
fifty feet. The distance shall be measured from the
point of intersection of the two converging front lot
lines or of two lines lying tangent to and in the same
direction as the front lot lines. No driveway shall be
located across any curved section of frontage lying
between the point of intersection and the point of
tangency.
(d) Lots with frontages of one hundred fifty feet or
less are encouraged to share access to streets with
adjacent lots. Where this is feasible, the Planning
Commission may require joint access. Where it is
determined to be infeasible by the Planning
Commission, they may refer the proposed driveway
location(s) to the Board of Zoning Adjustments with
a recommendation for exception.
Table 4.15.7 149
Zone Min
Width
Percent of Frontage Allowed
in Approach
A-1 10’ 40%
A-E 10’ 40%
R-1-6 10’ 33%
R-1-8 10’ 33%
R-1-8a 10’ 33%
R-1-9 10’ 50%
R-1-10 10’ 50%
R1-15 10’ 50%
R-M 10’ 33%
R-M approaches are to be approved during the site
plan review and established as unchangeable without
site plan review. 104
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Parking Chapter 4
Page 4-9
(e) The design and location of all driveways entering
a state highway shall be done as required by the Utah
Department of Transportation. Approval of the
driveway(s) shall be provided to the city in writing
prior to the issuance of any building permit.
(f) Access points from Arterials and Sub-Arterials, as
outlined in the Clinton City Transportation Master
Plan, shall be designed as street entrances rather than
a curb cut.134
(2) Width of Driveway: Each driveway shall have a
width of not less than twenty feet nor greater than
thirty-five feet in width on local and collector streets.
On arterial streets the width shall not exceed forty
feet in width. The measurement of driveways shall be
taken at right angles to the centerline of the driveway
at the front lot line and shall be from face to face of
the curb radii.
(3) All parkstrip areas providing access from a public
way shall be Hard Surface.
28-4-17 Permits and Certificates of Occupancy.
No permit for any contemplated use or building shall
be issued unless the location of the driveways for
vehicular access to the property is shown on the plot
plan and no certificate of occupancy shall be issued
or approved unless and until the requirements of this
chapter have been complied with in full.
28-4-18 Parking Lot Landscaping.137
(1) Landscaping and Screening: Whenever parking
spaces for five (5) or more cars and their associated
access driveways are located in or near a residential
zone, screening is required to protect residential
properties from potential impacts of lights, noise,
increased pedestrian and automobile traffic, invasions
of privacy and physical intrusions on property. Based
on the applicant's site plan, the department will
determine the potential impacts resulting from
location, site design and layout as they relate to the
areas of concern identified in Table A of this section.
The nature of surrounding topography may be
considered in determining whether impacts exist. The
applicant may then choose from among those
screening options in Table A of this section that are
designed to mitigate identified impacts. The specified
standard for each option is identified in Table B of
this section. Determinations may be appealed to the
Planning Commission. If there are no potential
impacts, screening may not be required. The fencing
and landscaping required under this section shall be
maintained and replaced as needed in order to
provide an effective screen. Whenever a fence abuts a
parking area, tire blocks will be required; the tire
blocks must be set back a minimum of 2 1/2' from the
curb, in order to protect the fence from traffic.
Landscaping shall be protected from automobile
overhang, excluding low growing ground covers and
turf.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Parking Chapter 4
Page 4-10
TABLE A: SCREENING OPTIONS
IMPACTS ON ADJACENT RESIDENTIALLY ZONED PROPERTY
Area Of Concern
Dumpster Lights Noise Privacy Objectionable Views Access Restriction
D or E C1, D, E, or H1 C1, E, or H1 C1, D, E or H1 C1, D, E, G, or H1 D, E, F, G, H1 or I
1. This is an option only when abutting residentially zoned property is vacant or has substantial existing vegetation. In either
instance the time needed for growth of vegetation will not be detrimental to the buffering needs.
TABLE B: SCREENING OPTION DESCRIPTIONS
Option Screening Type Purpose And Standards
A 3' berm Screens vehicles in parking lot and decreases asphalt appearance, except when
difference in topography offsets screening. Any berm shall have a minimum height
of 3' and a stabilized side slope of no greater than 3 to 1 ratio of run to rise. Berms
shall be a minimum width of 9'.
B Berm with shrub landscaping
sufficient to achieve a 4' high
screen
Screens parking lot and buffers building. Evergreen shrubs shall be of a locally
adapted species such as pyracantha, yew, juniper or evergreen euonymus. Shrubs
shall be a minimum of 5 gallons when planted and shall be expected to reach a
height of at least 4' within 5 years of planting. Shrubs shall be planted at a
maximum of 5' on center. The berm shall have a stabilized side slope no greater
than 3 to 1 ratio of run to rise.
C Evergreen hedge with an ultimate
height of at least 5'
Screens parking lot except when difference in topography offsets screening and
buffers building which is close to property line. Shrubs shall be of a locally adapted
evergreen species such as arborvitae (Thuja occidentalis or orientalis), juniper
(Juniperus virginiana or chinensis), pyracantha, yew (Taxus media), or evergreen
euonymus (Euonymus japonica), with a 5 gallon minimum planted size, and shall
be expected to reach a height of at least 5' within 5 years of planting. Shrubs shall
be planted at a minimum of 5' on center.
D A 6' tall solid fence of either
wood, vinyl or chain-link with
interlocking opaque vinyl or a 6'
tall decorative masonry wall with
textured surfacing facing
residential use
Screens ground level lights, noise, objectionable views, provide privacy and access
restriction, and texturing provides aesthetic relief. "Decorative masonry" shall
include split-face block or brick, brick, fluted block, or masonry wall with stucco
finish, but shall not include openings in the wall surface below a height of 6'.
Bumper guards set back a minimum of 2 1/2' from the fence shall be required when
fence abuts parking.
E A 6' wide landscaped strip and
either a 6' tall solid fence of
either wood, vinyl or chain-link
with interlocking opaque vinyl,
or a 6' tall decorative masonry
wall with textured surfacing
facing residential use
Screens ground level lights, higher level lights, noise, and objectionable views;
provides privacy, access restriction and additional noise mitigation. Trees shall be a
minimum of 2" caliper in size, spaced at a minimum of 20' on center.
F 6' chain-link fence Provides security and access restriction. Used only when these are the major
impacts. Bumper guards, set back a minimum of 2 1/2' from the fence, shall be
required when fence abuts parking.
G
.
6' chain-link fence with inserts in
the fence fabric
Provides security and access restriction. Inserts help screen objectionable views.
Inserts shall be of a durable opaque material and shall be kept in good repair.
Bumper guards, set back a minimum of 2 1/2' from the fence, shall be required
when fence abuts parking.
H 6' open fence with evergreen
trees and shrubs
Screens ground level and higher level lights, provides security and access
restriction. Vegetative screen provides additional noise mitigation and screens
objectionable views. Trees and shrubs shall be of a locally adapted evergreen
species such as arborvitae, juniper, pyracantha, evergreen euonymus, pines or
spruces, with a planted size of at least 15 gallons for trees and 5 gallons for shrubs,
and shall be expected to reach a height of at least 5' within 5 years of planting. Trees
shall be planted at 20' on center and shrubs at 5' on center.
I Ornamental wrought iron fence
or other decorative see through
fencing
Provides some access restriction. Used when this is the only impact from the
proposed development. Bumper guards, set back a minimum of 2 1/2' from the
fence, shall be required when fence abuts parking.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Parking Chapter 4
Page 4-11
(2) Parking Lot Perimeter Landscaping: Parking lots
with four (4) or more spaces shall be buffered from
public streets. At least seventy percent (70%) of the
length of the parking lot fronting the street shall be
screened to a height of thirty six inches (36"). To
screen the parking area, the landscaped area may
either be bermed, planted with shrubs or evergreen
trees.
(3) Parking Lot Interior Landscaping: In addition to
the site landscaping requirements;
(a) Required parking areas shall install landscaped
islands with raised curbs. Islands shall not be placed
over asphalt or concrete. A curb shall be provided
along all interior roadways to prevent vehicular
intrusion into landscape areas. Whenever a
landscaped island under this provision is required it
shall be a minimum width of nine feet (9') and the
length of the parking stalls it abuts. Landscaped
islands shall be required for each of the following
conditions:
(i) The end of all row(s) of stalls.150
(ii) A row of parking has over fifteen (15) parking
stalls. One island shall be placed between every
fifteen (15) stalls in the row. In the light
manufacturing zone, if the parking is located behind
the building and is not in public view from the street,
the island placed between every fifteen (15) stalls can
be relocated and placed as one large island. The area
for the large island shall be the cumulative square
footage of the separate islands. Such combined area
shall be located at the entrance to the row of parking
which is most visible from the public street.
(iii) To define parking lot entrances.
(iv) To define the main interior circulation road
pattern.
(b) When landscaped islands are required, a
minimum of one deciduous tree shall be planted in
each island. This tree requirement is in addition to the
number of trees required on the remainder of the lot.
The surface of the island shall be planted in grass or
shrubs. If shrubs are used they shall meet the
requirement of seventy five percent (75%) of the
landscaped area covered with living plant material
within three (3) years. Plantings shall be maintained
at a height not to exceed three feet (3').
(c) Required public and employee parking areas over
two hundred (200) stalls shall be divided by a
minimum ten foot (10') wide landscaped planting
island perpendicular to the parking stalls. The
planting island shall be placed along every fourth row
of parking. Trees shall be planted in the island at
forty feet (40') on center and shall be a minimum two
foot (2') caliper size. Where possible, these islands
should line up with exit & entryways of the buildings
and have a minimum of a five foot (5’) walkway,
within the island.
(d) A minimum of six percent (6%) of the interior
space (as measured by drawing a rectangular shaped
area around the maximum extent of each parking
area) of all parking lots with ninety-nine (99) or less
spaces, and ten percent (10%) of all parking lots with
one hundred (100) or more spaces shall be landscape
areas.
Design for parking of a minimum of 200
stalls
Ten foot (10’) wide
landscape island every 4th
Forty foot (40’)
spacing for trees
Landscaped island
defines internal
circulation
Landscaped island
defining entry way
Landscaped island after
fifteen (15) stalls to break
up parking lot
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Parking Chapter 4
Page 4-12
Historic Changes to Chapter (see chapter 24 for
details)
3, 100, 104, 123,134, 137, 148, 149, 150, 158,
173,181, 198, 199, 203, 204
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Conditional Uses Chapter 5
Page 5-1
Chapter 5. Conditional Uses 176
28-5-1 Purpose and Intent
28-5-2 Conditional Use Permit
28-5-3 Review Procedure
28-5-4 Determination
28-5-5 Basis for Issuance of Conditional Use
Permit
28-5-6 Appeal
28-5-7 Building Permit
28-5-8 Expiration
28-5-9 Re-review of a Conditional Use Permit
28-5-10 Amendments of the Conditional Use
Permit
28-5-11 Revocation
28-5-12 Appeal of Revocation
28-5-1 Purpose and Intent. The purpose and
intent of this chapter is to establish standards for land
uses listed in each zone as conditional uses.
Conditional uses are generally related to permitted
uses, but due to their unique characteristics or
potential impacts on surrounding uses or the goals of
the City may be appropriate only in certain locations
and under specific conditions that mitigate potential
impacts and may not be compatible in some areas as
impacts cannot be mitigated. Conditional uses are
intended to allow greater flexibility by providing a
wider variety of uses in a zone, while at the same
time allowing conditions to be applied, if conditions
of mitigation or elimination of detrimental impacts
would make the use compatible with surrounding
area.
28-5-2 Conditional Use Permit.
(1) A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for all
uses listed as Conditional Uses in the zone
regulations. A conditional use permit shall be issued
only upon approval of the Planning Commission and
issued to the applicant at the address listed on the
permit and shall not be transferable. The conditional
use permit shall list all requirements determined
appropriate to mitigate the impacts created by the use
in order to make it acceptable at the specific location.
(2) A conditional use permit shall make the approved
use allowable at the specific location and the right of
the approved use with its conditions shall run with
the property, unless the permit has expired as
provided under § 5.08 of this chapter or has been
revoked as provided under § 5.10 of this chapter. In
the event a change is proposed from the conditions of
the original approval, an amendment to the original
conditional use permit shall be required. If the use is
discontinued for a continuous period of one year, a
new conditional use permit is required.
28-5-3 Review Procedure.
(1) Application for a Conditional Use Permit shall be
made to the Planning Commission.
(2) Detailed location, site and building plans shall
accompany the complete application forms provided
by the City.
(3) The application together with all pertinent
information shall be considered by the Planning
Commission at its next regularly scheduled meeting.
(4) The Planning commission shall call a Public
Hearing on any Conditional Use request in
accordance with the requirements of Section 1.04.3
20, 88 of this Title.
(5) Notification of such review shall be sent to the
applicant and all property owners within a 300-foot
radius of the property under review. The notification
shall not be less than seven (7) days prior to the
Conditional Use application review, giving
concerned parties adequate notice of the request to
allow participation and input from all parties.
28-5-4 Determination. The Planning Commission
shall approve a conditional use permit if reasonable
conditions are imposed to mitigate the reasonably
anticipated detrimental effects of the proposed use of
the adjacent properties and the public welfare. If
reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of a
proposal exist, and imposition of reasonable
conditions can not achieve compliance with the
applicable standards, the Commission may deny a
conditional use permit necessary for the protection of
adjacent properties and the public welfare.
28-5-5 Basis for Issuance of Conditional Use
Permit. Conditional use applications shall be
reviewed and approved or denied according to the
following criteria:
(1) Detrimental To Persons Or Property: The
proposed use will not, under the circumstances of the
particular case and the conditions imposed, be
detrimental to the health, safety and general welfare
of persons, nor injurious to property and
improvements in the community, existing
surrounding uses, buildings and structures. It shall be
demonstrated that the use and property development:
(a) Does not lead to deterioration of the environment
by emitting pollutants into the ground or air to cause
detrimental effects to the property or neighboring
properties;
(b) Does not introduce hazards or potentials for
damage to neighboring properties that cannot be
mitigated;
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Conditional Uses Chapter 5
Page 5-2
(c) Does not encroach upon rivers or streams or
direct runoff into those features; and
(d) Is in keeping with the type of existing uses
surrounding the property and development as
proposed will improve the character of the area by
encouraging reinvestment and upgrading of
surrounding properties.
(2) General Plan Consistency: The proposed use at
the particular location is consistent with the
objectives and strategies established in the General
Plan.
(3) Use Compatibility: The proposed use at the
particular location is compatible with the character of
the site, adjacent properties, surrounding
neighborhoods and other existing development. In
determining the compatibility of the use with the
surrounding area, the Planning Commission may
consider:
(a) The type of use and its location does not create
unusual pedestrian or vehicle traffic patterns or
volumes that would not be expected with the
development of a permitted use. In determining
unusual patterns, the Planning Commission shall
consider:
(i) the orientation of driveways and if they direct
traffic to the major streets or the local streets and if
directed to the local streets the impact it creates to the
safety, purpose and character of the local street;
(ii) parking locations and size and if they encourage
street-side parking and walking to the proposed use
which impacts the adjacent land uses; and
(iii) hours of peak land use, when traffic to the use
would be greatest and that such times and peaks
would not impact the ability of the surrounding uses
to enjoy the use of their property.
(b) The hours of operation of the proposed use when
compared with the hours of activity of the
surrounding uses and the potential of such hours of
operation do not create noise, light or other nuisances
not acceptable to the enjoyment of the existing
surrounding uses or common to the surrounding uses.
(4) Design Compatibility: The proposed site and
building design and placement at the particular
location is compatible with:
(a) The character of the site in relationship with the
surrounding uses which includes buildings and site
uses integrating with the topography of the site,
retaining trees of value, using natural features as site
amenities, developing landscaping along the public
areas of the property to create an improved
streetscape, reducing expanses of large areas of
asphalt or concrete, and screening objectionable
views that may exist on the site from all surrounding
property owners;
(b) The character of the area by the site design
location of parking lots, access ways, delivery areas
and on-site vehicle circulation patterns taking into
consideration the adjacent uses and not adversely
impacting the adjacent use by exposing them to loss
of privacy, objectionable views of large parking or
storage areas, or views and sounds of loading and
unloading areas;
(c) The character of the surrounding uses by the type
of exterior lighting and signage that will not detract
by being bright or create unwanted light onto
adjacent properties;
(d) the architectural character of the community and
the surrounding neighborhood, considering the
building materials, colors, roof shapes, height, mass,
size and orientation to the proposed building and
design.
(5) Compliance with Regulations: The proposed use
will comply with the regulations and conditions
specified in the Land Use Ordinances.
28-5-6 Appeal.
(1) Decision; When Effective: The decision of the
Planning Commission shall become final and
effective fifteen (15) days after a final decision has
been made by the Planning Commission. However, it
shall not become final if, prior to the expiration of the
fifteen (15) days, any aggrieved person files notice of
appeal with the board of zoning adjustment. The
notice of appeal shall specifically state the
objection(s) to the decision of the Planning
Commission.
(2) Time Limitation: Any person aggrieved by
decision of the Planning Commission may appeal to
the board of zoning adjustment by filing such appeal
with the department within fifteen (15) days after the
final decision of the Planning Commission.
(3) Filing: Said appeal shall be filed in accordance
with the board of zoning adjustment rules of
procedures.
(4) Review: The board of zoning adjustment shall
hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is an
error in any requirement, decision or determination
made by the Planning Commission. The petition
shall provide evidence to the board of zoning
adjustment, to support the specific objections made to
the decision of the Planning Commission.
28-5-7 Building Permit. Upon receipt of a
Conditional Use Permit, the applicant shall take such
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Conditional Uses Chapter 5
Page 5-3
permit to the Building Official, who will review the
permit and conditions attached. Based on this review
and compliance with any other items that might
develop in the pursuance of his duties, the Building
Official may approve an application for a building
permit and shall insure that development is
undertaken and completed in compliance with the
permit and conditions pertaining thereto.
28-5-8 Expiration.
(1) Unless there is substantial action under a
Conditional Use Permit within a period of one year of
its issuance, as determined by the Planning
Commission, the Conditional Use Permit shall
expire. The Planning Commission may grant a
maximum extension of six (6) months under
exceptional circumstances.
(2) An approved conditional use permit shall expire if
a permitted use or a different conditional use replaces
the use allowed under the permit. The conditional use
permit shall also expire if the use is discontinued for
a continuous period of one year. Once the conditional
use permit has expired, a new conditional use permit
shall be required in order to occupy the site.
28-5-9 Re-Review of a Conditional Use Permit.
Once issued, a conditional use permit may be
required to be re-reviewed for the following reasons:
(1) Time limit, which is up to but not beyond every
five (5) years, OR
(2) Receipt of a legitimate complaint.
If a re-review is required the conditional use permit
will follow 5.03.3 & 5.03.4 procedurally.
Notification will include the property owner,
applicant (if different) and all complainants (if any).
28-5-10 Amendment of the Conditional Use
Permit. Once issued, a conditional use permit shall
not be enlarged, changed, extended, increased in
intensity, or relocated except by approval of the
Planning Commission. Application and review of a
proposed amendment to the conditional use permit
shall follow the same procedures as outlined in this
chapter for an original application.
28-5-11 Revocation. A Conditional Use Permit may
be revoked by the Planning Commission for the
following:
(1) Failure to comply with the conditions imposed
with the original approval of the permit,
(2) Abandonment of the use for a continuous period
of one year or longer, or
(3) Any change in the use for which the permit was
issued which may adversely affect the surrounding
area.
Before a permit is revoked, the Planning Commission
shall hold a public hearing as outlined in §5.03 4 to
allow sufficient public input. In the case of
abandonment as listed in 2 above, the public hearing
only needs to be held at the discretion of the Planning
Commission.
28-5-12 Appeal of Revocation. The decision of the
Planning Commission concerning the revocation of a
permit may be appealed by any concerned party to
the board of zoning adjustments by filing such appeal
within fifteen (15) days after the date of the notice of
the decision is received by the permit holder. The
board of zoning adjustment may uphold or reverse
the decision of the Planning Commission and impose
any additional conditions that it may deem necessary
in granting an appeal.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Reserved Chapter 6
Page 6-1
Chapter 6. Reserved 179
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Reserved Chapter 7
Page 6-1
Chapter 7. Reserved 181
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Condominium Development Chapter 8
Page 8-1
Chapter 8. Condominium Development126
28-8-1 Purpose
28-8-2 Description; General Limitations
28-8-3 Definitions
28-8-4 Planning Commission/City Council
Review
28-8-5 Preliminary Plats Approval
28-8-6 Final Plat Review
28-8-7 Recording Required
28-8-8 Requirements
28-8-1 Purpose. Applicability: The procedures and
requirements of this Chapter shall apply to and
govern the processing of condominium record of
survey maps pursuant to the requirements of the
Condominium Ownership Act of 1975, Utah Code
Annotated Chapter 57, Chapter 8. Said procedures
and requirements shall supplement zoning, site
development, health, building and other ordinances
applicable to a particular condominium project, and
shall apply to the approval of such projects involving
new construction as well as those involving the
conversion of existing structures. In addition,
condominium projects which contemplate dedication
of real property or improvements for the use of the
public, or condominium projects in which units are
not contained in existing or proposed buildings shall
also be considered subdivisions requiring compliance
with the applicable provisions of this Chapter.
28-8-2 Description; General Limitations.
(1) It is the intent of this Chapter to establish a
reasonable process whereby the City can assess the
impact of mixing collective and individual
ownerships, as presented in a particular condominium
project, upon the public health, safety, welfare,
convenience of the City and to allow flexibility and
diversification in the use of land in the following
zones of Clinton City: PZ, RM and MP-1.
Condominium ownership of spaces may be allowed
as main uses in each of these zones. Uses of the
condominium space shall be limited to those uses
allowed in each zone. Residential development may
also be required to follow those procedures set forth
in Chapter 7 (PRUD Ordinance), Clinton City Zoning
Ordinance. In the case of commercial or residential
conversions of existing buildings, corrections of
Building Code violations, the upgrading of vehicle
parking facilities and safety of common functional
elements of the structure or structures are of prime
importance. A condominium project shall be
considered to be a subdivision, and a record of survey
map or supplement thereto prepared.
(2) Nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted to
state or imply that a condominium project, unit,
association of unit owners, or management
committee is exempt from compliance with the
Zoning Ordinance, Building and Sanitary Codes, or
similar development regulations which have been
adopted by Clinton City, Davis County, the state of
Utah, or any federal requirements. No condominium
or any record of survey, declaration, or other material
as required for recordation under this Chapter or the
Utah State Condominium Act shall be recorded in the
office of the County Recorder until all attributes of
the condominium project shall have been approved
by Clinton City.
28-8-3 Definitions.
“Association of Unit Owners” Means all of the
unit owners acting as a group in accordance with the
declaration and by-laws.
“Building” Means a structure, containing units, and
comprising a part of the property.
“Common Areas and Facilities” Means and
includes, unless otherwise provided in the declaration
of lawful amendments thereto:
(1) The land included within the condominium
project, whether leasehold or in fee simple;
(2) The foundations, columns, girders, beams,
supports, main walls, roofs, halls, corridors, lobbies,
stairs, stairways, fire escapes, entrances and exits of
the building when used by more than one unit;
(3) The basements, yards, gardens, parking areas and
storage spaces when used in common by more than
one unit;
(4) The premises for lodging of janitors or persons in
charge of the property;
(5) Installations of central services such as power,
light, gas, hot and cold water, heating, refrigeration,
air conditioning and incinerating;
(6) The elevators, tanks, pumps, motors, fans,
compressors, ducts and in general all apparatus and
installations existing for common use;
(7) Such community and commercial facilities as
may be provided for in the declaration; and
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Condominium Development Chapter 8
Page 8-2
(8) All other parts of the property necessary or
convenient to its existence, maintenance and safety,
or normally in common use.
“Common Expenses” Means and includes:
(1) All sums lawfully assessed against the unit
owners;
(2) Expenses of administration, maintenance, repair
or replacement of the common areas and facilities;
(3) Expenses agreed upon as common expenses by
the association of unit owners; and
(4) Expenses declared common expenses by
provisions of this Chapter, or by the declaration of
the bylaws.
“Common Profits” Means and includes, unless
otherwise provided in the declaration or lawful
amendments thereto, the balance of all income, rents,
profits, and revenues from the common areas and
facilities remaining after the deduction of the
common expenses.
“Condominium” Means the ownership of a single
unit in a multi-unit project, together with an
undivided interest in common in the common areas
and facilities of the property.
“Condominium Project” Means a real estate
condominium project; a plan or project whereby two
or more units, whether contained in existing or
proposed residential, commercial or industrial
buildings or structures or otherwise, are separately
offered or proposed to be offered for sale.
Condominium project shall also mean the property
when the context so requires.
“Condominium Unit” Means a unit together with
the undivided interest in the common area and
facilities appertaining to that unit. Any reference in
this act to a condominium unit includes both a
physical unit together with its appurtenant undivided
interest, unless the reference is specifically limited to
a time period unit.
“Contractible Condominium” Means a
condominium project from which one or more
portions of the land within the project may be
withdrawn in accordance with provisions of the
declaration and of this act. If the withdrawal can
occur only by the expiration or termination of one or
more leases, then the condominium project shall not
be deemed a contractible condominium within the
meaning of this act.
“Convertible Land” Means a building site; that is
to say, a portion of the common areas and facilities,
described by metes and bounds, within which
additional units or limited common areas and
facilities may be created in accordance with this
Chapter.
“Convertible Space” Means a portion of the
structure within the condominium project, which
portion may be converted into one or more units or
common areas and facilities, including, but not
limited to, limited common areas and facilities in
accordance with this Chapter.
“Declarant” Means all persons who execute the
declaration or on whose behalf the declaration is
executed. From the time of the recordation of any
amendment to the declaration expanding an
expandable condominium, all persons who execute
that amendment or on whose behalf that amendment
is executed shall also come within this definition.
Any successors of the person referred to in this
chapter who come to stand in the same relation to the
condominium project as their predecessors did, shall
also come within this definition.
“Declaration” Means the instrument by which the
property is submitted to the provisions of this
Chapter, as may from time to time be lawfully
amended.
“Expandable Condominium” Means a
condominium project to which additional land or an
interest in it may be added in accordance with the
declaration and this Chapter.
“Leasehold Condominium” Means a condominium
project in all or any portion of which each unit owner
owns an estate for years in his unit, or in the land
upon which that unit is situated, or both, with all such
leasehold interests to expire naturally at the same
time. A condominium project including leased land
or an interest therein, upon which no units are
situated or to be situated shall not be deemed a
leasehold condominium within the meaning of this
Chapter.
“Limited Common Areas and Facilities” Means
those common areas and facilities designated in the
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Condominium Development Chapter 8
Page 8-3
declaration as reserved for use of a certain unit or
units to the exclusion of the other units.
“Majority or Majority of the Unit Owners”
Means, unless otherwise provided in the declaration
or lawful amendments thereof, the owners of more
than fifty percent in the aggregate in interest of the
undivided ownership of the common areas and
facilities.
“Management Committee” Means the committee
as provided in the declaration charged with and
having the responsibility and authority to make and
to enforce all of the reasonable rules and regulations
covering the operation and maintenance of the
property.
(1) The “management committee” makeup shall be
fifty percent owners within the project and fifty
percent disinterested parties not directly associated
with the project to guarantee an impartial review of
all decisions.
(2) A management consultant or certified public
accountant should be hired by the management
committee or be made a member of the committee
itself to guide the financial affairs of the project.
“Par Value” Means a number of dollars or points
assigned to each unit by the declaration, substantially
identical units shall be assigned the same par value,
but units located at substantially different heights
above the ground, or having substantially different
views, or having substantially different amenities or
other characteristics that might result in differences in
market value, may, but need not, be considered
substantially identical within the meaning of this
subsection. If par value is stated in terms of dollars,
that statement shall not be deemed to reflect or
control the sales price or fair market value of any
unit, or any undivided interest in the common areas
and facilities, voting rights in the unit owners'
association, liability for common expenses, or right to
common profits, assigned on the basis thereof.
“Person” Means an individual, corporation,
partnership association, trustee or other legal entity.
“Property” Means the land, whether leasehold or in
fee simple, the building, if any, all improvements and
structures thereon, all easements, rights; and
appurtenances belonging thereto, and all articles of
personal property intended for use in connection
therewith.
“Record as Survey Map” Means a plat or plats of
survey of land and units.
“Record, Recording, Recorded and Recorder”
Shall have the meaning stated in Chapter 57-03, Utah
Code Annotated.
“Size” Means the number of cubic feet, or the
number of square feet of ground or floor space,
within each unit as computed by reference to the
record of survey map and rounded off to a whole
number. Certain spaces within the units including,
without limitation, attic, basement, or garage space,
may, but need not, be omitted from such calculation
or be partially discounted by the use of a ration, so
long as the same basis of calculation is employed for
all units in the condominium project and so long as
that basis is described in the declaration.
“Time Period Unit” Means an annually recurring
part or parts of a year specified in the declaration as a
period for which a physical unit is separately owned.
“Unit” Means a separate physical part of the
property intended for any type of independent use,
including one or more rooms or spaces located in one
or more floors (or part or parts of floors) in a building
or a time period unit, as the context may require. A
convertible space shall be treated as a unit in
accordance with subsection 57-8-13.4(3) Utah Code
Annotated.
“Unit Number” Means the number, letter or
combination thereof designating the unit in the
declaration and in the record of survey map.
“Unit Owner” Means the person or persons owning
a unit in fee simple and an undivided interest in the
fee simple estate of the common areas and facilities
in the percentage specified and established in the
declaration, or, in the case of a leasehold
condominium project, the person or persons whose
leasehold interest or interests in the condominium
unit extend for the entire balance of the unexpired
term or terms.
28-8-4 Planning Commission/City Council
Review. In reviewing a condominium project, the
Planning Commission and City Council shall review
such things as:
(1) Plans as required in this Chapter;
(2) Geographic layout of the condominium project;
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Condominium Development Chapter 8
Page 8-4
(3) Facilities for utility lines, road and parking areas
which will be constructed;
(4) The percentage of the project which will be
devoted to common or recreational use and whether
or not those areas are usable and contiguous, or
blocky parcels which are unacceptable; and
(5) Contents of the declaration with respect to the
standards which must be adhered to concerning
maintenance, upkeep, and operation of any roads,
utility facilities, recreational areas, and open spaces
included in the project.
28-8-5 Preliminary Plats Approval. For a
condominium project to receive preliminary
approval, the following standards and procedures
must be adhered to. The owner or developer of a
proposed condominium project desiring approval
shall file an application with the Community
Development Director of the City on a form
prescribed by the City, together with:
(1) Any person desiring approval from the Planning
Commission for a condominium project shall file
seven (7) copies of the preliminary plat with the
Community Development Director not less than
thirty (30) days prior to the Planning Commission
meeting at which first consideration of the
condominium project is to be given. The Planning
Commission shall consider the preliminary plat
within sixty (60) days after the filing of the plat.
Within thirty days of the first meeting at which the
Planning Commission gives consideration to the
preliminary plat, a decision shall be made to approve,
disapprove, or approve on specific conditions.
(2) The preliminary plats shall be distributed to the
appropriate utility companies and to all departments
of Clinton City.
(3) Preliminary plats shall:
(a) Be drawn to scale as required by Utah Code
Annotated section 57-8-13, as amended, which shall
be made by a registered Utah Land Surveyor using a
scale no smaller than one inch to equal fifty feet (1" =
50');
(b) Show diagrammatic floor plans identifying
boundaries of the project units, convertible and
expandable areas or spaces and common areas.
(c) Show the intended use of common areas, (e.g.,
storage, recreational, parking for guests as opposed to
unit owners, open space, etc.), and should indicate
whether such common areas are to be open to the
public, assigned to specific units or semi-private and
available only to unit owners.
(d) Have a north point, scale and date;
(e) Show the name of the condominium project;
(f) Show the names and addresses of the developer,
engineer and surveyor;
(g) Have contour lines at no more than a five foot
interval;
(h) Show the boundary lines of the condominium
project;
(i) Show existing sanitary sewers, storm drainage
systems, water supply mains, culvert and irrigation
system within the project;
(j) Show and describe in detail the location of
existing or proposed driveways, pedestrian ways,
curb cuts, walls, structures, fences, landscaping and
sprinkling systems.
(k) Show a preliminary utility layout for the
condominium project;
(l) Locations of streets, walks, easements, parks and
open spaces, all commonly owned structures and
property;
(m) All requirements in Chapter 4, (Parking), Clinton
City Zoning Ordinance, shall be observed, and all
parking facilities shall be clearly shown on the plat;
(n) Show clearly the construction phases of the
project; and
(o) Have the preliminary declaration.
(4) Declarations; Bylaws: Two (2) copies, signed in
the original, of the proposed condominium
declarations and bylaws.
(5) Certain items listed above may be waived at the
discretion of the Planning Commission when the
condominium project involves the conversion of the
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Condominium Development Chapter 8
Page 8-5
existing structures into condominium ownership;
however, all conversions must be inspected by the
City prior to preliminary approval to insure
compliance to the current building codes.
Note: Certain items listed above may be waived
when the project involves the conversion of existing
structures into condominium ownership.
(6) Incomplete Applications: Incomplete applications
may be proffered and reviewed for advisory comment
by the planning or building services divisions, but
shall not be deemed accepted or received until
complete, nor shall the condominium project be
scheduled for any hearings before the planning
commission until the application is complete.
(7) Fees: The Clinton City Council may establish
application and review fees from time to time as set
forward in the Clinton City Consolidated Fee
Schedule.
(8) After review of the preliminary plat, the Planning
Commission's recommendations shall be submitted to
the City Council for its review.
28-8-6 Final Plat Review. At any time after
approval of the preliminary plat by the City Council,
but no later than one year thereafter, the linen, one
reproducible copy and two prints shall be submitted
to the City planning director who will check for
conformance to the preliminary plat. Upon his review
and approval the City Community Development
Director will submit the plat to the City Engineer for
checking and approval. If the City Engineer finds that
the plat meets all of the engineering requirements of
the City, he will sign the engineer’s certificate of
approval and will turn the plat to the County Health
Department for their review and approval who will
then return the plat to the City. If determined
necessary by the City the City Attorney will check
the declaration and the plat as to form and upon
signing the certificate of approval, the attorney will
turn the plat to the Planning Commission for its
review and approval. The Planning Commission will
forward the plat to the City Council for final action,
which upon its approval, the Mayor will sign the City
Council certificate of approval which will be attested
by the City Recorder. If the final plat is rejected by
any of the foregoing officers or agencies of the City,
it shall be returned to the developer with a written
statement of the reasons for rejection.
28-8-7 Recording Required. The final plat when,
and only when, it bears all official approvals and
required signatures shall be filed for record in the
office of the Davis County Recorder by the
Community Development Director.
28-8-8 Requirements. The final plat shall comply
in all respects with the requirements for a preliminary
plat and in addition shall:
(1) Be drawn with waterproof ink on standard grade
linen or mylar with trim dimensions of nineteen
inches by thirty inches;
(2) Be drawn with the tip of the plat facing either
north or west;
(3) Be certified and signed by a registered land
surveyor licensed to practice in the state of Utah;
(4) Have reserved the proper spaces for dedication,
certification, approval or recording as the case may
be, for owners, City Engineer, City Attorney, County
Health, Planning Commission, City Council and
County Recorder;
(5) Show proper bearings and dimensions of all
project boundary lines, properly tied to public survey
monuments;
(6) Show widths, lengths, boundaries, bearings,
dimensions and curve data of the centerlines of
proposed street (public or private) and easements;
(7) Show clearly on commercial projects, all parking
stalls. For residential projects, which parking stalls
will be covered, which will be guest or open stalls,
and shall also show the layout of all R.V. parking
areas;
(8) The linear measurements and locations of the
exterior boundaries of the building or buildings on
the property other than within the boundaries of
convertible lands;
(9) Diagramed floor plans of the buildings built or to
be built on the property, other than within the
boundaries of any convertible lands, in sufficient
detail to identify each convertible space and physical
unit contained within a building including an
identifying number or symbol, the official datum
elevations of finished and unfinished interior surfaces
of the floors and ceilings and the linear
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Condominium Development Chapter 8
Page 8-6
measurements of the finished or unfinished interior
surfaces of the floors and ceilings and the linear
measurements of the finished or unfinished interior
surfaces of the perimeter walls, and the lateral
extensions of every such convertible space and unit;
(10) The size in square feet, and where applicable,
the address of each unit in the condominium project;
and
(11) All other applicable items pertaining to the type
of the condominium project as listed in 57-3-13, Utah
Code Annotated.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses Chapter 9
Page 9-1
Chapter 9. Non-Conforming Regulations 177
28-9-1 Purpose and Intent
28-9-2 Non-complying Structures
28-9-3 Non-conforming Uses
28-9-4 Non-conforming Certificate
28-9-5 Amortization
28-9-1 Purpose and Intent. It is the purpose of
this chapter to provide for the continual use of any
building, structure or tract of land lawfully
established at the time of passage of the zoning
ordinance, other land use ordinance, or any
amendments thereto, which does not conform to the
present regulations of the zone in which it is located.
It is the intent of this chapter to regulate such uses
and structures in such a manner to lead eventually to
the elimination of non-conforming uses and noncomplying
structures over time and in no way
perpetuate said uses beyond reasonable
abandonment.
28-9-2 Non-complying Structures. A noncomplying
structure, or what has previously been
referred to as a non-conforming building, is any
building or structure that legally existed before its
current land use designation, and because of one or
more subsequent changes to the zoning ordinance, or
other land use ordinance, does not conform to the
setback, height restrictions, or other regulations now
governing the use of land, which regulations
generally include yard regulations, lot coverage or
landscaping requirements, parking regulations
governing the location, design or number of parking
stalls. Non-conformity as to regulations governing
the use of land such as area or density requirements
or parking requirements, established as a minimum
requirement for the use of land in the applicable
zone, shall render any structure located on the land to
be both a non-complying structure and a nonconforming
use. For purposes of this chapter, an
expansion of structure where the use is otherwise
allowed in the applicable zoning district shall be
reviewed under § 2 of this section. If the use is not
otherwise allowed in the applicable zoning district,
the expansion shall be reviewed under § 9.03.2 of this
chapter.
(1) Ordinary Maintenance and Repair: A noncomplying
structure may be maintained or repaired
so long as such work does not increase the noncomplying
or non-conforming conditions of the
building or structure.
(2) Addition or Enlargement:
(a) Authorization; Determination: A non-complying
structure shall not be added to or enlarged in any
manner, unless the Community Development
Director or his appointee, finds that such expansion is
otherwise authorized under § 2b through 2d of this
section, or except by issuance of a non-complying
structure permit by the Planning Commission. In
reviewing a request to expand a non-complying
structure, the Planning Commission shall determine
that:
(i) Granting the expansion will not adversely impact
the attainment of the general plan of the city;
(ii) The expansion will improve the general
appearance or safety of the area;
(iii) By expanding the building, the character of the
neighborhood is not adversely impacted;
(iv) The expansion will improve the area by
providing additional or adequate parking;
(v) Any expansion will be adequately screened or
buffered, if needed, so as not to increase impacts to
the adjoining properties; and
(vi) The expansion will not otherwise violate the
standards established in § 2b through 2d of this
section for any particular type of expansion.
(b) Non-complying as to Height: A main building
non-complying as to height regulations can be
expanded provided the addition meets all required
setbacks of the zone in which it is located and does
not increase any other non-complying or nonconforming
status of the property on which it is
located. If only a portion of the building is noncomplying
as to height then the addition or expansion
must meet the height regulations of the zone in which
it is located. A non-complying accessory building
cannot be enlarged or expanded unless the addition or
expansion complies with the height regulation and
required setbacks of the zone and does not increase
any other non-complying or non-conforming status of
the property on which it is located.
(c) Non-complying as to Setbacks or Yard
Regulations:
(i) A main building non-complying to front yard
setbacks may be expanded and maintain the existing
non-conforming front yard setback provided such
expansion will not displace required parking or
otherwise require a parking variance, or will not
result in the removal of existing landscaping in the
required front yard setback.
(ii) A residential main building with non-complying
side yard setbacks but having a minimum side yard of
not less than three (3) feet, may be extended in depth
along the non-conforming building line to a
maximum of the depth of the existing dwelling if
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses Chapter 9
Page 9-2
such extension is for the purpose of enlarging and
maintaining the existing dwelling or required
parking, and provided such enlargement does not
increase any other nonconformity which may exist
and conforms to all other regulations of the zone in
which it is located.
(iii) A main building non-complying to rear yard
setbacks may be expanded provided the expansion
does not increase the non-complying rear yard
setback and does not require any other variance.
(d) Single Family; Expansion Of Parking: A singlefamily
detached dwelling non-conforming as to the
number of properly located off street parking spaces
located on the lot may add additional spaces not to
exceed the minimum required in accordance with the
following standards:
(i) Side Yard Parking With One Legal Stall: If the lot
has at least one properly located off street parking
space, or if no legal off street parking exists and
cannot be developed, then one parking stall may be
constructed in one required side yard; provided, that:
(A) The parking area is at least nine (9) feet wide and
is at least twenty (20) feet in length and that no
portion of the vehicle extending forward of the front
face of the dwelling;
(B) The parking area and its associated driveway
shall be hard surfaced;
(C) The appurtenant driveway to the side yard
parking must be tapered if using an existing driveway
and approach or a new driveway and approach must
be installed to the new parking space;
(D) Any parking in the side yard setback must remain
open and unobstructed to the sky;
(E) All storm water runoff from the hard surface of
the parking area must be directed so as to prevent
drainage onto adjacent properties; and
(F) No parking shall be permitted within the required
side yard facing a street on a corner lot.
(ii) Front Yard Parking: A maximum of two (2) hard
surfaced parking spaces may be added in the front
yard setback, if all of the following standards are
met:
(A) No legal parking has existed on the property and
space is not available, or there is no reasonable
access, to locate legal parking either in the side or
rear yards;
(B) Such space must remain open and unobstructed
to the sky;
(C) No portion of a parked vehicle shall extend
beyond the front property line into the public right of
way;
(D) The parked vehicle shall not exceed eight feet
(8') in width, twenty feet (20') in length, and seven
feet (7') in height; and
(E) The parking area and its associated driveway
shall be hard surface and the parking area shall not
exceed fifty percent (50%) of the front yard area.
(iii) Non-conforming or Non-complying as to Lot
Area:
(A) A single-family dwelling with inadequate lot area
in a residentially zoned district shall be allowed to
expand or construct on the lot provided that the
construction will meet required setbacks or has
received the needed setback variances.
(B) A single-family dwelling shall be allowed to be
constructed on a vacant subdivided lot with
inadequate lot area in a residentially zoned district
provided that the construction will meet required
setbacks or has received the needed setback
variances.
(C) A multiple-family dwelling and associated
buildings with inadequate lot area may expand the
buildings or structure on the lot; provided, that:
(a) The construction will meet required setbacks or
has received the needed setback variances; and
(b) The expansion will create covered parking in
areas that are presently paved and used for parking.
(3) Damage or Destruction:
(a) A non-complying structure that is involuntarily
damaged or destroyed, in whole or in part, by fire,
flood, wind, earthquake or other natural disaster or
calamity may be restored or rebuilt; provided, that
such restoration is started within a period of one year
and is diligently pursued to completion and the
noncompliance is not increased.
(b) Non-complying structure shall not be rebuilt or
restored if:
(i) The structure is allowed to deteriorate to a
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses Chapter 9
Page 9-3
condition that the building is rendered uninhabitable
and a building permit has not been issued to repair or
restore within six (6) months after written notice to
the property owner that the structure is uninhabitable
and that the right to rebuild or restore such noncomplying
structure will be lost if a building permit
has not been issued to repaired or restored within six
(6) months; or
(ii) The property owner has voluntarily demolished
or removed a majority of the non-complying
structure.
28-9-3 Non-conforming Uses. A non-conforming
use is a use of land, including the use of any building
or structure located thereon, that legally existed
before its current land use designation, has been
maintained continuously since the time the land use
ordinance governing the land changed, and because
of one or more subsequent changes to the zoning
ordinance, or other land use ordinance, does not
conform to the regulations that now govern the use of
the land. Nonconformity as to regulations governing
the use of land such as area or density requirements
or parking requirements established as a minimum
requirement for the use of land in the applicable zone
shall render any structure located on the land to be
both a non-complying structure and a nonconforming
use. For purposes of this chapter, an
expansion to such structure where the use is
otherwise allowed in the applicable zoning district
shall be reviewed under § 9.02 2 of this chapter. If
the use is not otherwise allowed in the applicable
zoning district, the expansion shall be reviewed under
§ 2 of this section.
(1) Right of Use: Except as otherwise provided
herein, a non-conforming use may be continued by
the present or any future owner.
(2) Expansion of Use:
(a) Building or Structure:
(i) A non-conforming use may be extended through
the same building or structure provided no structural
alteration of the building is proposed or made for the
purpose of the expansion.
(ii) A building or structure non-conforming as to use
regulations shall not be added to or enlarged in any
manner if the expansion involves any structural
alterations of the building unless the director finds
that such expansion is otherwise authorized under §
9.02 2 of this chapter, or except by issuance of a
non-conforming use permit by the planning
commission. The planning commission shall find
that:
(A) The expansion of the use would not adversely
impact the surrounding properties;
(B) The proposed expansion is compatible with the
surroundings;
(C) The site of the proposed expansion conforms to
all site development requirements as much as
physically possible given existing site limitations;
(D) The proposed expansion shall not create new
nonconformities or conditions of noncompliance; and
(E) No expansion of a non-conforming use shall be
allowed which would extend beyond the original lot
or tract of land.
(b) Land: The non-conforming use of land, not
related to the non-conforming use of a building or
structure, shall not be expanded or extended.
(3) Change of Non-conforming Use: The nonconforming
use of a building or structure may not be
changed to another non-conforming use, except by
issuance of a non-conforming use permit by the
planning commission. No change of use shall be
permitted if the new use is more intensive than the
existing use in its zoning classification and its nature
or character. A use shall be considered to be more
intensive in its zoning classification if it is not
allowed as a permitted use either in the zone where
the existing non-conforming use is first allowed as a
permitted use or in a more restrictive zone. The
planning commission shall find that the proposed
change of use:
(a) Would not adversely impact the surrounding
properties more than the existing non-conforming
use;
(b) Would not intensify the use of the site or impacts
to the neighborhood;
(c) Would not change the character of the existing
building or site unless the change would make the
building or site more compatible with the
surroundings and existing zoning; and
(d) Any site development meets all site development
requirements as much as physically possible, given
existing site limitations.
(4) Damage or Destruction which affects Use: A
building or structure which contains a nonconforming
use and is involuntarily damaged or
destroyed by fire, flood, wind, earthquake or other
natural disaster or calamity may be restored or rebuilt
and the occupancy or use of such building, structure
or part thereof, which existed at the time of such
destruction, may be continued or resumed; provided,
that such restoration shall be started within a period
of one year and diligently pursued to completion. In
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses Chapter 9
Page 9-4
restoring such building or structure, the nonconforming
use shall not be changed, enlarged or
expanded except in accordance with the other
provisions of this chapter and the following:
(a) The reconstruction and reuse of the structure shall
not change the character of the neighborhood by
using construction materials that did not exist
previously on the building; provided that other
building materials may be approved by the director if
the materials are determined to be compatible with
the neighborhood and make the building or site more
compatible with the surroundings;
(b) The reconstruction shall not expand the floor area
of the use, increase its intensity or expand accessory
uses from what had previously existed; and
(c) The new construction shall meet all site
development requirements as much as physically
possible, given existing site limitations and the
existing development before damage occurred.
(5) Loss of Right:
(a) A non-conforming use of a building or structure
shall be terminated if the building or structure in
which the use is located is allowed to deteriorate to a
condition that the structure is rendered uninhabitable
and a building permit has not been issued to repair or
restore within six (6) months after written notice to
the property owner that the structure is uninhabitable
and that the right to rebuild or restore such noncomplying
structure will be lost if a building permit
has not been issued to repair or restore within six (6)
months; or
(b) A non-conforming use of a building or structure
shall be lost if the property owner voluntarily
demolishes a majority of the building or structure that
houses the non-conforming use.
(c) The non-conforming use of a building, structure
or tract of land that has been abandoned shall be
terminated and the building or structure not occupied
or used thereafter except in conformance with the
present use regulations of the zone in which it is
located. Any party claiming that a non-conforming
use has been abandoned shall have the burden of
establishing the abandonment.
(d) A use shall be presumed to be abandoned if:
(i) A majority of the primary structure associated
with the non-conforming use has been voluntarily
demolished;
(ii) The use has been discontinued for a continuous
period of one year; or
(iii) The primary structure associated with the nonconforming
use remains vacant for a continuous
period of one year, excluding vacancies due to:
(A) Remodeling or renovation under a valid building
permit, or
(B) Pending court actions which affect occupancy or
possession of the property, i.e., probate, ownership
disputes.
(e) The property owner may rebut the presumption of
abandonment under § 5d of this section and shall
have the burden of establishing that any claimed
abandonment has not in fact occurred.
(f) The non-conforming status of a school district or
charter school use or structure shall terminate when
the property associated with the school district or
charter school use or structure ceases to be used for
school district or charter school purposes for a
continuous period of one year. Such termination shall
not prevent the reuse of such building or structure
under the other provisions of this chapter.
(6) Reuse of Residential Structures In Residential
Zone: If a right to use land non-conforming as to area
or density requirements of residential uses is lost
pursuant to § 5 of this section, the residential
buildings shall not thereafter be occupied or used
except in conformance with the area or density
requirements of the respective zone, except as
otherwise provided in this section or except as
follows:
(a) The loss of right shall not prohibit the use of an
existing residential building as a single-family
dwelling in any zone permitting said use.
28-9-4 Non-conforming Certificate. The
existence of any non-complying building or nonconforming
use will be recognized by the city
through issuance of a non-complying structure or
non-conforming use certificate. The certificate shall
describe the nature and extent of any noncompliance
or nonconformity. The certificate shall also include
any permits authorizing expansions, additions or
changes of use approved by the director or the
planning commission under the provisions of this title
and any conditions imposed thereon.
(1) Issuance: A non-complying or non-conforming
certificate shall be issued by the director upon the
applicant establishing the existence of the noncomplying
structure or non-conforming use right by a
preponderance of the evidence. Any application for a
non-complying structure or non-conforming use
certificate shall include:
(a) A complete description of the nature and
character of the noncompliance or nonconformity,
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses Chapter 9
Page 9-5
including any accessory uses;
(b) A site plan showing all existing buildings,
structures, parking facilities and other improvements
on the applicable lot;
(c) Any evidence the applicant intends to submit to
establish the noncompliance or nonconformity; and
(d) Whether the applicant requests at that time an
administrative hearing for additional submission of
evidence.
(2) Review Procedures:
(a) Except as provided in subsection B4 of this
section, the burden of proving the non-complying
structure or non-conforming use shall be upon the
applicant. The director may investigate the accuracy
or credibility of any information submitted and may
conduct its own investigation into any facts
pertaining to the existence or nonexistence of the
non-complying structure or non-conforming use.
(b) Once the application has been submitted and
reviewed, the director shall, within a reasonable
period of time, either approve issuance of the
certificate, request additional information, or deny
the application stating the reasons for denial. The
applicant may request an administrative hearing
within fifteen (15) days of the mailing of the decision
on the application. The hearing shall be held at a time
and place to be determined by the director after
notice to the applicant.
(c) The decision of the director shall be considered to
be a final administrative order or decision, subject to
appeal to the board of zoning adjustment.
(3) Expansions, Additions, Or Changes Of Noncomplying
Structures Or Non-conforming Uses:
(a) No expansions, additions or changes of a noncomplying
structure or non-conforming use under §
9.02 and § 9.03 of this chapter shall be approved
unless and until a non-complying structure or nonconforming
use certificate has been issued as
described above.
(b) Any non-complying structure or non-conforming
use permit approving an expansion or change shall
become a part of the original certificate and subject to
any conditions placed thereon.
(c) Any approval granted by the planning
commission or the director for an expansion, addition
or change of a non-complying structure or nonconforming
use shall expire if, within a one year
period, there is no substantial action taken to
complete the change or expansion.
(d) The permit portion of a non-complying structure
or non-conforming use certificate issued for an
expansion, addition or change may be revoked by the
issuing body if any of the conditions or terms are
violated. The holder of the certificate shall first be
afforded an opportunity to be heard before the board
or commission, as applicable, and show cause why
the certificate should not be revoked. In addition, a
violation of a condition or term of the certificate shall
constitute a violation of this title, and the revocation
of a certificate shall not prohibit any other remedy
provided herein.
(4) Revocation; Incorrectly Issued Certificate: A noncomplying
structure or non-conforming use
certificate may be revoked by the director if the
director determines that such certificate was
incorrectly issued due to mistake, misrepresentation,
or the discovery of new evidence demonstrating that
the rights of a non-complying structure or nonconforming
use did not exist. Notice of revocation
shall be mailed to the owner of the property, and at
the address, as shown in the records of the Davis
County recorder's office. The property owner may
request an administrative hearing within thirty (30)
days of the mailing of the notice of revocation. Said
hearing shall be held at a time and place to be
determined by the director after notice to the owner.
If a hearing is not requested, or if the director
determines after hearing that the notice of revocation
should not be rescinded, the director's decision to
revoke shall be considered to be a final
administrative determination. A decision that the
permit should be revoked shall not restrict the right of
the property owner to make further application for a
non-complying structure or non-conforming use
permit after presentation of additional evidence or
information.
(5) Building Permit: After the effective date hereof,
no building permit shall be issued which
encompasses any non-conforming use or noncomplying
building without the prior issuance and
except in accordance with the terms and conditions of
a non-conforming or non-complying certificate. The
city shall continue to recognize any non-conforming
use or non-complying building previously approved,
but the character, nature and extent of the nonconforming
use or non-complying building must
hereafter be documented through the application and
certificate issuance process described in this section.
(6) Loss Of Right; Procedure: If it has been
determined by the director that a loss of a nonconforming
use or non-complying structure right has
occurred under the provisions of this chapter, the
director shall notify the owner of the property, and at
the address, as shown in the records of the Davis
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Non-Conforming Buildings and Uses Chapter 9
Page 9-6
County recorder's office, that the loss of nonconforming
or non-complying rights has occurred.
The owner may, within thirty (30) days of receipt of
said notice, request a hearing before the director to
present any evidence or reasons why the certificate
should not be revoked. If, after the hearing, the
director determines that the right has been lost, the
decision shall be considered to be a final
administrative order or decision, subject to appeal to
the board of zoning adjustment.
28-9-5 Amortization. The provisions of this
chapter are not intended to restrict the city council's
authority under section 10-9a-511, Utah Code
Annotated, to terminate all non-conforming uses, by
providing a formula establishing a reasonable time
period during which the owner can recover or
amortize the amount of his or her investment in the
non-conforming use, if any.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Board of Adjustments Chapter 10
Page 10-1
Chapter 10. Board of Zoning Adjustments 178
28-10-1 Purpose and Intent
28-10-2 Appointment, Term and Removal38
28-10-3 Organization and Meetings
28-10-4 Powers and Duties
28-10-5 Appeals
28-10-6 Zoning Administrator
28-10-7 Special Exceptions
28-10-8 Variances
28-10-9 Time for Filing Appeals
28-10-10 Time Limitation on Variances
28-10-11 Appeals of Board of Zoning Adjustments
Decisions
28-10-1 Purpose and Intent. The purpose and
intent of this chapter is to provide for just and fair
treatment in the administration of the Clinton City
zoning Ordinances, and to ensure that substantial
justice is done. The City establishes of the Board of
Zoning Adjustments in accordance with Utah Code
Annotated 10-9a-701.
28-10-2 Appointment, Term and Removal. 38 The
Board of Zoning Adjustments shall consist of six (6)
total members, five (5) of whom are to be appointed
by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city
council, and the sixth shall be a member of the
planning commission, designated by the Chairman of
the commission with the advice and consent of the
commission. The commission member of the board
shall serve as an ex-officio member of the
commission and shall not be a voting member.
Otherwise the commission member shall have the
same powers and duties as the other appointed
members of the board.
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the city
council, may appoint two (2) alternate members to
the board to be appointed by the Chair when
members are absent in order to have a full Board.
Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of
any member whose term becomes vacant. Terms of
office of the five citizen members of the board shall
be staggered at intervals to provide uniformity and
continuity of policy. Such appointed citizen
members shall serve for a period of five (5) years and
at staggered intervals, but in any event, each member
of the Board of Zoning Adjustments shall serve until
the expiration of the term for which he is appointed
and until a successor is appointed and qualified. The
planning commission representative to the board
shall serve a one year term and only while serving on
the planning commission.
The city council may appoint associate members of
such board, and in the event that any regular member
is temporarily unable to act due to absence from city,
illness, interest in a case before the board or any other
cause, his place may be taken during such temporary
disability by an associate member designated for the
purpose.
Any member may be removed for cause by the
appointing authority upon written charges and after
public hearing, if such public hearing is requested.
28-10-3 Organization and Meetings.
(1) During the first meeting of each year, the Board
of Zoning Adjustments shall elect one of its members
to act as Chairman for that particular year.
(2) Meetings of the Board shall be held at the call of
the Chairman and at such other times as the Board
may determine. The Chairman, or in his absence, the
acting Chairman, may administer oaths and compel
the attendance of witnesses. .
(3) All meetings of the Board of Zoning Adjustments
shall comply with the requirements of Title 52
Chapter 4 of the Utah State Code, Open and Public
Meetings.
(4) The Board shall keep minutes of its proceedings,
showing the vote of each member upon each
question, or if absent or failing to vote indicating
such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations
and other official actions. The records of the Board
shall be filed in the Department of Community
Development and be public record.
(5) All decisions of the Board shall be based upon the
findings of fact and every finding shall be supported
in the record of the meetings of the Board. The
concurring vote of three (3) members of the Board
shall be necessary to reverse or modify any order,
requirement, decision, or determination of any
administrative official or agency or to decide in favor
of the appellant.
(6) Decisions of the Board of Zoning Adjustments
become effective at the meeting in which the decision
is made.
(7) The Board of Zoning Adjustments may adopt
rules of procedure, not inconsistent with State law or
City Code.
28-10-4 Powers and Duties. The Board of Zoning
Adjustments shall have the power and duty to hear
and decide:
(1) Appeals from zoning decisions applying the
Zoning Ordinance;
(2) Special Exceptions to the terms of the zoning
ordinance; and
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Board of Adjustments Chapter 10
Page 10-2
(3) Variances from the terms of the zoning ordinance.
28-10-5 Appeals.
(1)
(a) The applicant or any other person or entity
adversely affected by a decision administering or
interpreting a zoning ordinance may appeal that
decision applying the zoning ordinance by
specifically objecting to any order, requirement,
decision, or determination made by an official in the
administration or interpretation of the zoning
ordinance.
(b) Any officer, department, board, or bureau of a
municipality affected by the grant or refusal of a
building permit or by any other decisions of the
administrative officer in the administration or
interpretation of the zoning ordinance may appeal
any decision to the Board of Zoning Adjustments.
(2) The person or entity making the appeal has the
burden of proving that an error has been made.
(3)
(a) Only zoning decisions applying the zoning
ordinance may be appealed to the Board of Zoning
Adjustments.
(b) A person may not appeal, and the Board of
Zoning Adjustments may not consider, any zoning
ordinance amendments.
(4) Appeals may not be used to waive or modify the
terms or requirements of the zoning ordinance.
(5) An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of
the action appealed from, unless the officer from
whom the appeal was taken certifies to the Board of
Zoning Adjustments after the Notice of Appeal shall
have been filed with him that by reason of facts
stated in the certificate, a stay would, in his opinion,
cause immediate and irreparable damage to life or
property. In such case, proceedings shall not be
stayed otherwise than by restraining order which may
be granted by the Board of Zoning Adjustments or by
the district court on application and notice and on due
cause shown.
28-10-6 Zoning Administrator.
(1) There is hereby created the office of Zoning
Administrator. The Community Development
Director shall serve as the zoning administrator or
another may serve as designated by the Mayor and
approved by the City Council.
(2) The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized to
decide certain matters, as designated by the Board of
Zoning Adjustments, that are consistent with the
guidelines established by this Title, state law and the
rules adopted by the Board of Zoning Adjustment.
Pursuant to that authority the Zoning Administrator
may decide all cases which are routine in nature,
uncontested, that do not impact the character of the
neighborhood, are primarily brought about by recent
changes in the zoning ordinance or City initiated
development or construction that has resulted in the
creation of nonconforming structures or uses. The
specific types of decisions the Zoning Administrator
is authorized to make shall include:
(a) Change in the status of a nonconforming use to a
less intense use than that immediately preceding the
proposed use;
(b) Final review and approval on plans where the
Board has required that a final plan be submitted for
special approval, showing that all requirements
imposed by the Board in granting the original
approval have been complied with; and
(c) The granting of a variance in the very limited
instance wherein the applicant and the City are in
complete agreement regarding all issues, that the
spirit and intent of the zoning ordinance is satisfied
and that all criteria required statutorily for variance
have also been satisfied.
(3) The notice requirements established by the
ordinance, which are required before a hearing on a
variance, must still be satisfied by the Zoning
Administrator. However, in lieu of giving notice of a
time, date and place of a hearing, the Zoning
Administrator's notice shall provide for a time frame
within which all interested parties may submit their
input to the Zoning Administrator. All responses
received pursuant to the notice shall become a
permanent part of the file.
(4) A decision of the Zoning Administrator may be
appealed to the Board of Zoning Adjustments as
provided for in this chapter.
28-10-7 Special Exceptions.
(1) In enacting the zoning ordinance, the City
Council has given jurisdiction to the Board of Zoning
Adjustments to hear and decide certain specified
special exceptions to the provisions of the zoning
ordinance.
Where a zone boundary line divides a lot in single
ownership at the time of the passage of this
Ordinance, permit the extension of a use of building
stated on the portion of such lot which lies in the less
restricted zone into the more restricted zone,
provided that such extension shall be subject to all
regulations of the less restricted zone and shall
extend not more than one hundred (100) feet into the
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Board of Adjustments Chapter 10
Page 10-3
other portion of the lot in the more restricted zone.
To permit lot line adjustment, wherein such an
adjustment creates a lot which does not have the
required width of the zone in which the lot is located;
provided, the created nonconforming lot meets the
area requirements of the zone and the structure
placed on the lot meets all required site standards of
the zone; and furthermore, that before building
permits are issued for the nonconforming split lot, the
lot split shall be reviewed and approved by the
Community Development Department.
(2) The Board of Zoning Adjustments may hear and
decide special exceptions only if authorized to do so
by the zoning ordinance and based only on the
standards contained in the zoning ordinance.
28-10-8 Variances.
(1) Any person or entity desiring a waiver or
modification of the requirements of the zoning
ordinance as applied to a parcel of property that he
owns, leases, or in which he holds some other
beneficial interest may apply to the Board of Zoning
Adjustments for a variance from the terms of the
zoning ordinance.
(2)
(a) The Board of Zoning Adjustments may grant a
variance only if:
(i) Literal enforcement of the zoning ordinance
would cause an unreasonable hardship for the
applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general
purpose of the zoning ordinance;
(ii) There are special circumstances attached to the
property that do not generally apply to other
properties in the same district;
(iii) Granting the variance is essential to the
enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed
by other property in the same district;
(iv) The variance will not substantially affect the
general plan and will not be contrary to the public
interest; and
(v) The spirit of the zoning ordinance is observed and
substantial justice done.
(b)
(i) In determining whether or not enforcement of the
zoning ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship
under Subsection (2)(a), the Board of Zoning
Adjustments may not find an unreasonable hardship
unless the alleged hardship:
(A) is located on or associated with the property for
which the variance is sought; and
(B) Comes from circumstances peculiar to the
property, not from conditions that are general to the
neighborhood.
(ii) In determining whether or not enforcement of the
zoning ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship
under Subsection (2)(a), the Board of Zoning
Adjustments may not find an unreasonable hardship
if the hardship is self-imposed or economic.
(iii) In determining whether or not there are special
circumstances attached to the property under
Subsection (2)(a), the Board of Zoning Adjustments
may find that special circumstances exist only if the
special circumstances:
(A) relate to the hardship complained of; and
(B) deprive the property of privileges granted to other
properties in the same district.
(3) The applicant shall bear the burden of proving
that all of the conditions justifying a variance have
been met.
(4) Variances run with the land.
(5) The Board of Zoning Adjustments and any other
body may not grant use variances.
(6) In granting a variance, the Board of Zoning
Adjustments may impose additional requirements on
the applicant that will:
(a) mitigate any harmful affects of the variance; or
(b) serve the purpose of the standard or requirement
that is waived or modified.
28-10-9 Time for Filing Appeals. The applicant
shall file an appeal in writing within fifteen (15) days
after having received a determination from a City
official regarding the administration or interpretation
of the zoning ordinance. Said appeal shall be filed
with the office of the Community Development.
Failure to file within said fifteen (15) days shall bar
the applicant from a hearing before the Board of
Zoning Adjustments.
28-10-10 Time Limitation on Variances.
In the event the Board of Zoning Adjustments does
grant a variance in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter, alterations in accordance with the
variance must be activated within six months after
the date the variance is granted or the variance
becomes null and void. The time limit of the
variance may be extended an additional six months
by the Board of Zoning Adjustments, only if the
petitioner shows adequate cause to the Board that
circumstances necessitate a time extension.
28-10-11 Appeals of Board of Zoning
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Board of Adjustments Chapter 10
Page 10-4
Adjustments Decisions. Any person adversely
affected by any decision of a Board of Zoning
Adjustments may petition the District Court for a
review of the decision as provided by state law.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Establishment of Zones Chapter 11
Page
Chapter 11. Establishment of Zones
28-11-1 Purpose and Intent
28-11-2 Establishment of Zones
28-11-3 Boundaries of Zones
28-11-4 Rules Applicable Where Boundaries
Uncertain
28-11-1 Purpose and Intent. To provide zones
within the City of Clinton in which land uses shall be
limited as specified in this Ordinance; and to guide
the orderly physical growth, neighborhood
compatibility and community stability.
28-11-2 Establishment of Zones. Based on location,
topographic features, and other reasonable
considerations, the following zones are hereby
established:
Table 11.2.1
Agricultural Zone A-1
Agricultural Estates Zone A-E
PH 139
R-1-15 52
R-1-10
R-1-9 21
R-1-8
R-1-8a 25
Single-Family Residential
R-1-6 1
Multi-Family Residential R-M
Mobile Home Park Zone MHP
Neighborhood Commercial CP-1
Area Commercial Zone CP-2
Light Manufacturing Zone MP-1
Performance Zone PZ 18
28-11-3 Boundaries of Zones. The boundaries of
each of the said zones are hereby established as
described herein or as shown on the map entitled
"Zoning Map of Clinton" or as hereafter amended, a
copy of which is attached hereto, and all boundaries,
notations, and other data shown on said map are made
by this reference as much a part of this Ordinance as
if fully described and detailed herein. The said map
shall be filed in the custody of the City Recorder and
may be examined by the public subject to any
reasonable regulations established by the City
Recorder.
28-11-4 Rules Applicable Where Boundaries
Uncertain. Where uncertainty exists as to the
boundary of any zone, the following rules shall apply;
(1) Wherever the zone boundary is indicated as being
approximately upon the centerline of a street, alley or
block, or along a property line, then unless otherwise
definitely indicated on the map, the centerline to be
the boundary of such zone.
(2) Where the indicated boundary is approximately a
lot line, section line or quarter section line, said lot
line, section line or quarter section line shall be
construed to be the zone boundary unless otherwise
indicated.
(3) Where land has not been subdivided into lots
and/or blocks the zone boundary shall be determined
by the use of the scale measurements shown on the
map unless otherwise indicated.
(4) Where uncertainty continues to exist, the Board of
Adjustment shall interpret the map.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Agricultural Zone (A-1) Chapter 12
Page 12-1
Chapter 12. Agricultural Zone (A-1)
28-12-1 Purpose
28-12-2 Permitted Uses 134, 181, 182
28-12-3 Accessory Uses 134, 182
28-12-4 Conditional Uses 126, 134, 199
28-12-5 Minimum Lot Development Standards
28-12-1 Purpose. With the establishment of the A-1
Zone, the rural atmosphere of Clinton shall be
maintained in areas identified for the least intense
residential use.
28-12-2 Permitted Uses.134, 182
(1) Agriculture
(2) Churches, Synagogues and Temples
(3) Educational Institutions (Elementary and
Secondary, including associated grounds and athletic
and other facilities)
(4) Publicly-owned and operated recreation uses and
facilities; public buildings; public parks and
playgrounds.
(5) Raising, pasturing, and maintaining of not more
than the following animal or fowl units for family
food production or pleasure: 2 animal and 1 fowl unit
for the first acre, for each additional one-half acre 1
animal and 1 fowl unit, up to a maximum of 2 fowl
units.
(6) Seasonal summer pasturing or grazing of domestic
animals upon lots or property of 5 acres or more
during the period commencing April 1 and ending
October 15 the same year at a maximum density of
three head per acre and not to exceed 250 head of
livestock confined within the same fenced area.
(7) Seasonal winter feeding, pasturing, and
maintaining of domestic animals upon lots or
property of 5 acres or more during the period
commencing October 15 and ending April 15 of the
following year at a maximum density of six head per
acre and not to exceed 250 head of livestock confined
within the same fenced area.
(8) Single-Family Dwelling
(9) Immediate Family Dwelling Unit.
(10) Handicapped Residential Facilities IAW §10-9-
605 and this ordinance.134
(11) Household Pets126
(12) Garages, Accessory Buildings, Sheds, and
Carports, as defined in this Title, incidental to any
permitted use.199
(13) Residential facilities for elderly IAW §10-9-605
and this ordinance.
(14) Home Business 179
(15) Garage and Yard Sales 179
(16) Cemetery
(17) Sign - One nameplate and one identification sign
as per the Clinton City Sign Ordinance.
(18) Accessory buildings and use customarily
incidental to any permitted use.
(19) Commercial horse training and breeding facility
including track on a minimum of 5 acres of land.
(20) Equestrian Riding Academies.
(21) Temporary residences, renting by the day or
month.
(22) Temporary, on site, storage containers for
emergency construction of repair of residences, with
the following stipulations
(a) Must place on a hard surface
(b) Can only be present for three (3) months out of a
twelve (12) month period.
28-12-3 Conditional Uses.126, 134, 182, 199
(1) Animal Hospital or Clinic in a fully enclosed
building, including farm animals.
(2) Dog Kennel.
(3) Cattery.
(4) Golf Course.
(5) Private Recreation Clubs.
(6) Private stables; public stables on a minimum of 5
acres of land; privately owned and operated
recreational uses, grounds and facilities not operated
as a business and to which no admission charge is
made.
(7) Public Utility Substations.
(8) Bed and Breakfast.
(9) Municipal Wells, Reservoir, or Storage Tanks for
water. 198
(10) Above ground fuel storage tank
(11) Garages, Accessory Buildings, Sheds, and
Carports, as defined in this Title incidental to an
approved conditional use and approved during site
plan review.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Agricultural Zone (A-1) Chapter 12
Page 12-2
28-12-4 Lot Development Standards
(2) Width 125 feet
(1) Minimum lot area - 1 acre
Table 12.4.1
Front Major Street 35 feet
Other Street 30 feet
Garage/Carport
Detached
Same as
Dwelling
Side,
interior
Dwelling 10 feet
Non-Residential
Building
20 feet
Accessory
Garage/Carport
3 feet rated
structure
5 feet nonrated
structure
Detached Garage
/Carport
10 feet
Accessory Building 3 feet rated
structure
5 feet nonrated
structure
Accessory Building
Large Lot
3 feet rated
structure
5 feet non
rated
structure
Shed219 3 feet
Side,
street
Major Street 35 feet
Other Street 30 feet
Accessory
Garage/Carport
30 feet b
Detached Garage/
Carport
Same as
Dwelling
Accessory Building 30 feetb
Accessory Building
Large Lot
30 feetb
Shed219 3 feet
Rear Main Building 30 feet
Accessory Garage/
Carport
3 feet rated
structure
5 feet nonrated
structure a
Detached Garage/
Carport
Same as
Dwelling
Accessory Building 3 feet rated
structure
5 feet nonrated
structure a
Accessory Building
Large Lot
3 feet rated
structure
5 ft nonrated
structure a
Shed 3 feet
a Except ten (10) feet where building rears on the
side yard of adjacent corner lots
b These buildings shall not gain access from arterial
or sub arterial streets.
(4) Building Height:92, 169, 219
Table 12.4.2
Main Building Minimum 1 story
Maximum 2 ½ stories or
35 feet
Accessory Garage Minimum 12 feet
Maximum 25 feet
Detached Garage Minimum 12 feet
Maximum 25 feet
Accessory
Building
Minimum 12 feet
Maximum 25 feet
Accessory
Building Large Lot
Minimum 12 Feet
Maximum 35 feet
Shed Minimum N/A
Maximum 16 feet 183
(5) Distance from Dwelling:169, 219
Table 12.4.3
Accessory Garage Behind On Lot 10 feet
On Adjacent
Lot
20 feet
Detached Garage/
Carport
Side 10 feet
Accessory
Building
Behind 10 feet
Accessory
Building Large
Lot
On Lot 40 feet
Adjacent Lot 20 feet
Shed On Lot 6 feet
Adjacent Lot N/A
(6) Building Square Footage Requirement:72, 126, 169,
219
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Agricultural Zone (A-1) Chapter 12
Page 12-3
Table 12.4.4
Single Family Dwelling Unit
Footprint (minimum)
1200 b
Minimum Living Space
(minimum)
1250 b
Accessory Garage (maximum) 2000 a
Detached Garage (maximum) 2000 a
Accessory Building (maximum) 2000 a
Accessory Building Large Lot Unlimited a
Shed (maximum) 200 a
a The combined floor area of all accessory buildings
or other structures on a parcel or lot containing a
residential structure cannot exceed 10% of the gross
lot area.
b Applies to subdivisions approved after March
30,2005. For subdivisions approved prior to March
30, 2005, the Single Family Dwelling Unit Footprint
is 950 square feet and Minimum Living Space is 950
square feet for the A-1 zone.
(7) Garages, accessory buildings, sheds, carports and
distances from the property lines when associated
with a use that is not a dwelling will be evaluated
during a site plan review as established in §28-3-10.
Distances outlined above, for a dwelling, will be used
as a guide and where the use being evaluated is
adjacent to a lot with an existing dwelling the
distances outlined above will be followed.
Consideration for reducing distances during site plan
review will be based upon mitigation proposed to
reduce impact upon adjacent properties.
Historic Changes to Chapter (see chapter 24 for
details)
3, 181, 198, 199, 219
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Agricultural Estate Zone (A-E) Chapter 13
Page 13-1
Chapter 13. Agricultural Estate Zone
(A-E)
28-13-1 Purpose
28-13-2 Permitted Uses 134, 199
28-13-3 Accessory Uses 134, 199
28-13-4 Conditional Uses 126
28-13-5 Minimum Lot Development
Standards 169
28-13-1 Purpose. The purpose of the Agricultural
Estate Zone is to provide an acceptable buffer zone
between the rural agricultural areas and the more
intense residential areas within Clinton City.
28-13-2 Permitted Uses.134, 181, 182, 199
(1) Agriculture
(2) Single -Family Dwelling
(3) Publicly-owned and operated recreation uses and
facilities; public buildings; public parks and
playgrounds.
(4) Raising, pasturing, and maintaining of not more
than the following animal or fowl units for family
food production or pleasure: 1 animal and 1 fowl unit
for each one-half acre, for each additional one-half
acre, 1 animal and 1 fowl unit will be permitted.
(5) Handicapped Residential Facilities IAW §10-9-
605 and this ordinance.
(6) Household Pets.126
(7) Garages, Accessory Buildings, Sheds, and
Carports, as defined in this Title, incidental to any
permitted use.199
(8) Residential Facilities for Elderly IAW §10-9-605
and this ordinance.
(9) Immediate Family Dwelling Unit
(10) Home Business 179
(11) Garage and Yard Sales 179
(12) Cemetery
(13) Sign – One nameplate and identification sign in
accordance with the Clinton City Sign Ordinance.
(14) Educational Institution (Elementary and
Secondary, including associated grounds and athletic
and other facilities)
(15) Churches, Synagogues, and Temples
(16) Temporary residences, renting by the day or
month.
(17) Temporary, on site, storage containers for
emergency construction of repair of residences, with
the following stipulations
(a) Must place on a hard surface
(b) Can only be present for three (3) months out of a
twelve (12) month period.
(18) Seasonal summer pasturing or grazing of
domestic animals upon lots or property of 5 acres or
more during the period commencing April 1 and
ending October 15 the same year at a maximum
density of three head per acre and not to exceed 250
head of livestock confined within the same fenced
area.
(19) Seasonal winter feeding, pasturing, and
maintaining of domestic animals upon lots or
property of 5 acres or more during the period
commencing October 15 and ending April 15 of the
following year at a maximum density of six head per
acre and not to exceed 250 head of livestock confined
within the same fenced area.
28-13-3 Conditional Uses.126, 182, 198
(1) Animal
(2) Golf Course
(3) Public Utility Substation
(4) Bed and Breakfast
(5) Municipal Wells, Reservoir, and Storage Tanks
for water. 198
(6) Above ground fuel storage tank. 198
(7) Garages, Accessory Buildings, Sheds, and
Carports, as defined in this Title, incidental to an
approved conditional use and approved during site
plan review.199
28-13-4 Minimum Lot Development Standards.169,
219
(1) Area – 21,780 square feet
(2) Width - 110 feet
(3) Yard Setback:169
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Agricultural Estate Zone (A-E) Chapter 13
Page 13-2
Table 13.4.1219
Front Major Street 35 feet
Other Street 30 feet
Garage detached Same as
Dwelling
Side,
interior
Dwelling 10 feet
Non-Residential
Building
20 feet
Accessory Garage 3 feet rated
structure
5 Feet nonrated
structure
Detached Garage 10 feet
Accessory Building 3 feet rated
structure
5 feet nonrated
structure
Accessory Building
Large Lot
3 feet rated
structure
5 feet nonrated
structure
Shed 3 feet
Side,
street
Major Street 35 feet
Other Street 30 feet
Accessory Garage 30 feetb
Detached Garage Same as
Dwelling
Accessory Building 30 feetb
Accessory Building
Large Lot
30 feetb
Shed 3 feet
Rear Main Building 30 feet
Accessory Garage 3 feet rated
structure
5 feet nonrated
structure
Detached Garage Same as
dwelling
Accessory Building 3 feet rated
structure
5 feet nonrated
structure
Accessory Building
Large Lot
3 feet rated
structure
5 feet nonrated
structure
Shed 3 feet
a Except (10) feet where building rears on the side
yard of adjacent corner lots
b These buildings shall not gain access from a minor
arterial or principal arterial streets.
(4) Building Height:92, 169, 219
Table 13.4.2
Main Building Minimum 1 story
Maximum 2 ½ stories or 35
feet
Accessory Garage Minimum 12 feet
Maximum 25 feet
Detached Garage Minimum 12 feet
Maximum 25 feet
Accessory Building Minimum 12 feet
Maximum 25 feet
Accessory Building
Large Lot
Minimum 12 Feet
Maximum 35 feet
Shed Minimum N/A
Maximum 16 feet 183
(5) Distance from Dwelling:169, 199, 219
Table 13.4.3
Accessory Garage/
Carport
Behind On Lot 10 feet
On Adjacent
Lot
20 feet
Detached
Garage/Carport
Side 10 feet
Accessory
Building
Behind 10 feet
Accessory
Building Large
Lot
On Lot 40 feet
On Adjacent
Lot
20 feet
Shed219 On Lot 6 feet
On Adjacent
Lot
N/A
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Agricultural Estate Zone (A-E) Chapter 13
Page 13-3
(6) Building Square Footage Requirement:72, 126, 169,
219
Table 13.4.4
Single Family Dwelling Unit
Footprint (minimum)
1200 b
Minimum Living Space
(minimum)
1250 b
Accessory Garage (maximum) 2000 a
Detached Garage (maximum) 2000 a
Accessory Building (maximum) 2000 a
Accessory Building Large Lot Unlimited a
Shed (maximum) 219 200 a
a The combined floor area of all accessory buildings
or other structures on a parcel or lot containing a
residential structure cannot exceed 15% of the gross
lot area.
b Applies to subdivisions approved after March
30,2005. For subdivisions approved prior to March
30, 2005, the Single Family Dwelling Unit Footprint
is 950 square feet and Minimum Living Space is 950
square feet for the A-1 zone.
(7) Garages, accessory buildings, sheds, carports and
distances from the property lines when associated
with a use that is not a dwelling will be evaluated
during a site plan review as established in §28-3-10.
Distances outlined above, for a dwelling, will be used
as a guide and where the use being evaluated is
adjacent to a lot with an existing dwelling the
distances outlined above will be followed.
Consideration for reducing distances during site plan
review will be based upon mitigation proposed to
reduce impact upon adjacent properties.
Historic Changes to Chapter (see chapter 24 for
details)
3, 181, 198, 199, 219
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Residential, Single Family Chapter 14
Page 14-1
Chapter 14. Residential, Single Family
28-14-1 Purpose and Intent
28-14-2 Uses 169, 170, 181, 182,199
28-14-3 Site Development Standards 149,169
28-14-4 Averaging Standards
28-14-5 Special Provisions for R-1-6 Zone 1
28-14-6 Special Provisions for Development
Adjacent to the Performance Zone 123
28-14-1 Purpose and Intent. The purposes of the
R-1 Zones are to provide regulated areas for singlefamily
residential use at varied density levels and to
provide density buffers between existing Agricultural
Estate Zones and residential uses in the agricultural
zone. Included in these zones are provisions for a
wider choice of residential housing styles needing
varied lot sizes, through the use of conventional
subdivision designs, averaging of lot sizes and
frontages, while enhancing the advantages of
individual home ownership. It is not the intent that
these zones become areas for the keeping,
maintaining, feeding, etc. of animal or fowl units as
defined in this ordinance.
28-14-2 Uses. 169, 170, 181, 182, 199
(1) Permitted and conditional uses for each zone are
outlined in Table 14.2.
(2) All Conditional Uses shall be processed as
outlined in Chapter 5 of this ordinance.
28-14-3 Site Development Standards. 149, 169 Site
development standards for all R-1 Zones are outlined
in Table 14.3.
28-14-4 Averaging Standards. Subdivisions, where
averaging is permitted, developed within these zones
will be evaluated throughout the approval process
based upon the use of lot and width averaging in
respect to the intent and purpose of these zones as
stated herein, and the following guidelines:
(1) Corner lots are not to be included in any averages.
(2) Lot sizes will be interspersed throughout the
subdivision unless specific sizes concentrated within
one area are required for buffering. In the R-1-15
Zone a minimum of 50% of interior lots will meet the
95 foot frontage requirement.
(3) The averaging plan for a subdivision will be
approved during the preliminary plat approval
process and will not be changed without reevaluation
of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission.
In the R-1-15 Zone the accumulated average lot size
for the first and subsequent phases within the
subdivision shall not be lower than required.
28-14-5 Special Provisions for R-1-6 Zone. 1
(1) Minimum area of zone - 10 acres.
(2) The City may require park land dedication as
authorized by the Clinton City Municipal Code, Title
24 Chapter 1.6
28-14-6 Special Provisions for Development
Adjacent to the Performance Zone. 123
(1) Any subdivision developing next to a vacant
parcel located within the Performance Zone will
provide, as a minimum, a fifteen (15) foot buffer
easement and a six-foot high chain link fence
constructed to city standards next to the vacant land.
(2) The intent of this additional space is for it to be
utilized as a buffer with additional vegetation, to be
installed by the homeowner, it desired whenever the
vacant land is developed with a non-compatible use.
(3) The buffer easement will not be utilized for
structures of other use which would interfere with the
possible development of a landscape buffer. 125
(4) All setback requirements established in this
ordinance shall be measured from the buffer
easement and not from the property line.
(5) Buffer easements may be used in conjunction
with the public utility and drainage easement required
in the Clinton City Subdivision Ordinance.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Residential, Single Family Chapter 14
Page 14-2
TABLE 14.2 118, 198, 208 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
USES
R-1-6
R-1-8
R-1-8a 25
R-1-9 21, 24
R-1-10
R-1-15 52
P = Permitted C = Conditional N = Not Permitted A = Accessory 134
1. Agriculture P P P P P P
2. Single Family Dwelling
1. Site-built52 P P P P P P
2. Modular Structures52 P P P P P P
3. Manufactured Housing52 P P P P P P
4. Camper Trailer N N N N N N
5. Mobile Home N N N N N N
3. Household Pets P P P P P P
4. Garages, accessory buildings, sheds, carports and uses customarily
incidental to any permitted use.169, 199
P P P P P P
5. Public Building: public park, public recreation grounds and
associated buildings.
P P P P P P
6. Raising, pasturing, and maintaining of not more than the following
animal and fowl units for family food production or pleasure: 1
animal unit and 1 fowl unit for each one acre in the lot up to a
maximum of 5 animal and 2 fowl units.
P P P P P N
7. Residential Chickens (see § 28-2-2 ) Permitted only on lots 10,000
square feet and larger. (All chickens are registered at City) 170, 208
P P P P P P
8. Family Day Care Center 26 A A A A A A
9. Home Business 179 P P P P P P
10. Golf Course C C C C C C
11. Churches, Synagogues, and Temples 182 P P P P P P
12. Educational Institution (Elementary and Secondary, including
associated grounds and athletic and other facilities) 182
P P P P P P
13. Immediate Family Dwelling Unit P P P P P P
14. Public utility substation C C C C C C
15. Handicapped Residential Facilities IAW Utah Code § 10-9-610
through §10-9-604.134
P P P P P P
16. Residential Facilities for Elderly IAW Utah Code § 1-9-501 through
§10-9-504.134
P P P P P P
17. Municipal Water Wells, Reservoir, or Storage Tanks for water C C C C C C
18. Kennels, Private or Commercial N N N N N N
19. Garage and Yard Sales 179 P P P P P P
20. Cemetery P P P P P P
21. Sign – One nameplate or identification sign in accordance with the
Clinton City Sign Ordinance 182
P P P P P P
22. Bed and Breakfast 182 P P P P P P
23. Temporary residences renting by the day or week 182 P P P P P P
24. Temporary on site storage containers for emergency construction or
repair of residences, with the following stipulations: 182
a. Must be placed on a hard surface
b. Can only be present for 3 months out of a 12 month period
P P P P P P
25. Garages, accessory buildings, carports uses customarily incidental to
any non-residential use. 169, 199
Structures will be evaluated along
with application for primary use
when evaluating a site plan as
established in §28-3-10
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Residential, Single Family Chapter 14
Page 14-3
TABLE 14.3 118, 183, 199, 219 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS R-1-6 R-1-8 R-1-8a 25 R-1-9 21, 24 R-1-10 R-1-15 52
1. Lot Area (square feet)
1. Averaging Allowed No No No Yes No Yes
2. Minimum Area 6,000 8,000 8,000 7,000 10,000 11,000
3. Maximum Area 149, j n/a n/a n/a n/a n/a 22,100
4. Minimum Average Area n/a n/a n/a 9,000 n/a 15,000
5. Corner Lot Minimum Area 6,000 8,000 8,000 9,000 10,000 15,000
2. Minimum Lot Frontage (feet) 15
1. Corner Width (feet) 70 80 80 80 85 95
2. Interior Width
1. Averaging Allowed a No Yes Yes Yes Yes Yes
2. Minimum Average n/a 70 70 70 85 95
3. Minimum Width 65 60 60 60 75 75
3. Minimum Yard Setbacks
1. Front
Main Street 35 35 35 35 35 35
Other Street 20 30 25 30 30 30
2. Side 169
Interior Lot 8/10 8/10 5/8 8/10 10/10 10/10
Facing Main Street 35 35 35 35 35 35
Facing Other Street 20 20 20 20 20 20
Detached Garages Distances are the same as exist for a dwelling
Accessory Building Side Yard
Interior
3’ rated structure, 5’ non rated structure
Accessory Building Side Yard
facing a Street
20 20 20 20 20 20
Shed199 3 3 3 3 3 3
3. Rear 169, 199
Main Building and Detached
Garages
25 25 25 25 30 30
Main Building Main Street and
Detached Garages
35 35 35 35 35 35
Accessory buildings, and sheds 3 3 3 3 3 3
Accessory Building Side Yard
facing a Street
20 20 20 20 20 20
Shed 199 3 3 3 3 3 3
4. Building Height
1. Main Building
Minimum Stories 1 1 1 1 1 1
Maximum Stories 2½ 2½ 2½ 2½ 2½ 2½
Maximum Height (feet) 35 35 35 35 35 35
2. Other Structures 169
All Maximum Stories 1 1 1 1 1 1
Accessory
Building
Minimum Height (feet) 12 12 12 12 12 12
Maximum Height (feet) f 25 25 25 25 25 25
Accessory
Building
Large Lot
Minimum Height (feet) 12 12 12 12 12 12
Maximum Height (feet) f 30 30 30 30 35 35
Shed Minimum Height (feet) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A
Maximum Height (feet) 16 16 16 16 16 16
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Residential, Single Family Chapter 14
Page 14-4
TABLE 14.3 118, 183, 199, 219 RESIDENTIAL ZONES
SITE DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS R-1-6 R-1-8 R-1-8a 25 R-1-9 21, 24 R-1-10 R-1-15 52
5. Dwelling Unit Footprint (square feet)125
1. Single Family Dwelling Unit
Footprint 67
950 950 950 1080 + 1250 i 1250 i
2. Minimum Living Space 950 950 950 1080 i 1250 i 1250 i
3. Maximum Sizes for Other Enclosed
Structures 169
Garage Accessory 850 1,200 1,200 1,500 g g
Garage Detached 850 1,200 1,200 1,500 g g
Accessory Building 850 1,200 1,200 1,500 g g
Accessory Building Large Lot 1000 1,300 1,400 1,500 g g
Shed 200 200 200 200 200 200
6. Rear Yard Impervious Surface Ratio 9, h 35% 25% 25% 25% 25% 25%
7. Garages, accessory buildings, sheds, carports and distances from the property lines when associated with a use that is
not a dwelling will be evaluated during a site plan review as established in §28-3-10. Distances outlined above, for a
dwelling, will be used as a guide and where the use being evaluated is adjacent to a lot with an existing dwelling the
distances outlined above will be followed. Consideration for reducing distances during site plan review will be based
upon mitigation proposed to reduce impact upon adjacent properties.
a Corner lots not to be included in averaging.
b Reserved
c Reserved
d Reserved
e Reserved
f Height of an accessory building on a residential lot shall not be higher than the primary structure on the lot unless located a
minimum of ten (10) feet behind the primary structure on the lot.
g The accessory building size limited by the overall impervious surface ratio of the rear yard.
h Includes the combined square footage of all accessory buildings on a single lot. Refer to Chapter 2 Definitions for
Impervious Surface Ratio, Residential Rear Yard and Yard, Rear. 219
i Applies to subdivisions approved for after March 30, 2005. For subdivisions approved prior to March 30, 2005, the Single
Dwelling Unit Footprint is 950 square feet and minimum living space is 950 feet for all “R” zones. 126
Historic Changes to Chapter (see chapter 24 for
details) 15, 21, 24, 25, 26, 52, 67, 118, 125, 149,
169, 170, 179, 182,183, 199, 219
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Residential, Multi-Family (RM) Chapter 15
Page 15-1
Chapter 15. Residential, Multi-Family
(R-M)
28-15-1 Purpose and Intent
28-15-2 Permitted Uses
28-15-3 Conditional Uses
28-15-4 Site Development Standards
28-15-1 Purpose and Intent. To provide
neighborhoods in Clinton City with multi-family
dwellings of moderate density.
28-15-2 Permitted Uses. 182, 193, 199, 205
(1) Agriculture
(2) One, two, three, four, five, and six-family
dwellings.
(3) Public-owned and operated uses and facilities;
public buildings; public parks and playgrounds.
(4) Household Pets
(5) Garages, Accessory Buildings, Sheds, and
Carports, as defined in this Title, incidental to any
permitted use.
(6) Churches, Synagogues, and Temples
(7) Cemetery
(8) Sign - One nameplate or identification sign in
accordance with the Clinton City Sign Ordinance.
(9) Educational Institution (Elementary and
Secondary, including associated grounds and athletic
and other facilities)
(10) Temporary on site storage containers for
emergency construction or repair of residences, with
the following stipulations:
(a) Must be placed on a hard surface
(b) Can only be present for 3 months out of a 12
month period.
(11) Home Office
28-15-3 Conditional Uses. 134, 182, 199
(1) Golf Course
(2) Public Utility Substations
(3) Garages, Accessory Buildings, Sheds, and
Carports, as defined in this Title, approved during
site plan review and incidental to an approved
conditional use.199
28-15-4 Site Development Standards. Site
development standards shall be in accordance with
Table 15.4. 199
Table 15.4 NUMBER OF DWELLINGS
MINIMUMS 1 2 3 4 5 6
Lot Area Square Feet 6,000 7,500 10,750 14,500 16,500 21,500
Lot Width 60 75 85 85 90 100
Yard Set-
Backs a
Front 20 30 30 30 30 30
Side,
(interior)
Dwelling 10 20 20 20 20 20
Other Main
Building
10 20 20 20 20 20
Side,
(exterior)
Major
Streets
30 feet
Other Streets 20 feet
Rear 25 feet
Garages, Accessory
Buildings, Sheds, and
Carports
Distances from the property lines will be evaluated during a site plan
review as established in §28-3-10. Distances outlined above, for a
dwelling, and in the “R” Zones for the type of structure will be used as a
guide. Consideration for reducing distances during site plan review will
be based upon mitigation proposed to reduce impact upon adjacent
properties.
Building
Height 169
Minimum 1 story
Maximum 2 ½ story or 35 feet
Accessory Building Minimum 12 feet, Maximum 20 feet, Maximum 1 story
Shed Minimum 6 feet, Maximum 16 feet, Maximum 1 story
Building
Size 169
Dwelling 850 square feet minimum except townhouses and other similar attached 2-
story units may have a ground floor minimum of 550 square feet
Accessory Building 600 square feet maximum per unit.
Shed 200 square feet maximum individual structure per unit.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Residential, Multi-Family (RM) Chapter 15
Page 15-2
a Exception: Front setback from any Major Street shall be a minimum of 35 feet.
Historic Changes to Chapter (see chapter 24 for details) 134, 169, 182 199, 205
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Reserved Chapter 16
Page 16-1
Chapter 16. Reserved 180
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Planned Commercial Zones (CP1 And CP2) Chapter 17
Page
Chapter 17. Planned Commercial Zones (CP1
and CP2)
28-17-1 Purpose and Intent
28-17-2 Site Development Standards
28-17-3 Sign Regulations
28-17-4 Special Regulations
28-17-5 Parking Regulations
28-17-6 General Regulations
28-17-7 Procedure
28-17-8 Time Limitation
28-17-9 Application to Existing Commercial
District
28-17-10 Uses 38
28-17-1 Purpose and Intent. The intent of the
Planned Commercial Zones is to permit the
establishment of a well-designed complex of retail
commercial facilities for a neighborhood or
community which will provide goods and services for
the people to be served, minimize traffic congestion
on public streets in the vicinity and which shall best
fit the general environment and land use pattern of the
area to be served. The protective standards contained
in this Chapter are intended to minimize any adverse
effect of the Planned Commercial Zone on nearby
property values by achieving maximum compatible
integration of land uses, by preserving the aesthetic
qualities of the area, and to provide for safe and
efficient use of the Planned Commercial Zone itself.
28-17-2 Site Development Standards. Site
development standards shall be known as Table 17.2.
Table 17.2 CP-1 CP-2
Minimum Lot Area None None
Minimum Lot Width None None
Front 0 0
Side None except 10 feet
adjacent to a
residential boundary
Side
facing
street on
corner lot
0 0
Minimum
yard setback
Rear None, except 10 feet
where building rears
on a residential zone.
Building Height Minimum and
maximum subject to
Clinton City Fire
Safety Capabilities.
Maximum Lot Coverage Not over 6 0% of lot
area by buildings or
accessory buildings.
28-17-3 Sign Regulations. The height, size, use,
maintenance and location of signs shall comply with
the Clinton City Sign Ordinance.
28-17-4 Special Regulations.
(1) Hereinafter specified permitted and conditional
uses shall be allowed only when in compliance with
the following conditions:
(a) All manufacturing shall be done within a
completely enclosed building.
(b) All uses shall be free from objection because of
odor, dust, smoke, noise or obnoxious gases.
(c) In the CP-1 Neighborhood Commercial Zone, no
entertainment except recorded music shall be
permitted in cafes, cafeterias, ice cream parlors, or
restaurants.
(2) A car wash shall be allowed subject to the
following restrictions:
(a) Operation or use is forbidden between the hours of
10 p.m. and 6 a.m. on the following morning.
(b) There shall not be more than four washing bays
for a manual spray car wash.
(c) Off-street vehicle storage required as follows:
(i) One bay car wash, four spaces in the approach
lane.
(ii) Two bay car wash, three spaces in the approach
lane for each wash bay.
(iii) Three or more bay car wash, two spaces in the
approach lane for each wash bay.
(d) Where a planned commercial development adjoins
any lot in any residential zone, there shall be provided
and maintained along such property line a non seethrough
type fence of not less than six feet in height,
provided, however, that such fence shall be three and
one-half feet in height along the property line which
bounds the front yard of adjoining residential lots.
28-17-5 Parking Regulations. Off-street parking
facilities shall be in accordance with Chapter 4,
"Parking and Loading Space" of this Ordinance.
28-17-6 General Regulations.
(1) A CP Zone may be established where the Planning
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Planned Commercial Zones (CP1 And CP2) Chapter 17
Page 17-2
Planning Commission determines that commercial
development on separate adjoining properties should
be coordinated to form a physically unified
commercial facility which will be compatible with the
surrounding land uses. At the time a CP zone is
established and before building permits are issued,
deed restrictions on the property or properties covered
under the zone change shall be filed by the applicant
or owners of subject property with the County
Recorder and shall provide that development take
place on such property or properties in accordance
with a final site development plan on file with the
City Recorder.
(2) A CP zone shall not be established upon a tract of
land which would contain a non-conforming use after
the passage of such amendment to the Zoning
Ordinance unless the development planned for the
tract includes the elimination of the non-conforming
use or its integration into the planned development.
(3) The location of the CP zone shall have an
acceptable relationship to and further the purposes of
the Master Plan for the City as determined by the
Planning Commission.
28-17-7 Procedure.
(1) A development plan for the commercial center
showing a unified and organized arrangement of
building and structures and their proposed uses, off
street parking, internal and external traffic circulation,
and service facilities, landscaping plans and sketches
demonstrating the design and character of the
proposed development shall be submitted to the
Planning Commission. The developer shall submit all
evidence deemed necessary by the City Council
and/or Planning Commission of his ability to
undertake the proposed project.
(2) Permitted uses specified in this Chapter require
site plan review by the Planning Commission of
Clinton City before building permits are issued for a
respective use. A copy of the approved site plan will
be forwarded to the Clinton City Council for their
information. Conditional uses shall be subject to
Chapter 5, "Conditional Uses", of this Ordinance.
(3) The Planning Commission shall recommend
approval or denial of the zoning petition and
preliminary development plan to the City Council.
The recommendation of the Planning Commission
may contain conditions, limitations or amendments to
the preliminary development plan to insure that the
Planned Commercial Development is integrated into
its surroundings and serves the public interest to the
greatest extent possible. The Planning Commission
may also recommend a reasonable amount to be
provided by the developer by cash deposit or bond, to
insure the completion of the landscaping for the entire
plan or phase thereof.
(4) The Planning Commission shall concurrently
approve a preliminary development plan, the site plan,
the amount required to insure completion of the
landscaping together with whatever amendments,
conditions, or requirements as it may deem necessary
to secure the purpose of this Chapter.
(5) Building permit issuance shall follow the Planning
Commission approval. Construction shall commence
in accordance with said final plan, and no changes
shall be made to the final plan during the course of
construction without first obtaining approval of the
Planning Commission. Copies of the approved final
plan shall be kept on file in the offices of the Planning
Commission, Building Inspector, and County
Recorder, and amendments or changes which may be
subsequently approved shall be added to the final
plans.
28-17-8 Time Limitation.
(1) A building permit shall be secured and
construction begun in accordance with the approved
final development plan within eighteen months from
the effective date of the approval of said plans.
Application may be made for not more than six
months extension of the time limit for commencement
of construction. Use and building permits shall be
issued only for those uses and buildings indicated on
the approved final development plan.
(2) In the event that construction is not started or
completed within the specified time limits, the
Planning Commission shall review the progress which
has taken place and, if deemed necessary revoke the
plan approval, permits, and/or use cash or surety
bonds to complete the landscaping of the property.
(3) All construction authorized in the approved final
development plan shall be completed within three
years of the date construction was commenced. A
plan for stage development which will require more
time than the limits contained herein may be approved
by the City Council, after recommendation by the
Planning Commission.
28-17-9 Application to Existing Commercial
District. In the case of existing Commercial Districts,
the Planning Commission and City Council may
proceed to rezone such districts to an equivalent
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Planned Commercial Zones (CP1 And CP2) Chapter 17
Page
Planned Commercial Zone without the requirements
of a preliminary development plan and other
necessary information; but, after being so zoned to a
Planned Commercial Zone, a preliminary and final
development plan of each development shall be
submitted in accordance with the provisions of this
Chapter prior to the issuance of building permits,
provided, however, that improvements already in
existence at the time of rezoning shall not be affected.
28-17-10 Uses. 38 In the following list of
uses, those designated in any zone as "P" will be a
permitted use. Uses designated "C" will be allowed
only when authorized by a conditional use permit
obtained as provided in Chapter 5 of this Zoning
Ordinance. Uses designated "N" are not permitted in
the zone.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Planned Commercial Zones (CP1 And CP2) Chapter 17
Page 17-4
TABLE 17.10 CP-1 CP-2
1. Above ground storage of flammable, combustible liquids29
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to a permitted use
Accounting Office
Air Conditioning, sales and service
Altering, pressing, and repairing of wearing apparel
Ambulance Base Stations
Amusement enterprises
Animal hospital, small animals only and provided conducted within
completely enclosed building
Antique, import or souvenir shop
Assisted Living Center27
Archery shop and range, provided conducted within completely enclosed
building
Art and artists supply store
Athletic and sporting goods store, excluding sale or repair of motor
vehicles, motor boats or motors
Athletic and sporting goods store, including sale or repair of motor
vehicles, motor boats or motors
Athletic Club
Auction establishment
Automobile parts sales
Automobile repair including paint, body and fender, brake, muffler,
upholstery or transmission work, provided conducted within completely
enclosed building.
Automobile, new or used, sales and service
Awning sales and service
N
P
P
N
P
N
C
N
C
C
N
N
C
N
C
N
N
N
N
N
C
P
P
P
P
P
C
C
P
N
P
P
P
C
P
P
P
C
C
P
2. Baby formula service
Bakery manufacture limited to goods retailed on premises
Bakery goods manufacturing
Bank or financial institution
Barber shop
Beauty culture school
Beauty parlor for cats and dogs
Beauty shop
Beer parlor, sale of draft beer
Bicycle sales and service
Billiard parlor
Blueprinting or Photostatting
Boarding house
Boat sales and service
Bookbinding
Book store, retail
Bottling and distribution plant
Bowling alley
Boxing arena
Building materials sales or yard
Bus terminal
P
P
N
P
P
N
N
P
N
P
N
N
N
N
N
P
N
N
N
N
N
P
P
C
P
P
P
P
P
C
P
P
P
C
C
P
P
P
C
C
C
P
3. Cafe or cafeteria
Camera store
Candy manufacture
Candy store, confectionery
P
P
N
P
P
P
C
P
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Planned Commercial Zones (CP1 And CP2) Chapter 17
Page 17-5
TABLE 17.10 CP-1 CP-2
Carbonated water sales
Carpenter and cabinet shop
Carpet and rug cleaning
Carpet, rug and linoleum service
Car wash, laundry type
Car wash, manual spray
Cash register sales and service
Catering establishment
China, crystal and silver shop
Christmas tree sales
Church
Church, temporary revival
Circus, carnival or other transient amusement
Cleaning and dyeing establishment
Clinics, medical or dental
Clothing and accessory store
Coal and fuel sales office
College or university
Communication equipment building
Contractor shop, provided work conducted within a completely enclosed
building
Convenience store with auto fuel sales
Costume rental
Catalog/mail order sales distribution
N
N
N
N
N
C
N
N
C
P
P
N
N
N
P
C
N
P
N
N
C
C
C
P
C
P
P
C
P
P
P
P
P
C
C
C
P
P
P
C
C
P
C
P
P
P
4. Dairy products store
Dance hall
Data processing service and supplies
Day care center
Delicatessen
Dental Office
Department store
Detective agency
Diaper service, including cleaning
Doughnut shop
Drapery and curtain store
Drive-it-yourself agency or business
Drug store
Dry cleaning establishment
Dry cleaning pickup station
Dwelling, single family to be used by employees of businesses in
conjunction with any commercial establishment, said dwelling unit to be a part
of the business structure.
P
N
C
P
P
P
N
P
C
P
C
N
P
C
P
C
P
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
C
5. Educational institution
Egg and poultry store, providing no live bird slaughtering or eviscerating
permitted
Electrical and heating appliances and fixtures sales and service
Electronic equipment sales and service
Employment agency
Express and transfer service
C
P
N
N
N
N
P
P
C
P
P
C
6. Fabric and textile store
Farm implement sales
Feed packaging and processing facility, contained wholly within a
building51
P
N
N
P
C
C
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Planned Commercial Zones (CP1 And CP2) Chapter 17
Page 17-6
TABLE 17.10 CP-1 CP-2
Film exchange establishment
Five and ten cent store
Fix-it shop
Florist shop
Frozen food lockers, incidental to a grocery store or food business
Fruit store or stand
Furniture sales and repair
Fur apparel sales, storage or repair
P
P
N
P
P
P
N
N
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
7. Garden supplies and plant materials sales
Gift store
Glass sales and service
Government buildings or uses, nonindustrial
Greenhouse and nursery; soil and lawn service
Grocery store
Gunsmith
Gymnasium
P
P
C
C
N
P
N
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
C
8. Hardware stores
Health club
Health food store
Heliport
Hobby and crafts store
Hospital
Hospital supplies
Hotel
House cleaning and repair
House equipment display
Household appliance sales and incidental service
Household pets, dwelling units only
C
C
P
N
P
N
N
N
N
N
N
P
P
P
P
C
P
C
P
C
P
P
C
P
9. Ice cream manufacture
Ice cream parlor
Ice manufacture and storage
Ice store or vending station
Insulation sales
Insurance agency
Interior decorator and designing establishment
N
P
N
P
N
C
N
C
P
C
P
P
P
P
10. Janitor service and supply
Jewelry store sales and service
N
P
P
P
11. Knitting mills N C
12. Laboratory, dental or medical
Laundry or dry cleaners, laundromat-type
Laundry or dry cleaning establishment
Launderette or laundromat
Lawn mower sales and service
Leather goods, sales and service
Legal office
Library
Linen store
Linen supply service
Liquor store
Locksmith
Lodge or social hall
Lodging house
Lounge
C
P
N
P
N
N
C
P
N
N
N
C
N
N
N
P
P
C
P
C
P
P
P
P
C
C
P
P
C
C
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Planned Commercial Zones (CP1 And CP2) Chapter 17
Page 17-7
TABLE 17.10 CP-1 CP-2
Luggage store
Lumber yard
N
N
P
C
13. Machine shop operations incidental to any use permitted in C-2 district
Manufacture of goods retailed on premises
Meat, fish and seafood store
Medical office
Millinery
Miniature golf
Mobile home sales lot and service
Monument works and sales
Mortuary
Motel
Motorboat sales and service
Motorcycle and motor scooters sales and service
Museum
Music store
N
N
P
P
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
C
N
C
C
P
P
P
C
C
P
C
C
C
C
P
P
14. Needlework, embroidery or knitting store
Newsstand
Night club or social club
Notions store
Novelty store
Nursery school
P
P
N
P
C
C
P
P
C
P
P
P
15. Office in which goods or merchandise are not commercially created,
exchanged or sold
Office supply
Office machines sales and service
Oil burner shop
Optometrist, optician or oculist
Ornamental iron sales or repair
N
N
N
N
P
N
P
P
P
C
P
C
16. Paint or wallpaper store
Paperhanger shop
Park and playground
Parking lot or garage for passenger automobiles
Pawnshop
Penny arcade
Pest control and extermination
Pet and pet supply store
Pharmacy
Photographic supplies
Photo studio
Physician or surgeon
Pie manufacture
Plumbing shop
Pony ring, without stables
Pool hall
Popcorn or nut shop
Post office
Printing, lithographing, publishing, or reproductions sales and services
Professional office
Public utilities substation
N
N
P
C
N
N
N
C
P
P
P
P
N
N
N
N
P
C
N
C
C
P
P
P
C
C
C
P
P
P
P
P
P
P
C
C
C
P
P
C
P
C
17. Reserved for future use
18. Radio, television and video tape and film sales and service
Radio, television or FM broadcasting station
C
N
P
P
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Planned Commercial Zones (CP1 And CP2) Chapter 17
Page 17-8
TABLE 17.10 CP-1 CP-2
Real estate agency
Reception center or wedding chapel
Recreation center
Recreational vehicle storage
Rental agency for home and garden equipment
Restaurant
Restaurant, drive-in
Roller skating rink
Roofing sales or shop
C
C
C
C
N
P
C
N
N
P
C
C
C
P
P
P
C
P
19. Second-hand store
Seed and feed store, retail
Service station, automobile excluding painting, body and fender and
upholstery work
Service station automobile with rotating brush car wash as accessory use
Sewing machine sale and service
Sheet metal shop and re-tinning, provided all operations conducted within
completely enclosed building
Shoe repair or shoe shine shop
Shoe store
Shooting gallery
Signs IAW Clinton City Sign Ordinance
Supermarket
Swimming pool, public or commercial
N
N
P
N
P
N
P
N
N
P
C
C
C
P
C
P
C
P
P
C
P
P
20. Tailor shop
Tavern
Taxi cab stand
Taxidermist
Telegraph office
Temporary building for uses incidental to construction work. Such
buildings shall be removed upon the completion of the construction work.
Theater, indoor
Theater, outdoor
Tobacco shop
Tool design (precision) repair and maintenance
Toy store, retail
Trade or industrial school
Trailer sales and service
Travel agency
Truck terminal
C
N
N
N
P
P
N
N
P
N
P
N
N
P
N
P
C
P
P
P
P
P
C
P
C
P
C
C
P
C
21. Upholstery shop
Used car lot
C
N
P
C
22. Variety store
Vegetable store or stand
Ventilating equipment sales and service
Video arcade
Video rental/sales
P
P
N
C
P
P
P
C
C
P
23. Water conditioning supply sale
Warehouse storage
Weather stripping shop
Welding shop
Wholesale business
Window washing establishment
N
N
N
N
C
N
P
C
P
C
P
P
24. Any commercial use not listed above shall be assumed not permitted within the corporate limits of
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Planned Commercial Zones (CP1 And CP2) Chapter 17
Page 17-9
TABLE 17.10 CP-1 CP-2
Clinton City unless an amendment is made to this Ordinance to permit that use.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Light Manufacturing (MP-1) Chapter 18
Page 18-1
Chapter 18. Light Manufacturing (MP-1)
28-18-1 Purpose and Intent
28-18-2 Site Development Standards
28-18-3 Site Plan Review Required
28-18-4 Special Provisions 149
28-18-5 Permitted Uses
28-18-6 Conditional Uses
28-18-7 Accessory Uses
28-18-8 Sign Regulations
28-18-9 Bufferyards
28-18-10 Bufferyard Requirements
28-18-11 Use of Bufferyards
28-18-12 Contractual Reduction of Bufferyard
Abutting Vacant Land
28-18-1 Purpose and Intent. The following district
is hereby established primarily to accommodate
enterprises engaged in the light manufacturing and its
associated uses.
28-18-2 Site Development Standards. Site
Development Standards shall be known as Table
18.2.
Table 18.2
Minimum Lot Area 6000 sq.
ft.
Minimum Lot Width 60 ft.
Front 40 ft.
Interior None except 20 feet
when adjacent to a
zone boundary
Major
Street
30 feet
Side
Exterior
Other
Street
20 feet
Rear None except 20 feet when
building rears on a zone
boundary, this does not include
any required bufferyard.
Building Minimum 1 story
Height a Maximum 35 feet
Minimum
Yard
Setback
Lot Coverage Not including required
buffers, the minimum
landscape area of a lot
is 10%
a Buildings on lots which rear on a zone boundary
shall not have a structure taller than that allowed in
the adjoining zone
28-18-3 Site Plan Review Required. Uses specified
in this chapter require site plan review by the
Planning Commission of Clinton City before building
permits are issued for a respective use. Additionally,
Conditional Uses are regulated by Chapter 5 of this
Ordinance.
28-18-4 Special Provisions. 149
(1) Containment: All activities and uses listed herein
which are manufacturing in nature, shall be
performed only within completely enclosed
buildings.
(2) Emissions: All uses shall be free from
objectionable appearance, odor, dust, noise, and all
premises kept free from refuse and debris as
determined by the Planning Commission and
Community Development Department. All
operations shall comply with the State Division of
Air Quality for stationary sources, all emissions,
except steam shall not be visible.
(3) Noise: Table 18.4.1 establishes the maximum
permissible noise levels for permitted and conditional
uses within the district. Measurements shall be taken
at the boundary line of the lot where the use is
located, and, as indicated, the maximum permissible
noise levels very according to the zoning of the lot
adjacent to the lot on which the MP classification use
is located.
Table 18.4.1 Table of Maximum
Permitted Sound Levels,
dB(A)a
Zoning of Lot
Adjacent to a MP Use
6 a.m.-11
p.m.
7 p.m.-7 a.m.
Residential,
Agricultural, &
PRUD
55 dB (A) 50 dB (A)
Commercial 60 dB (A) 55 dB (A)
Manufacturing 80 dB (A) 75 dB (A)
a A decibel is a measure of a unit of sound pressure.
Since sound waves having the same decibel level
"sound" louder or softer to the human ear depending
upon the frequency of the sound wave in cycles-persecond
(i.e., whether the pitch of the sound is high or
low) an A-weighted filter constructed in accordance
with the specifications of the American national
Standards Institute, which automatically takes
account of the varying effect on the human ear of
different pitches, shall be used on any sound level
meter taking measurements required by this section.
All measurements are expressed in dB(A) to reflect
the use of the A-weighted filter.
(4) Vibration:
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Light Manufacturing (MP-1) Chapter 18
Page 18-2
(a) No permitted or conditional use may generate any
ground-transmitted vibration that is perceptible to the
human sense of touch measured at:
(b) The outside boundary of the immediate space
occupied by the enterprise generating the vibration if
the enterprise is one of several located on a lot.
(i) The lot line if the enterprise generating the
vibration is the only enterprise located on a lot.
(ii) Vibrations resulting from temporary construction
activity that occurs between 7 a.m. and 7 p.m. shall
be exempt from the requirements of this section.
(5) Odors:
(a) For the purpose of this section, the "odor
threshold" is defined as the minimum concentration
in air of a gas, vapor, or particulate matter that can be
detected by the olfactory systems of a panel of
healthy observers.
(b) No permitted or conditional use in the MP-1
District may generate any odor that reaches the odor
threshold, measured at:
(i) The outside boundary of the immediate space
occupied by the enterprise generating the odor if the
enterprise is one of several located on a lot.
(ii) The lot line if the enterprise generating the odor is
the only enterprise located on a lot.
(6) Air Pollution:
(a) Any permitted or conditional use that emits any
"air contaminant" as defined in the state statutes shall
comply with applicable state standards concerning air
pollution, as set forth in the Air Conservation Act
§19-2-101 Utah Code Unannotated.
(b) No use shall be permitted with respect to
development or operation until the State Air Quality
Board has certified to Clinton City that the
appropriate state permits have been received by the
developer, or that the developer will be eligible to
receive such permits and that the development is
otherwise in compliance with air pollution laws.
(7) Disposal of Liquid Wastes:
(a) No permitted or conditional use may discharge
any waste contrary to the provisions of Utah Law
governing discharges of radiological, chemical, or
biological wastes into surface or subsurface waters.
(b) Or, discharge into the city sewage system any
waste that cannot be adequately treated by the North
Davis County Sewer District.
(c) No use shall be permitted with respect to
development or operation until the North Davis
County Sewer District has certified to Clinton City
that the appropriate District permits have been
received by the developer, or that the developer will
be eligible to receive such permits and that the
development is otherwise in compliance with District
standards.
(8) Water consumption: No permitted or conditional
use that requires for its operation a supply of treated
culinary water shall be permitted with respect to
development or operation until the City has certified
the results of the demands upon the city system.
(9) Electrical Disturbance or Interference:
(a) No permitted or conditional use may create any
electrical disturbance that adversely affects any
operations or equipment other than those of the
creator of such disturbance.
(b) Or, otherwise cause, create, or contribute to the
interference with electronic signals (including
television and radio broadcasting transmissions) to
the extent that the operation of any equipment not
owned by the creator of such disturbance is adversely
affected.
(10) Landscaping Requirements. 149
See Section 3.20 and 4.18 for details
(11) On Site Exterior Lighting Standards
(a) PURPOSE:
(i) The purpose of this section is to regulate the spillover
of light and glare on operators of motor
vehicles, pedestrians, and land uses in the proximity
of the light source. With respect to motor vehicles in
particular, safety considerations from the basis of the
regulations contained herein. In other cases, both the
nuisance and hazard aspects of glare are regulated.
This section is not intended to apply to public street
lighting.
(b) DEFINITIONS:
(i) “Candlepower”: the amount of light that will
illuminate a surface one (1) foot distant from a light
source to an intensity of one (1) foot-candle.
Maximum (peak) candlepower is the largest amount
of candlepower emitted by any lamp, light source, or
luminaire.
(ii) “Cutoff”: The point at which all light rays emitted
by a lamp, light source, or luminaire are completely
eliminated (cutoff) at a specific angle above the
ground.
(iii) “Cutoff Angle”: the angle formed by a line
drawn from the direction of light rays at the light
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Light Manufacturing (MP-1) Chapter 18
Page 18-3
source and line perpendicular to the ground from the
light source, above which no light is emitted.
(iv) “Cutoff-type Luminaire”: a luminaire with
elements such as shields, reflectors, or refractor
panels which direct and cut off the light at a cutoff
angle that is less than ninety (90) degrees.
(v) “Foot-candle”: a unit of illumination produced on
a surface, all points of which are one (1) foot from a
uniform point source of one (1) candle.
(vi) Glare: the brightness of a light source which
causes eye discomfort.
(vii) Luminaire: a complete lighting unit consisting
of a light source and all necessary mechanical,
electrical, and decorative parts.
(viii) “Maximum Permitted Illumination”: The
maximum illumination measured in foot-candles at
the interior bufferyard line at ground level in
accordance with the standards of Subsection (3)
below.
(c) The following standards are required of all
exterior lighting except the outdoor recreational uses
specifically exempted below. Many uses have the
option of providing a lower light post with a noncutoff
type luminaire or a higher pole, up to sixty
(60) feet, with a luminaire that totally cuts off light
spillover at a cutoff angle smaller than ninety (90)
degrees.
(i) The maximum height light post permitted is
dependent on amount of cutoff provided. This is
designed as a protection against excessive glare and
light spilling over to neighboring properties. The
exceptions which are permitted provide adequate
protection for neighboring residential property.
(ii) Exterior lighting shall meet one (1) of the
standards outlined in Tables 18.3, 18.4 or 18.5.
(d) Additional Regulations. Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this section to the contrary:
(i) No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted
(ii) Light sources or luminaries shall not be located
within bufferyard areas except on pedestrian
walkways.
(e) Measurement.
(i) Metering equipment. Lighting levels shall be
measured in foot-candles with a direct-reading,
portable light meter. The meter shall have a color
and cosine-corrected sensor with multiple scales and
shall read within an accuracy of plus or minus five
(5) percent. It shall have been tested, calibrated, and
certified by an independent commercial photometric
laboratory or the manufacturer within one (1) year of
the date of its use.
(ii) Method of measurement. The meter sensor shall
be mounted not more than (6) inches above ground
level in a horizontal position. Readings shall be
taken by qualified personnel only after the cell has
been exposed long enough to provide a constant
reading. Measurements shall be made after dark with
the light sources in question on, then with the same
sources off. The difference between the two readings
shall be compared to the maximum permitted
illumination at property line at ground level in
Section 18.15. This procedure eliminates the effects
of moonlight and other ambient light.
(f) Exterior Lighting Plan
(i) At the time any exterior lighting is installed or
substantially modified, and whenever a site plan
approval is sought, an exterior lighting plan shall be
submitted to the City in order to determine whether
the requirements of this section have been met.
28-18-5 Permitted Uses.
(1) Storage and display of goods outside fully
enclosed building within a fully fenced area.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Light Manufacturing (MP-1) Chapter 18
Page 18-4
TABLE 18.5.1 When light source or luminaire has no cutoff:
Standard Maximum Permitted Illumination Maximum Permitted Height of Luminaire
0.30 20 feet
An illustration of this type of luminaire is provided below.
NO CUTOFF LUMINAIRE
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Light Manufacturing (MP-1) Chapter 18
Page 18-5
TABLE 18.5.2 When a luminaire has total cutoff of an angle greater than ninety (90) degree, the
maximum illumination and the maximum permitted luminaire height shall be:
Standard Maximum Permitted Illumination Maximum Permitted Height of Luminaire
1.5 35 feet
An illustration of this type of luminaire is provided below.
90° CUTOFF LUMINAIRE
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Light Manufacturing (MP-1) Chapter 18
Page 18-6
TABLE 18.5.3 When a luminaire has total cutoff of light at an angle less than ninety (90) degrees and is
located so that the bare light bulb, lamp, or light source is completely shielded from the
direct view of an observer five (5) feet above the ground at a point where the cutoff angle
intersects the ground, then the maximum permitted illumination and the maximum
permitted height of the luminaire shall be:
Standard Maximum Permitted Illumination Maximum Permitted Height of Luminaire
4.00 50 feet
An illustration of this type of luminaire is provided below.
LUMINAIRE WITH LESS THAN 90° CUT-OFF
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Light Manufacturing (MP-1) Chapter 18
Page 18-7
(2) All operations conducted entirely within fully
enclosed building.
(a) Operations designed to attract and serve
customers or clients on the premises, such as the
offices of engineers, surveyors, contractors,
government office buildings, etc.
(b) Operations designed to attract little or no
customer or client traffic other than employees of the
entity operating the principal use.
(3) Operations conducted within fully enclosed
buildings and in a fully fenced outside space.
(a) Operations designed to attract and serve
customers or clients on the premises.
(b) Operations designed to attract little or no
customer or client traffic other than employees of the
entity operating the principal use.
(4) All operations conducted entirely within fully
enclosed building.
(a) Majority of dollar volume of business done within
walk-in-trade.
(b) Majority of dollar volume of business not done
with walk-in trade.
(5) Operations conducted within or outside fully
enclosed building.
(a) Storage of either raw materials or finished
products within fully fenced outside space.
(b) Storage of raw materials and finished products
within fully enclosed outside space.
(6) Restaurants
(a) Carry-out and delivery service, consumption
outside fully enclosed structure allowed.
(b) No substantial carry-out or delivery service, no
drive-in service, no service or consumption outside
fully enclosed structure except in attached patio
setting.
(7) Motor vehicle repair and maintenance.
(a) Not including substantial body work conducted
within fully enclosed building.
(b) Motor vehicle painting and body work conducted
within fully enclosed building.
(c) Not including substantial body work conducted
within fully enclosed building and storage of vehicles
within fully enclosed outside space.
(d) Motor vehicle painting and body work conducted
within fully enclosed building with storage of
vehicles within fully enclosed outside space.
(8) Public services to include Police Stations, Fire
Stations, Public Utility Substations, Rescue Squad,
Ambulance Services, Post Office, Community or
Regional Structures.
28-18-6 Conditional Uses. Conditions for approval
shall be determined by the planning Commission by
reference to Chapter 5.
(1) Buildings of height greater than thirty feet (30') or
less than ten feet (10').
(2) Towers and related structures.
(a) Towers and antennas 50 feet tall or less.
(b) Towers and antennas more than 50 feet tall and
receive only earth station.
(3) Sexually Oriented Business. 71
28-18-7 Accessory Uses.
(1) Accessory Buildings and uses customarily
incidental to the above.
(2) Signs as follows: nameplate; identification sign;
on-premises business signs.
(3) Temporary buildings and uses incidental to
construction work.
28-18-8 Sign Regulations. Signs erected in the MP-
1 Zone shall be in accordance with an approved site
plan and the Clinton City Sign Ordinance.
28-18-9 Bufferyards.
(1) The bufferyard is a unit of yard together with the
planting required thereon. Both the amount of land
and the type and amount of planting specified for
each bufferyard requirement of this ordinance are
designed to ameliorate nuisances between adjacent
land uses or between a land use and a public road.
the planting units required of bufferyards have been
calculated to insure that they do, in fact function as
"buffers". Bufferyards shall be required to separate
different land uses form each other in order to
eliminate or minimize potential nuisances such as
dirt, litter, noise, glare of lights, signs, and unsightly
buildings or parking areas, or to provide spacing to
reduce adverse impacts of noise, odor, or danger
from fires or explosions.
(2) Bufferyards shall be located at the perimeter of
light manufacturing lots where the lot abuts against a
zone other than light manufacturing.
(3) Bufferyards may remain in the ownership of the
original developer (and assigns) of a land use, or they
may be subject to deed restrictions and subsequently
be freely conveyed, or they may be transferred to any
consenting grantees, such as adjoining landowners,
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Light Manufacturing (MP-1) Chapter 18
Page 18-8
City, or an open-space or conservation group,
provided that any such conveyance adequately
guarantees the protection of the bufferyards for the
purposes of this ordinance.
28-18-10 Bufferyard Requirements.
(1) Bufferyard requirements are outlined in Table
18.7.
(a) The following plant material substitutions shall
satisfy the requirements of this section.
(i) Evergreen canopy or evergreen understory trees
may be substituted for deciduous canopy forest trees
without limitation.
(ii) In all bufferyards, evergreen or conifer shrubs
may be substituted for deciduous shrubs without
limitation.
(2) If the development on the adjoining use is
existing, planned, or deed-restricted for solar access,
understory trees may be substituted for canopy trees
where canopy trees would destroy solar access.
(3) Any existing plant material which otherwise
satisfies the requirements of this section may be
counted toward satisfying all such requirements.
(4) The exact placement of required plants and
structures shall be the decision of each user except
that evergreen (or conifer) plant materials shall be
planted in clusters rather than singly in order to
maximize their chances of survival.
(5) All bufferyard areas shall be seeded with grass
and provided with a means of watering.
28-18-11 Use of Bufferyards. A bufferyard
may be used for passive recreation; it may contain
pedestrian, bike, or equestrian trails, provided that: a.
No plant material is eliminated, b. the total width of
the bufferyard is maintained, and c. all other
regulations of the ordinance are met. In no event,
however shall the following uses be permitted in
bufferyards: ice skating rinks, playfields, ski hills,
stables, swimming pools, and tennis courts.
28-18-12 Contractual Reduction of
Bufferyard Abutting Vacant Land. When a land
use is proposed adjacent to vacant land which is in
another zone, and the owner of that vacant land
enters into a contractual relationship with the owner
of the land that is to be developed first, a reduced
buffer may be provided by that first use, provided
that:
(1) The contract contains a statement by the owner of
the vacant land of an intent to develop at no greater
than a specified land use intensity class; and
(2) The vacant landowner makes an agreement to
assume all responsibility for additional buffer, if
needed, by his development of a less intense use than
had been agreed upon.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Light Manufacturing (MP-1) Chapter 18
Page 18-9
BUFFERYARD
TABLE 18.7 BUFFERYARD STANDARDS AND FENCE REQUIREMENTS
FENCES
F-1
F-1
F-2
F-3
F-4
F-1 6’
Chain Link
F-2 6’
Chain Link with
Vinyl Slats
F-3 6’
Cedar Slats with
Metal Posts
F-4 6’
Solid Vinyl
Symbol Height Material
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-1
Chapter 19. Performance Standard Zone
28-19-1 Legislative Intent
28-19-2 Establishment of Economic Development
Zone
28-19-3 Introduction
28-19-4 Use Regulations 181, 182, 199
28-19-5 Public Hearing Required 88
28-19-6 Zoning District Performance Standards
28-19-7 Performance Standards 123
28-19-8 Sight Capacity Calculation:
Purpose 123
28-19-9 Base Site Area (All Land Uses) 123
28-19-10 Determination of Site Capacity (All
Nonresidential Uses)
28-19-11 Open Space
28-19-12 Land Use Intensity Classification and
Bufferyards
28-19-13 Land Use Intensity Class Standards
28-19-14 Table of Land Use Intensity Class
Standards
28-19-15 Bufferyards: Purpose
28-19-16 Location of Bufferyards 153, 163, 164
28-19-17 Table of Bufferyard Requirements
28-19-18 Bufferyard Requirements 151, 163
28-19-19 Use of Bufferyards 151, 153
28-19-20 Ownership of Bufferyards
28-19-21 Excess Bufferyards
28-19-22 Contractual Reduction of Bufferyard
Abutting Vacant Land
28-19-23 Site Development Standards 136
28-19-24 Site Design Standards
28-19-25 General Landscaping
Requirements 149
28-19-26 Off-Street Parking Landscaping
Requirements 123, 149
28-19-27 Exterior Lighting Standards
28-19-28 Sign Standards
28-19-29 Existing Residential Uses 123
28-19-30 Moderate Density Residential 123
28-19-31 Plant Materials 123
28-19-32 Clinton City Central Business District
Design Standards and Guidelines 123
28-19-1 Legislative Intent. In enacting this chapter
of the zoning ordinance, special notice has been taken
of the fact that the goals of citizens and landowners
of Clinton often conflict or compete. The prior
method of zoning regularly forced a "winner-take-all"
solution to the resolution of conflicts between
neighbors or adjoining property owners. Whenever a
proposed commercial use encountered objections, the
City Council had only two choices: either to permit
the use, to the detriment of the objectors, or to
prohibit it entirely, to the detriment of the landowner
who proposed it. Whenever a use was permitted
(usually by virtue of a rezoning), the preexisting
adjacent users were largely unprotected from any of
its negative impacts. This chapter has been designed
to protect and accommodate both competing interests.
This has inevitably, and properly, led to some form of
compromise. In arriving at these compromises, every
possible consideration has been given to the public
interest, individual property rights, and externalities.
While compromise implies mutual concessions or
losses, it also implies - and this chapter has been
designed to provide - mutual gains and benefits. It is
the goal of this chapter that both the burdens and the
benefits which it, like any scheme of public
regulation, implies be rationally and fairly distributed
among the citizens and property owners of Clinton.
28-19-2 Establishment of Economic Development
Zone. This zone is intended to accommodate most of
the economic development expected in Clinton
during the next twenty-year period. It consists of the
areas where economic development should logically
locate as a consequence of planned public facilities
and associated capital expenditure. This zone
provides for development of a generally suburban
character. It provides for necessary commercial and
institutional uses. 123
28-19-3 Introduction. The purpose of the
regulations contained in this chapter is to allow
maximum utilization of land in the zone while
insuring against detrimental impacts on the
environment, neighboring properties, and the public
interest. This regulatory approach has been termed
"performance zone" because it permits a use to be
developed on a particular parcel only if that use on
that parcel meets "performance" standards which
have been enacted to insure against the use causing
(or having the potential to cause) the negative
impacts mentioned above.
The format of the regulations in this chapter differs
somewhat from that of the rest of the ordinance
because performance zoning requires that
consideration be given to site (parcel) characteristics
and the range of impacts which any use (such as
"office" or "retail store") may have.
(1) Definitions.28, 123
“High Volume Traffic Generation.” Any business
that generates in excess of 100 vehicle trips per hour.
As part of any conditional use review or site plan
review a traffic study may be required by staff or the
Planning Commission.69, 88
“Low-Volume Traffic Generation.” Uses such as
furniture stores, carpet stores, major appliance stores,
etc. that are large and bulky, that need a relatively
large amount of storage or display area for each unit
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-2
offered for sale, and that therefore generate less
customer traffic per square foot of floor than stores
selling smaller items.69
“Site Area, Base.” The area of proposed
development minus rights-of-way, existing roads,
easements, etc. as outlined in 28-19-9.
“Site Area, Gross.” The entire acreage of a
proposed development.
“Site Area, Net.” The area of a proposed
development after subtracting required open spaces
as outlined in 28-19-10.
28-19-4 Use Regulations. 182 In the following list of
uses, those designated as "P" will be permitted use.
Uses designated "C" will be allowed only when
authorized by a conditional use permit obtained as
provided in Chapter 5 of this Zoning Ordinance.
TABLE 19.4 61, 123, 199
PERFORMANCE ZONE USES
DESIGN
REVIEW
PERMITTED/
CONDITIONAL
GENERAL
USE
CATEGORY
(SEC. 15)
1.000 RESIDENTIAL
1.100 Single-Family Residences (see section 19.29)
1.150 Immediate Family Dwelling Unit (see section 19.29)
1.200 Two-Family Residences (see section 19.29)
1.400 Miscellaneous, rooms for rent situations
1.410 Bed and Breakfast DR P Commercial
1.420 Tourist homes and other temporary residences
renting by the day or week
DR P Commercial
1.430 Hotels, motels, and similar business or
institutions providing overnight accommodations
DR P Commercial
1.500 Temporary on site storage containers for emergency
construction or repair of residences, with the following
stipulations
a. Must be placed on a hard surface
b. Can only be present for 3 months out of a 12 month
period
P Footnote a
1.600 Home Business 179 P
1.700 Garage and Yard Sales 179 P
1.800 Garages, accessory buildings, sheds, and carports when associated with a residential use will be evaluated
per Table 19.29.2
2.000 SALES AND RENTAL OF GOODS, MERCHANDISE AND EQUIPMENT
2.100 No storage or display of goods outside fully enclosed building
2.110 High-volume traffic generation
2.111 Miscellaneous 88 DR P Commercial
2.112 Convenience stores DR P Commercial
2.120 Low-volume traffic generation
2.121 Wholesale sales DR P Commercial
2.122 Retail sales DR P Commercial
2.200 Storage and display of goods outside fully enclosed building allowed
2.210 High-volume traffic generation DR C Commercial
2.220 Low-volume traffic generation DR C Commercial
2.230 Wholesale sales DR C Commercial
3.000 OFFICE, CLERICAL, RESEARCH AND SERVICES NOT PRIMARILY RELATED TO GOODS
OR MERCHANDISE
3.100 All operations conducted entirely within fully enclosed building
3.110 Operations designed to attract and serve
customers or clients on the premises, such as the
offices of attorneys, physicians, other
professions, insurance and stockbrokers, travel
DR P Office
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-3
TABLE 19.4 61, 123, 199
PERFORMANCE ZONE USES
DESIGN
REVIEW
PERMITTED/
CONDITIONAL
GENERAL
USE
CATEGORY
(SEC. 15)
agents, government office buildings, etc.
3.120 Operations designed to attract little or no
customer or client traffic other than employees
of the entity operating the principal use
DR P Office
3.130 Office or clinics of physicians or dentists with
not more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor
area
DR P Office
3.200 Operations conducted within or outside fully enclosed building
3.210 Operations designed to attract and serve
customers or clients on the premises
DR P Office
3.220 Operations designed to attract little or no
customer or client traffic other than the
employees of the entity operating the principal
use
DR P Office
3.230 Banks with drive-in windows DR P Office
3.240 Check Cashing or Deferred Deposit Loan
Business with or without a drive-up window.
LIMITATIONS: No business shall be located
within one thousand (1,000) feet of any other
similar business. Distance shall be measured in
a straight line. In addition only one business
shall be allowed for every ten thousand (10,000)
citizens living in Clinton City. 165
DR P Commercial
4.000 EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTIONS, CULTURAL, RELIGIOUS, PHILANTHROPIC, SOCIAL,
FRATERNAL USES
4.100 Educational Institutions
4.110 Elementary and secondary (including associated
grounds and athletic and other facilities)
DR P Institutional
4.120 Trade or vocational schools DR P Institutional
4.130 Colleges, universities, community colleges
(including associated facilities such as
dormitories, office buildings, athletic fields, etc.)
DR P Institutional
4.200 Churches, synagogues, and temples (including associated
residential structures for religious personnel and
associated buildings but not including elementary
schools or secondary school buildings)
DR P Institutional
4.300 Libraries, museums, art galleries, art centers, and similar
uses (including associated educational and instructional
activities)
DR P Institutional
4.400 Social, fraternal clubs and lodges, union halls, and
similar uses
DR C Institutional
5.000 RECREATION, AMUSEMENT, ENTERTAINMENT
5.100 Activity conducted entirely within building or substantial structure
5.110 Amusement enterprises, arcades, video game
centers, and similar uses
DR P Entertainment
5.120 Bowling alleys, skating rinks, indoor tennis and
squash courts, billiard and pool halls, indoor
athletic and exercise facilities and similar uses
DR P Indoor
Recreation
5.130 Movie Theaters DR P Indoor
Recreation
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-4
TABLE 19.4 61, 123, 199
PERFORMANCE ZONE USES
DESIGN
REVIEW
PERMITTED/
CONDITIONAL
GENERAL
USE
CATEGORY
(SEC. 15)
5.140 Coliseums, stadiums, and all other facilities
listed in the 5.100 classification designed to seat
or accommodate simultaneously more than
1,000 people
DR P Indoor
Recreation
5.200 Activity conducted primarily outside enclosed buildings or structures
5.210 Privately owned outdoor recreational facilities
such as golf and country clubs, swimming or
tennis clubs, etc., not constructed pursuant to a
permit authorizing the construction of some
DR C Outdoor
Recreation
5.220 Publicly owned and operated outdoor
recreational facilities such as athletic fields, golf
courses, tennis courts, swimming pools, parks,
etc., not constructed pursuant to a permit
authorizing the construction of another use such
as a school
DR C Outdoor
Recreation
5.230 Golf driving ranges not accessory to golf
courses, par 3 golf courses, miniature golf
courses, skateboard parks, water slides, and
similar uses
DR C Outdoor
Recreation
6.000 INSTITUTIONAL RESIDENCES OR CARE OR CONFINEMENT FACILITIES
6.100 Hospitals, clinics, other medical( including mental
health) treatment facilities in excess of 10,000 square feet
of floor area
DR P Institutional
6.200 Nursing care institutions, intermediate care institutions,
handicapped or infirm institutions, child care institutions
DR P Institutional
6.300 Institutions (other than halfway houses) where mentally
ill persons are confined
DR P Institutional
6.400 Nursery schools; day care centers with no overnight
facilities.
DR P Commercial
6.500 Homes emphasizing special services or supervision in an existing residential subdivision
6.510 Homes for handicapped or infirm P Special Res.
6.520 Nursing care, intermediate care homes P Special Res.
6.530 Child care homes P Special Res.
6.540 Halfway houses C Special Res.
7.000 RESTAURANTS, TAVERN, PRIVATE CLUBS
7.100 Restaurant DR P Commercial
7.110 Restaurant (Fast Food) DR P Commercial
7.200 Tavern DR P Commercial
7.300 Private Club DR C Commercial
8.000 MOTOR VEHICLE-RELATED SALES AND SERVICE OPERATIONS 126
8.100 Motor vehicle sales or rental, mobile home sales 88 DR P Road Service
8.200 Sales with installation of motor vehicle parts or
accessories (e.g. tires, mufflers, etc.)
DR C Road Service
8.300 Motor vehicle repair and maintenance, not including
substantial body work
DR C Road Service
8.400 Convenience Store DR P Road Service
8.500 Liquid Fuel Sales DR P Road Service
8.600 Car Wash DR P Road Service
8.700 Pressurized Fuel (LPG, Natural Gas) Sales DR P Commercial
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-5
TABLE 19.4 61, 123, 199
PERFORMANCE ZONE USES
DESIGN
REVIEW
PERMITTED/
CONDITIONAL
GENERAL
USE
CATEGORY
(SEC. 15)
9.000 STORAGE AND PARKING
9.100 Automobile parking garages or parking lots not located
on a lot on which there is another principal use to which
the parking is related
DR P Commercial
9.200 Parking of vehicles or storage of equipment outside
enclosed structures where:
(a) vehicles or equipment are owned and used by the
person making use of lot, and
(b) parking or storage is more than a minor and
incidental part of the overall use made of the lot
DR P Commercial
10.000 SERVICES AND ENTERPRISES RELATED TO ANIMALS
10.100 Veterinarian, inside fully enclosed structure DR P Commercial
10.110 Crematorium, associated with a veterinarian DR C Commercial
10.200 Kennel, inside fully enclosed structure DR C Commercial
11.000 EMERGENCY SERVICES, MISCELLANEOUS PUBLIC AND SEMI-PUBLIC FACILITIES
11.100 Municipal Offices DR P Public Service
11.200 Municipal Police Stations DR P Public Service
11.300 Municipal Fire Stations DR P Public Service
11.400 Municipal Rescue squad, ambulance service DR P Public Service
11.500 Other Municipal Structures or Uses DR C Public Service
11.600 Post office DR P Public Service
11.700 Bus station DR C Public Service
11.800 Private Ambulance Service DR C Public Service
12.000 DRY CLEANER, LAUNDROMAT DR P Commercial
13.000 PUBLIC UTILITY SUBSTATIONS DR C Public Service
14.000 COMMERCIAL GREENHOUSE OPERATIONS
14.100 No on-premises sales DR P Nursery
14.200 On-premises sales permitted DR P Nursery
15.000 FUNERAL HOME DR P Commercial
16.000 CEMETERY AND CREMATORIUM
16.100 Cemetery DR P Commercial
16.200 Crematorium, associated with a mortuary DR C Commercial
17.000 TEMPORARY STRUCTURES USED IN
CONNECTION WITH THE CONSTRUCTION OF
A PERMANENT BUILDING OR FOR SOME NONRECURRING
PURPOSE
P Footnote b
17.100 Temporary storage containers, (location, screening from
public view & duration will be reviewed) 165
DR C Commercial
18.000 COMBINATION USES DR C Footnote c
19.000 EXISTING RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISIONS AND
SINGLE FAMILY DWELLINGS
P See Section
19.30
21.000 EXISTING OR NON-CONFORMING USE
RELATED TO MANUFACTURING,
DR P Light Industry
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-6
TABLE 19.4 61, 123, 199
PERFORMANCE ZONE USES
DESIGN
REVIEW
PERMITTED/
CONDITIONAL
GENERAL
USE
CATEGORY
(SEC. 15)
PROCESSING, CREATING REPAIRING,
RENOVATING, PAINTING, CLEANING,
ASSEMBLING OF GOODS, MERCHANDISE AND
EQUIPMENT
22.000 EXISTING AGRICULTURAL USE OR NONCONFORMING
USE ASSOCIATED WITH
AGRICULTURAL, SILVICULTURAL, OR
HORTICULTURAL PRODUCTION OR FARMING
NOT INCLUDED IN THE LISTED ITEMS ABOVE
P Agricultural or
Agricultural
Support
23.000 Garages, accessory buildings, sheds, and carports when associated with a use that is not a residential use
will be evaluated during the site plan review as established in §28-3-10.
a Temporary structures are approved by the city staff with concurrence of the city council depending upon the
urgency of the emergency and situation.
b Land use classifications are the same as the main use on the property.
c Uses falling under multiple Class categories as outlined in Table 19.15 will fall under the highest class category.
28-19-5 Public Hearing Required. 88 For all nonresidential
uses proposed in this zone, a site plan
review by the Planning Commission will be required
as specified in 28-3-10. of the Zoning Ordinance.
Conditional uses within this zone will require review
as outlined in Chapter 5 and 28-1-4 (3). Notice of
public hearings for reviews other than Conditional
Uses will be set forth in 28-1-4 (4).
28-19-6 Zoning District Performance Standards.
Sections 19.6 and 19.7 delineate the minimum
standards for open space, density, impervious surface
coverage, and lot area which apply in this zone. The
purpose of these performance standards is to provide
detailed regulations and restrictions by means of
minimum criteria which must be met by uses in order
to protect neighbors from adverse impacts of
adjoining land uses and to protect the general health,
safety, and welfare by limiting where uses may be
established, insuring that traffic congestion is
minimized, controlling the intensity of use, and
prescribing other such performance criteria necessary
to implement the Comprehensive Plan and to meet
the goals and objectives of this chapter. All uses and
activities shall comply fully with the provisions of
the following standards as a precondition of being
permitted pursuant to Table 19.4.
28-19-7 Performance Standards. 123 This section
contains the range of basic standards applicable to the
uses allowed by this chapter. All standards must be
met. Whenever the standard contained in 28-19-7 is
different from another performance standard
articulated in this chapter, the strictest standard shall
always govern. The floor area factor is the amount of
floor area of a building compared with the net
buildable site area. The minimum site area specifies
the minimum total number of acres for which
development of a particular use may be proposed.
Specific standards are dependent upon the intensity
of development as outlined in 28-19-14.
28-19-8 Sight Capacity Calculation: Purpose. 123
Site capacity for any proposed development is equal
to the net buildable area of the site multiplied by the
floor area factor or impervious surface ratio,
whichever is more restrictive. The site capacity
calculation provides the mechanism for subtracting
from the base site area all portions of a site
inappropriate for development. Consequently, the
purpose of this section is to determine the extent to
which a site may be utilized given its unique physical
characteristics.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-7
Table of Performance Standards (Table 19.7)
Table 19.7 Open Space Ratio
(OSR) Minimum
Sect. 12
Density
Factor
Floor Area
Factor (FAF)
Impervious
Surface Ratio
(ISR)a
Maximum
Minimum
Site Area
Acres
Minimum
Site Area
Sq. Ft.
Use - Low High Low High Low High - -
Conventional
Subdivision
- 3 5.5 - - 0.3 40 - 6,000
Performance
Subdivision
0.20 4.2 15 - - 0.3 0.65 5 -
Other Uses - - - 0.005 1.2 0.05 1.0 - -
a For conventional subdivision, ratio is applied to individual building lots. For performance subdivision and other
uses, ratio is applied to total project area.
28-19-9 Base Site Area (All Land Uses). 123
A. Gross site area as determined by actual on-site survey acres
B. Subtract land constituting roads and land within ultimate rights-of-way of
existing roads as shown in the Clinton City Major Street Plan, rights-of-way of
utilities, and easements of access.
- acres
C. Subtract land which is not contiguous:
1. A separate parcel which does not abut, adjoin or share common boundaries
with the rest of the development. - acres
2. Land which is cut off from the main parcel by a road, railroad, existing land
uses, or major stream, such that common use is hindered or that the land is
unavailable for building purposes. - acres
D. Subtract land which in a previously approved subdivision encompassing the
same land, as part or all of the subject parcel, was reserved for resource reasons
(e.g. flooding or for recreation). - acres
E. Subtract land required for bufferyard area by Sections 19.16 through 24. (A
preliminary decision of which buffer is to be used will need to be made at this time
to arrive at this figure. Refer to Sections 19.16 and 19.18 for bufferyard
requirements and sizes.) - acres
F. Equals base site area. = acres
28-19-10 Determination of site Capacity (All Nonresidential Uses). Individual site capacity is calculated
as follows. Both maximum impervious surface area and maximum floor area must be calculated.
Table 19.10
Take BASE SITE AREA acres
Multiply by Impervious Surface Ratio * acres
EQUALS PERMITTED IMPERVIOUS AREA = acres
Take Base Site Area acres
Subtract FAR (from land use intensity class of proposed use or
district maximum, whichever is less) - acres
EQUALS Permitted floor area = acres
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-8
28-19-11 Open Space.
(1) Land which is required by this chapter to remain
as open space may be used for the recreation,
agriculture, resource protection, amenity and other
purposes specified in this section. Open-space land
shall be freely accessible to all intended users of a
development with the exception that agricultural land
uses shall be permitted to restrict access to that land
to those solely engaged in agricultural pursuits.
Open-space land shall not be occupied by nonrecreational
buildings, roads, road right-of-way or
parking areas. 123
(2) All developments required by this chapter to
provide open space shall meet the following
requirements:
(a) Land designated as open space shall be
maintained as open space and may not be separately
sold, subdivided, or developed except as provided
below.
(b) An open-space plan shall be submitted as a part of
the application for site plan approval. This plan shall
designate and indicate the boundaries of all openspace
areas required by this ordinance. The plan
shall:
(a) Designate areas to be reserved as open space. The
specific design of open-space areas shall be sensitive
to the physical and design characteristics of the site.
(b) Designate the type of open space which will be
provided.
(c) Specify the manner in which the open space shall
be perpetuated, maintained, and administered.
(c) The types of open space which may be provided
to satisfy the requirements of this ordinance, together
with the maintenance required for each type, are as
follows:
(a) Agricultural uses. No specific maintenance is
required.
(b) Greenways are linear green belts linking
residential areas with other open-space areas. These
greenways may contain bicycle paths, footpaths, and
bridle paths. Connecting greenways between
residences and recreational areas are encouraged.
Maintenance is limited to a minimum removal and
avoidance of hazards, nuisances, or unhealthy
conditions.
(c) Lawns consist of grass with or without trees.
Maintenance is limited to watering and mowing to
insure neatness.
(d) Interim open space. Land intended for future
development may be designated as a holding zone
and thus remains vacant until such time as this land is
annexed or rezoned as a development district.
(d) All designated open space shall be large enough
to be useable open space. The minimum dimension
for usable open space shall be (10) feet and the
minimum area shall be one hundred (100) square feet.
(3) Preservation of open space. Open-space areas
shall be maintained so that their use and enjoyment as
open space are not diminished or destroyed. Openspace
areas may be owned, preserved, and
maintained as required by this section by any of the
following mechanisms or combinations thereof:
(a) Dedication of open space to the City or an
appropriate public agency, if there is a public agency
willing to accept the dedication.
(b) Common ownership of the open space by a
homeowner's association which assumes full
responsibility for its maintenance.
(c) Dedication of development rights of open space
may be made to an appropriate public agency with
ownership remaining with the developer or
homeowner's association. Maintenance responsibility
shall remain with the property owner.
(d) Deed-restricted private ownership which shall
prevent development and/or subsequent subdivision
of the open-space land and provide the maintenance
responsibility.
In the event that any private owner of open space
fails to maintain same according to the standards of
this ordinance, Clinton City may, in accordance with
the Open-Space Plan and following reasonable notice,
demand that deficiency of maintenance be corrected,
enter the open space to maintain same. The cost of
such maintenance shall be charged to those persons
having the primary responsibility for maintenance of
the open space.
28-19-12 Land Use Intensity Classification
and Bufferyards.
(1) All land uses which are permitted by this chapter
have been assigned a land use intensity class
designation (see 28-19-14). This classification
system separates uses on the basis of the type and
degree of "nuisance" or negative impact they are
likely to impose on land uses adjacent to them.
(2) In order to minimize any negative effects that a
more obnoxious or intensive use will impose on its
neighbors, this ordinance requires that bufferyards be
provided between uses.
28-19-13 Land Use Intensity Class
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-9
Standards. In keeping with the concept that
performance should be the relevant measure of any
land use regulations, the following section classifies
uses according to their respective impact (all uses
within a use class are considered to have an equal
impact on neighboring uses). A developer may
develop at an intensity which will minimize
nuisances to neighbors or provide a denser bufferyard
if the land is developed at greater intensities. The
impacts of greater intensity may include greater
impervious surface coverage, with associated
increased runoff, heat generation, reduced percolation
and open space, increased bulk and height of
buildings, increased traffic with associated noise and
congestion, signs and exterior lighting visible from
neighboring property, late hours of operation, and
other nuisances. Thus, for example, and office use
on any lot may meet the standards at intensity class
IV, V, VI, VII, or VIII. The range of intensity
classes open to a use does not affect whether it can
locate on its lot, but only how it can develop on that
lot. Performance standards are specified for each
intensity class; exceeding any single standard in an
intensity class moves a use to the next-higher
intensity class. In the event that a use does not
appear in the next-higher intensity class, it may not
exceed any single criteria in the highest intensity
class in which it is listed.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-10
28-19-14 Table of Land Use Intensity Class Standards.
Land Use Intensity
Class Number and
General Use
Category
Maximum
Density
(Gross)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface Ratio
Maximum
Floor Area
Ratio
Site Design
Standards a
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)b
Hours of
Operation
Class I
Agriculture 1.00 0.07 n/a R 35/80 n/a
Class II
Outdoor Recreation n/a 0.05 0.003 A 20 7 am-9 pm
Class III
Performance
Subdivision
5.2 0.35 n/a R 35 n/a
Outdoor Recreation n/a 0.08 0.005 A 25 7 am- 9 pm
Class IV
Performance
Subdivision
15 0.65 n/a R 40 n/a
Outdoor Recreation n/a 0.10 0.006 A 30 7 am- 9 pm
Class V
Outdoor Recreation n/a 0.15 0.009 A 30 7 am-9 pm
Indoor recreation,
institutional, and
special residential
n/a 0.30 0.25 A 35 7 am-10 pm
Public Service n/a 0.20 0.12 A 20 n/a
Office n/a 0.20 0.05 A 25 7 am-9pm
Nursery n/a 0.03 0.05 A 25 7 am-9 pm
Class VI
Outdoor Recreation n/a 0.25 0.01 B 30 6 am-10 pm
Indoor recreation,
institutional, and
special residential
n/a 0.60 0.49 B 40 6 am-10 pm
Public Service n/a 0.50 0.35 B 30 n/a
Office n/a 0.50 0.24 B 60 n/a
Nursery n/a 0.20 0.27 B 30 7 am-9 pm
Class VII
Outdoor Recreation n/a 0.40 0.02 C 35 6 am-11 pm
Indoor recreation,
institutional, and
special residential
n/a 0.70 0.40 C 45 n/a
Public Service n/a 0.70 0.40 C 40 n/a
Office n/a 0.70 0.36 C 60 n/a
Commercial n/a 0.65 0.77 C 30 n/a
Entertainment n/a 0.65 0.77 C 30 n/a
Road Service 126 n/a 0.50 0.19 C 25 n/a
Class VIII 126
Outdoor Recreation n/a 0.60 0.03 D 40 6 am-12 pm
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-11
Land Use Intensity
Class Number and
General Use
Category
Maximum
Density
(Gross)
Maximum
Impervious
Surface Ratio
Maximum
Floor Area
Ratio
Site Design
Standards a
Maximum
Building
Height
(feet)b
Hours of
Operation
Indoor recreation,
institutional, and
special residential
n/a 0.70 0.65 D 50 n/a
Public Service n/a 0.90 0.45 D 50 n/a
Office n/a 0.85 0.50 D 60 n/a
Commercial n/a 0.85 1.10 D 50 n/a
Entertainment n/a 0.85 1.10 D 50 n/a
Road Service n/a 0.80 0.31 D 40 n/a
Class IX
Public Service n/a 0.90 0.59 E 50 n/a
Office n/a 0.90 0.70 E 75 n/a
Commercial n/a 0.90 1.20 E 60 n/a
Entertainment n/a 0.90 1.20 E 60 n/a
Road Service n/a 0.90 0.35 E 40 n/a
Recreational n/a 0.80 0.30 E 25/80 n/a
Class X
Recreational n/a 0.90 0.40 E 40/120 n/a
a See Sections 19.24 through 19.26: Landscaping 19.25; Off Street Parking Area Landscaping 19.26; and Exterior
Lighting 19.27.
b The figure specified in this column is the maximum permitted height of each permitted structure. When two
figures are specified, the latter one is the maximum permitted height of permitted uninhabited accessory structures.
The following structures are exempt from the maximum height regulations of this section, except as limited by any
height restriction regulation of the Federal Aviation Agency or any height restriction imposed by any airport
authority, or other municipal corporation operating an airport.
1. Agricultural buildings except residences.
2. Bulk storage silos and storage towers in all districts except agricultural, provided the maximum permitted
height shall not exceed 100 feet.
3. Concrete batching and mixing towers, provided the maximum permitted height shall not exceed 100 feet.
4. Gravity feed apparatus in all districts except agricultural; the maximum permitted height shall not exceed
60 feet.
5. Public utility poles, towers, and wires.
6. Radio and television antenna and towers.
7. Towers for mechanical equipment or smoke, not exceed 16 feet above roof line of principal building.
8. Water tanks and standpipes.
28-19-15 Bufferyards: Purpose.
(1) The bufferyard is a unit of yard together with the
planting required thereon. Both the amount of land
and the type and amount of planting specified for
each bufferyard requirement of this ordinance are
designed to ameliorate nuisances between adjacent
land uses or between a land use and a public road.
The planting units required of bufferyards have been
calculated to insure that they do, in fact function as
"buffers".
(2) Bufferyards shall be required to separate different
land uses form each other in order to eliminate or
minimize potential nuisances such as dirt, litter, noise,
glare of lights, signs, and unsightly buildings or
parking areas, or to provide spacing to reduce adverse
impacts of noise, odor, or danger from fires or
explosions.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-12
28-19-16 Location of Bufferyards. 163 164
(1) To determine the type of bufferyard required
between two adjacent parcels or between a parcel and
a street, the following procedure shall be followed.
(a) Identify the land use category of the proposed use
by referring to Table 19.4.
(b) Identify the use category of the land use(s)
adjacent to the proposed use by on-site survey.
(c) Identify the land use intensity class of all
adjoining land uses by referring to Table 19.14.
Clinton City will supply this information.
(d) Classify any street adjacent to the proposed use
by referring to the Clinton City Transportation
Master Plan.
(e) Determine the bufferyard required on each
boundary (or segment thereof) of the subject parcel
by referring to Table 19.17.
(2) 28-19-18 specifies the bufferyard required
between adjacent land uses. The requirements are
expressed in terms which are further described and
detailed in 28-19-18 through 28-19-22.
(3) Bufferyard specifications are detailed and
illustrated in Table 19.18.2. The bufferyards
illustrated constitute the total bufferyard required
between the two adjacent land uses. Any of the
options contained in Table 19.18.2 for the required
bufferyard shall satisfy the requirement of buffering
between adjacent land uses.
(4) Responsibility for bufferyards.
(a) When a use is the first to develop on two adjacent
vacant parcels, this first use, if it is other than a
commercial or office use shall provide the buffer
which Section 19.18 requires next to a commercial
use with a Class VIII land use intensity classification.
123
(b) When a commercial or office use is developed
adjacent to a vacant parcel, no buffering is required.
(c) The second use to develop shall, at the time it
develops, provide all additional plant material and/or
land necessary to provide the total bufferyard
required between those two uses by 28-19-18. 28
(d) Any development within the Performance Zone
located against an adjacent vacant parcel in a
residential zone, this first use, shall provide the buffer
which Section 19.18 requires next to a residential use
with a Class III land use intensity classification. 123
(e) Existing plant material and/or land located on the
preexisting (first developed) land use which meets
the requirements of this chapter
(f) May be counted as contributing to the total
bufferyard required between it and the second
(adjacent) land use to develop.
(5) Streetscape Landscaping Requirements. The
requirements mentioned in this section do not in any
way supersede those found within Chapter 4 of this
title with regards to parking lot screening, but are to
help enhance the streetscape. The landscaping along
the street can be included in the calculation for
landscaping requirements.
(a) Specifications for bufferyards required against
adjoining streets are stipulated in Table 19.16.1.
(b) During the Site Plan Review the Planning
Commission will evaluate pedestrian access through
required buffer areas to ease access between the
development and the public way. As a minimum
placement of this access will evaluate slope,
construction, texture, snow removal, safety, and
continued access from the area of the buffer to
structures.
(c) If the planning commission determines that a
fence is necessary to be part of a street buffer, due to
public safety, fences will be of a decorative nature
selected from the F-#W, wrought iron, type fences or
F-2B berms. If a fence is required the buffer can be
deleted in width by 5-feet, however at no time will
the buffer be less than 10-feet deep.
(d) Buffers at corners. In order to facilitate the sight
triangle, where buffers meet at intersection corners
the minimum depth of the corner buffer will be equal
to the larger buffer for a distance of 40-feet from the
corner.
(e) Where a development includes a public right-ofway
to be developed as a street both sides of the street
will be developed with a buffer. If there is property
adjacent to the right-of-way that is not part of the
development the buffer on that side of the street will
be developed with either a street buffer or a
bufferyard standard whichever is the greater.
(f) EXCEPTIONS to the streetscape landscaping
requirements shall apply only to the location of the
parking area and not that of the building. 165
(a) Reduction of the depth requirement on adjacent
streets may be reduced from one (1) to, but not
beyond, five (5) feet if it is determined that the
evaluation of the Architecture of the building
elevations has received at least a positive score.
(b) Reduction of the depth requirement on adjacent
streets may be reduced from one (1) to, but not
beyond, five (5) feet if it is determined that the
evaluation of the landscaping features (water features,
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-13
rock work, additional landscaping, and other
significant features [refer to 28-20-6 (3) for
examples], etc.) to receive at least a positive
evaluation by significantly exceeding the minimum
requirements.
(c) Use table 19.16.2 when evaluating both the
Architectural reductions and the Streetscape
landscaping reductions.
Table 19.16.1 – Streetscape Landscaping Requirements
Required Plant Units / 100 l.f.
Plant Unit
Multiplier
Depth
(feet)
100-feet in Length
Type of
Street
1 Canopy Trees 1 20 Residential
1 Understory Trees 1.2 20 Collector
10 Shrubs 1.5 20 Sub-Arterial
1 Evergreen/Conifers 2 20 Arterial
.5 Bench
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-14
Table 19.16.2 -- Streetscape Landscaping Reduction Options
A. -- Architecture B. -- Landscaping
Architectural Reduction
Options
Landscaping Reduction Options Water Feature Reduction Options
Reduction
in Depth
(feet)
Average
Architectural
score
Reduction in
Depth (feet)
* Plant unit
multiplier
Reduction in
Depth (feet)
Scope of Feature
0 0 3 0.3 3 8%
1 - 2.5 + 1 2 0.2 2 5%
2.6 - 5 + 2 1 0.1 % of total street frontage
* Add this amount to the
plant unit multiplier
number within table
19.16.1
** Rock Work Reduction Options Combination's of Reduction Options
** Rock work can not be
used as both the reduction
option of the streetscape
and the required screening
of the parking lot
Reduction in
Depth (feet)
Scope of Work
Any combination of Landscaping,
water features, rock work, or other
significant features may be used to
add up to the five (5) feet reduction
3 15%
If the maximum reduction
of the streetscape
landscaping requirement is
given, only berm F-2B (see
table 19.18.2) can be used
for the screening of the
parking area.
2 10%
1 5%
% of total street frontage
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-15
28-19-17 Table of Bufferyard Requirements. The letter designations contained in this table refers to the
bufferyard requirements and standards contained in table 19.18.2.
Table 19.17
Proposed Land Use
Intensity Class
ADJACENT EXISTING LAND USE INTENSITY CLASS
Ia II III IV V VI VII VIII IX X
I b c c c c c c c c c
II c b C D D E F G H I
III c C b C D E F G H I
IV c D C b D E F G H I
V A D D D b b C D E E
VI A E E E b b b C D D
VII A F F F C b b b C C
VIII B G G G D C b b b B
IX B H H H E D C b b b
X C I I I E D C B b b
a ALSO APPLIES TO VACANT LAND
b NO BUFFERYARD REQUIRED
c FENCING ONLY REQUIRED
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-16
28-19-18 Bufferyard Requirements. 151, 163
(1) The following illustrations graphically indicate
the specifications of each bufferyard. Bufferyard
requirements are stated in terms of width of the
bufferyard and the number of plant units required per
one hundred (100) linear feet of bufferyard. The
requirements of a bufferyard may be satisfied by any
of the options thereof illustrated. The "plant unit
multiplier" is a factor by which the basic number of
plant materials required for a given bufferyard is
determined given a change in the width of that yard.
The type and quantity of plant materials required by
each bufferyard, and each bufferyard option, are
specified in this section.
Table 19.18.1 – Available Bufferyards
Development
depth in feet
Bufferyard Options Available
Less than 500
feet
All options are available
501 – 1000 feet Smallest option is not available
1001 – 1500 feet
Smallest two (2) options are not
available
1501 feet and
greater
Smallest three (3) options are not
available, if however there are
only three options within the
required bufferyard, then the
largest bufferyard must be used.
(2) Each illustration depicts the total bufferyard
located between two uses. However, where
bufferyards are required against residential units or a
residential zone the minimum bufferyard will have a
minimum 6’ chain link fence, to meet city standards
located on the property line between the bufferyard
and residencies/residential zone. Where a fence is
required the type of fence shall be upgraded one step
to further protect the residential use, i.e. F2 will be
installed as a F3, F4, as a F5.
(3) Whenever a wall, fence, or berm is required
within a bufferyard, these are shown as "structure
required" in the following illustrations, wherein their
respective specifications are also shown.
(4) The following plant material substitutions shall
satisfy the requirements of this section.
(a) In bufferyards F, G, H, and I, evergreen canopy or
evergreen understory trees may be substituted for
deciduous canopy forest trees without limitation.
(b) In bufferyards A, B, C, D, E, and G, evergreen
canopy or evergreen understory trees may be
substituted as follows:
(a) In the case of deciduous canopy forest trees, up to
a maximum of fifty (50) percent of the total number
of the deciduous canopy trees otherwise required.
(b) In the case of deciduous understory, without
limitation.
(c) In all bufferyards, evergreen or conifer shrubs
may be substituted for deciduous shrubs without
limitation.
(d) In all bufferyards required of public service uses,
the public service use may substitute evergreen
canopy or evergreen understory plant materials for
canopy forest trees and understory plant materials,
without limitation.
(e) If the development on the adjoining use is
existing, planned, or deed-restricted for solar access,
understory trees may be substituted for canopy trees
where canopy trees would destroy solar access.
(f) Any existing plant material which otherwise
satisfies the requirements of this section may be
counted toward satisfying all such requirements.
(g) The exact placement of required plants and
structures shall be the decision of each user except
that the following requirements shall be satisfied:
(a) Evergreen (or conifer) class III and IV plant
materials shall be planted in clusters rather than
singly in order to maximize their chances of survival.
(b) Berms with masonry walls (BW1, BW2, and BW3)
required of bufferyard I are intended to buffer more
significant nuisances from adjacent uses and,
additionally, to break up and absorb noise, which is
achieved by the varied heights of plant materials
between the masonry wall and the noise source.
(c) All bufferyard areas shall be seeded with grass
and provided with a means of watering.
(5) The bufferyards as established within table
19.18.2 represent all of the options available for
every development. However, the minimum required
bufferyard changes depending on the depth of the
development. Use table 19.18.1 to determine the
minimum bufferyard allowed per depth of
development.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-17
Table 19.18.2
Required Plant Units / 100 l.f.
Plant Unit
Multiplier
Depth
(feet)
100-feet in Length
BUFFERYARD A
.6 Canopy Trees .6 12.5
1 Understory Trees .8 10
Shrubs 1 7.5
Evergreen/Conifers
BUFFERYARD B
1 Canopy Trees .6 25
2 Understory Trees .8 20
Shrubs 1 15
Evergreen/Conifers 1
BUFFERYARD C
1 Canopy Trees .6 25
2 Understory Trees .8 20
3 Shrubs 1 15
Evergreen/Conifers
BUFFERYARD D
2 Canopy Trees .6 30
4 Understory Trees .8 25
6 Shrubs 1 20
Evergreen/Conifers
BUFFERYARD E
3 Canopy Trees 8 30
6 Understory Trees 1 25
9 Shrubs .9 20
Fence
Evergreen/Conifers
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-18
BUFFERYARD F
5 Canopy Trees .8 30
10 Understory Trees 1 25
15 Shrubs .9 20
Fence
Evergreen/Conifers .8 15
Fence
BUFFERYARD G
4 Canopy Trees .8 40
6 Understory Trees 1 30
24 Shrubs .75 25
Fence
12 Evergreen/Conifers .7 20
Fence
BUFFERYARD H
5 Canopy Trees .8 50
7.5 Understory Trees 1 40
30 Shrubs .6 30
Fence
15 Evergreen/Conifers
BUFFERYARD I
6 Canopy Trees .8 75
Fence
9 Understory Trees 1 50
Fence
36 Shrubs .75 40
Fence
18 Evergreen/Conifers .6 30
Fence
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-19
FENCES
SYMBOL HEIGHT MATERIAL
F-1V
F-2V
4-feet
6-feet
Vinyl
F-3V 6-feet
Vinyl
F-4V 7-feet
Vinyl
F-1W
F-2W
4-feet
6-feet
Wrought Iron
F-3W
F-4W
4-feet
6-feet
Wrought Iron and Block
F-5W
F-6W
6-feet
(2’w/4’)
7-feet
(4’w/3’)
Wrought Iron and Concrete
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-20
FENCES
SYMBOL HEIGHT MATERIAL
F-1C >3-feet
Retaining Wall
F-2C
F-3C
6-feet
8-feet
Concrete Slide In
F-4C 8-feet
Concrete Slide In
Concrete slide in fencing may be replaced with decorative block or
rock fencing constructed on site when approved by the Planning
Commission.
BERMS
SYMBOL HEIGHT MATERIAL
F-1B >3-feet
Planting Berm
F-2B >3-feet wall
Retaining Berm
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-21
28-19-19 Use of Bufferyards. 151, 153
(1) A bufferyard may be used for passive recreation;
it may contain pedestrian, bike, or equestrian trails,
provided that:
(a) No plant material is eliminated,
(b) The total width of the bufferyard is maintained,
and
(c) All other regulations of the ordinance are met.
(2) In no event, however the following uses be
permitted in bufferyards: ice skating rinks, playfields,
stables, swimming pools, and tennis courts.
28-19-20 Ownership of Bufferyards.
Bufferyards may remain in the ownership of the
original developer (and assigns) of a land use, or they
may be subject to deed restrictions and subsequently
be freely conveyed, or they may be transferred to any
consenting grantees, such as adjoining landowners,
City, or an open-space or conservation group,
provided that any such conveyance adequately
guarantees the protection of the bufferyards for the
purposes of this ordinance.
28-19-21 Excess Bufferyards. Where the
bufferyard required between a land use and vacant
land turns out to be greater than that bufferyard
which is required between the first use and the
subsequently developed use, the following options
apply:
(1) The subsequent use may provide one half (.5) of
the buffer required by 28-19-17 and 28-19-18. The
existing use may expand its use into the original
buffer area, provided that the resulting total
bufferyard between the two uses meets the bufferyard
requirements of 28-19-17 and 28-19-18.
(2) The existing use may enter into agreements with
abutting landowners to use its existing buffer to
provide some or all of the required bufferyard of both
land uses. The total buffer shall equal the
requirements of 28-19-17 and 28-19-18. Provided
that such an agreement can be negotiated, the initial
use may provide the second use some or all of its
required bufferyard and/or extra land on which it
might develop. The existing use may reduce its
excess buffer by transferring part or all of the excess
buffer to the adjoining landowner to serve as its
buffer. Any remaining excess buffer area may be
used by the existing use for expansion of that use or
for transfer by it to the adjoining landowner to
expand that adjoining use.
28-19-22 Contractual Reduction of
Bufferyard Abutting Vacant Land. When a land
use is proposed adjacent to vacant land, and the
owner of that vacant land enters into a contractual
relationship with the owner of the land that is to be
developed first, a reduced buffer may be provided by
that first use, provided that:
(1) The contract contains a statement by the owner of
the vacant land of an intent to develop at no greater
than a specified land use intensity class; and
(2) The vacant landowner makes an agreement to
assume all responsibility for additional buffer, if
needed, by his development of a less intense use than
had been agreed upon.
28-19-23 Site Development Standards. 136
(1) The Clinton City Master Land Use Map outlines
those portions of the city intended for development
within the Performance Zone. In order to provide a
natural buffer between residential developments
adjacent to the Performance Zone and major
roadways the Performance Zone shall not be reduced
in depth from major roadways or intersections of
major roadways below the following distances:
Table 19.23.1 134
Primary Arterial 500 foot
Minor Arterial 500 Feet
Intersection, Primary and
Secondary Arterial
800 Feet
Intersection, Primary and
Collector
600 Feet
Intersection, Secondary and
Collector
500 foot
(2) Street designations shall be as established in the
Clinton City Transportation Master Plan. Distances
shall be measured perpendicular from the centerline
of the street right-of-way or as a radius from the
intersection monument where applicable. 61, 123
28-19-24 Site Design Standards. The land
use intensity classification standards (28-19-14.)
regulate landscaping (both on-site and for parking
areas), and exterior lighting. The following sections
detail the regulations which apply to each of the six
standards (R,A,B,C,D, and E) specified in Section
19.14.
28-19-25 General Landscaping
Requirements. 149
(1) This section details the general landscaping
required of particular land uses by Section 19.14.
The number and type of plant units required per three
hundred (300) linear feet of building(s) perimeter
comprising the subject land use are specified for
standards A, B, C, D and E.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-22
(2) The landscaping requirements specified for
residential uses (R) is the requirement per ten (10)
dwelling units.
(3) The requirements of this section shall be applied
proportionately when the total linear feet of
building(s) perimeter varies from three hundred (300)
feet for nonresidential uses or ten (10) residential
dwelling units. All required planting shall be located
in areas which do not include any bufferyard or rightof-
way. Existing plant materials which meet the
requirements of this ordinance may be counted as
contributing to the total landscaping required by this
section.
(4) The following Table 19.25 specifies the type and
number of plant units required by this section.
Table 19.25 Number of Landscaping
Units Required
(Per 300 feet or 10
dwelling units)
Site Design
Standard
(Section 19-
14)
Standard Canopy Understory Shrubs
R 5 5 0
A 5 5 25
B 3 3 15
C 2 2 10
D 2 2 5
E 2 2 5
28-19-26 Off-Street Parking Landscaping
Requirements. 123, 149 See 28-3-20 and 28-4-18 for
details.
28-19-27 Exterior Lighting Standards.
(1) Purpose: This section details the exterior
lighting standards specified in 28-19-14. The
purpose of this section is to regulate the spillover of
light and glare on operators of motor vehicles in
particular, safety considerations from the basis of the
regulations contained herein. In other cases, both the
nuisance and hazard aspects of glare are regulated.
This section is not intended to apply to public street
lighting.
(2) Definitions:
“Candlepower” the amount of light that will
illuminate a surface one (1) foot distant from a light
source to intensity of one (1) foot-candle. Maximum
(peak) candlepower is the largest amount of
candlepower emitted by any lamp, light source, or
luminaire.
“Cutoff” The points at which all light rays emitted
by a lamp, light source, or luminaire are completely
eliminated (cutoff) at a specific angle above the
ground.
“Cutoff Angle” the angle formed by a line drawn
from the direction of light rays at the light source and
line perpendicular to the ground from the light source,
above which no light is emitted.
“Cutoff-type Luminaire” a luminaire with
elements such as shields, reflectors, or refractor
panels which direct and cut off the light at a cutoff
angle that is less than ninety (90) degrees.
“Foot-candle” a unit of illumination produced on a
surface, all points of which are one (1) foot from a
uniform point source of one (1) candle.
“Glare” the brightness of a light source which
causes eye discomfort.
“Luminaire” a complete lighting unit consisting of a
light source and all necessary mechanical, electrical,
and decorative parts.
“Maximum Permitted Illumination” The
maximum illumination measured in foot-candles at
the interior bufferyard line at ground level in
accordance with the standards of Subsection (3)
below.
(3) The following standards are required of all
exterior lighting except the outdoor recreational uses
specifically exempted below. Many uses have the
option of providing a lower light post with a
noncutoff type luminaire or a higher pole, up to sixty
(60) feet, with a luminaire that totally cuts off light
spillover at a cutoff angle smaller than ninety (90)
degrees. The maximum height light post permitted is
dependent on amount of cutoff provided. This is
designed as a protection against excessive glare and
light spilling over to neighboring properties. The
exceptions which are permitted provide adequate
protection for neighboring residential property.
Exterior lighting shall meet one (1) of the following
standards:
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-23
1. When light source or luminaire has no cutoff:
Standard Maximum Permitted Illumination Maximum Permitted Height of
Luminaire
R 0.20 10 feet
A 0.20 15 feet
B, C, D, E 0.30 20 feet
An illustration of this type of luminaire is provided below.
NO CUTOFF LUMINAIRE
2. When a luminaire has total cutoff of an angle greater than ninety (90) degree, the maximum illumination
and the maximum permitted luminaire height shall be:
Standard Maximum Permitted Illumination Maximum Permitted Height of Luminaire
R 0.30 15 feet
A 0.50 20 feet
B 0.75 25 feet
C 1.0 30 feet
D 1.5 35 feet
E 2.0 40 feet
An illustration of this type of luminaire is provided below.
90° CUTOFF LUMINAIRE
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-24
3. When a luminaire has total cutoff of light at an angle less than ninety (90) degrees and is located so that
the bare light bulb, lamp, or light source is completely shielded from the direct view of an observer five
(5) feet above the ground at a point where the cutoff angle intersects the ground, then the maximum
permitted illumination and the maximum permitted height of the luminaire shall be:
Standard Maximum Permitted Illumination Maximum Permitted Height of Luminaire
R 0.50 20 feet
A 1.00 25 feet
B 2.00 30 feet
C 3.00 40 feet
D 4.00 50 feet
E 5.00 60 feet
An illustration of this type of luminaire is provided below.
LUMINAIRE WITH LESS THAN 90° CUT-OFF
4. Exemption for specified outdoor recreational uses.
1. Because of their unique requirements for nighttime visibility and their limited hours of operation
(specified in 28-19-14.), ball diamonds, playing fields, and tennis courts are exempted from the exterior
lighting standards of 28-19-27 (3) above. These outdoor recreational uses must meet all other
requirements of this section and of this ordinance.
2. The outdoor recreational uses specified above shall not exceed a maximum permitted post height of
eighty (80) feet.
3. The outdoor recreational uses specified above shall not exceed a total cutoff angle of ninety (90)
degrees, provided that the luminaire is shielded to prevent light and glare spillover to adjacent residential
property. The maximum permitted illumination at the interior bufferyard line shall not exceed two (2)
foot-candles.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-25
(4) Additional Regulations: Notwithstanding any
other provisions of this section to the contrary:
(a) No flickering or flashing lights shall be permitted.
(b) Light sources or luminaries shall not be located
within bufferyard areas except on pedestrian
walkways.
(5) Measurement:
(a) Metering equipment. Lighting levels shall be
measured in foot-candles with a direct-reading,
portable light meter. The meter shall have a color
and cosine-corrected sensor with multiple scales and
shall read within an accuracy of plus or minus five
(5) percent. It shall have been tested, calibrated, and
certified by an independent commercial photometric
laboratory or the manufacturer within one (1) year of
the date of its use.
(b) Method of measurement. The meter sensor shall
be mounted not more than (6) inches above ground
level in a horizontal position. Readings shall be
taken by qualified personnel only after the cell has
been exposed long enough to provide a constant
reading. Measurements shall be made after dark with
the light sources in question on, then with the same
sources off. The difference between the two readings
shall be compared to the maximum permitted
illumination at property line at ground level in
Section 19.14. This procedure eliminates the effects
of moonlight and other ambient light.
(6) Exterior Lighting Plan: At the time any exterior
lighting is installed or substantially modified, and
whenever a zoning certificate is sought, an exterior
lighting plan shall be submitted to the City in order to
determine whether the requirements of this section
have been met.
28-19-28 Sign Standards. All signs located
within this zone shall be in conformance with the
Clinton City Sign Ordinance.
28-19-29 Existing Residential Uses. 123
(1) Purpose: 126 The purpose of this section is to
permit the continued use of single family residential
development established within the Performance
Zone prior to April 12, 2004. Additionally, the intent
is not to allow any additional single-family
residences to be developed except on lots that are part
of residential plats, approved by the City and
Recorded with the Davis County Recorder’s Office
prior to April 12, 2004. This does not create nonconforming
uses of the existing single-family
dwellings rather it maintains all existing rights and
privileges associated with single-family dwellings.
(2) Definitions:
“Subdivision Conventional.” Subdivisions
designed around standard, public owned rights-ofway.
Lots are owned by the homeowner, typical
development in residential zones within the city.
“Subdivision, Performance (single-family).”
Developments of single-family units on privately
owned or association owned land with facilities for
recreation and open spaces as part of the subdivision.
Typically referred to as town houses and cluster
homes.
(3) Table of Performance Standards
(Table19.29.1)
TABLE 19-29.1
USE Conventional
Subdivision
Performance
Subdivision
Open Space
ratio (OSR)
Minimum
.20
Density
Factor
Low 3 4.2
High 5.5 15
Floor Area
Factor (FAF
Maximum
Low
High
Impervious
Surface Ratio
(ISR)a
Maximum
Low .3 .3
High 40 .65
Minimum
Site Area
Acres
7
Minimum Lot
area Sq.-ft
6,000
a For conventional subdivision, ratio is applied to
individual building lot. For performance subdivision,
ratio is applied to total project area
(4) Site Development Standards: Theses standards
were in place when the existing developments in the
Performance Zone were established and shall remain
applicable. Subdivisions and classifications existing
at the time this change was implemented are:
(a) Park David Estates, all phases.
(a) Class III
(b) Conventional Subdivision
(b) Taylor Estates Subdivision, all phases.
(a) Class III
(b) Conventional Subdivision
(c) Plumcreek Subdivision, all phases.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-26
(a) Class IV
(b) Conventional Subdivision
(d) Snowberry Subdivision, all phases.
(a) Class IV
(b) Conventional Subdivision
(e) Tartan Ridge Subdivision, all phases.
(a) Class IV
(a) Conventional Subdivision
(f) Shady Grove Subdivision, all phases.
(a) Class IV
(b) Performance Subdivision
(g) Clinton Towne Center Subdivision, all phases.
(a) Class IV
(b) Performance Subdivision
(h) Clinton Towne Center Apartments
(a) Class IV
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-27
(b) Other Subdivision
Table 19.29.2 Development Standards199 Conventional
Subdivision
Performance
Subdivision
1. Minimum Lot
Frontage
Interior Width 65 None
Corner Width 65 None
2. Minimum Yard
Setbacks (feet)
1. Front Main street 35 35
Other street 20 20
2. Side Interior lot 8/10 20
Facing major street 35 35
Facing other street 20 20
Garages, accessory buildings, sheds,
and carports 199
3 feet rated
5 feet non-rated
3 feet rated
5 feet non-rated
3. Rear Main building 25 25
Garages, accessory buildings, sheds,
and carports
3 feet rated
5 feet non-rated
3 feet rated
5 feet non-rated
3. Building Height Minimum stories 1 1
Maximum stories 2.5 3
Maximum feet 35 35
Garages, accessory buildings, sheds, and
carports199
6’ minimum, 1
story max,< to main
building on lot
6’ minimum, 1 story
man, < to main
building on lot
4. Building First
Floor Area (sq.
ft.)
Dwelling unit minimum 850 800
Garages, accessory buildings, sheds, and
carports199
850 Evaluated during a
site plan review as
established in
§ 28-3-10.
5. Impervious
Surface Ratio
25% The impervious surface ratio is calculated based upon the impervious surface
within any required side or rear yard minimum set back.
a Applies to building rather than individual units
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Performance Standard Zone Chapter 19
Page 19-28
28-19-30 Plant Materials: 123 This section
provides for the plant materials and standards that
must be met in order to satisfy the requirements
established in this chapter. Included in this section
are regulations relating to the size of plant materials.
Although this section does not generally specify the
location or spacing of plant material required, all
plant materials shall be located so as to achieve the
maximum level of protection to the less intense use.
(1) Minimum Plant Size. Unless otherwise
specifically indicated elsewhere in this ordinance, all
plant materials shall meet the following minimum
size standards.
(2) Species of trees and shrubs shall be designated
by a state licensed landscape architect and submitted
to the city for approval as part of the site plan review.
Table 19.31
Plant Material
Minimum Size
Planting in
buffer yards
abutting
vacant lands
All other
planting
Canopy
Tree
Single
Stem
2 inch caliper 2 ½ inch
caliper
Multi-
Stem
Clump
6 feet high 8 feet high
Understory Tree 1 ½ inch
caliper
2 inch
caliper
Evergreen Tree 5 feet high 7 feet high
Shrubs Deciduous 3 gallon 5 gallon
Evergreen 3 gallon 5 gallon
28-19-31 Clinton City Central Business
District Design Standards and Guidelines. 123
(1) Clinton City Central Business District Design
Standards and Guidelines, referred to as the “CBD
Design Standards” are adopted as a companion
document to this chapter.
(2) Unless otherwise established by the Clinton City
Council the Clinton City Planning Commission shall
function as the Architectural Design Review
Committee.
Historic Changes to Chapter (see chapter 24 for
details)
3, 28, 69, 88, 123, 134, 136, 149, 151, 153, 163, 164,
181, 182, 198, 199
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Central Business District Design Standards Chapter 20
Page 20-1
Chapter 20. Central Business District
Design Standards
28-20-1 The Design Review Process 149
28-20-2 Prairie Style Architecture
28-20-3 Residential Design Objectives
28-20-4 Commercial Design Objectives
28-20-5 Big Box Design Objectives
28-20-6 Streetscape Design Objectives
28-20-1 The Design Review Process. 149
(1) The Vision
(a) The vision of the Central Business District is to
achieve a professional and a uniform appearance
among all Clinton City downtown businesses
following the Prairie Style architecture. Uniformity
implies continuity or a complimentary look, not
cookie-cutter sameness, with variance options and
some flexibility within the adopted design standards.
The desired effect is that the downtown businesses
will have an appearance that is simple, clean and
bold.
(b) The Central Business District will be a
welcoming location. It will have characteristics that
encourage walking in and through the area, and will
not create obstacles to a pedestrian-friendly
environment. Landscaping and other streetscape
elements will be important to creating this
environment.
(2) The Central Business District Area. The area
known as the Central Business District is comprised
of areas within the Performance Standard Zone, as
identified by the Zoning Map and Ordinance, and as
shown on Map 1 on the 20-2. Its core is at the
intersection of 2000 West and 1800 North Streets,
and the area stretches north, south, east and west
along these main corridors.
(3) General Goals
(a) The Central Business District will develop in a
cohesive and visually attractive manner, with
emphasis on the use of Prairie style architecture.
(b) An architectural design review process will occur
in the planning of all new developments in the
Central Business District.
(4) Design Objectives. To achieve the vision, the City
of Clinton has identified design objectives, following
the Prairie style architecture, to guide new
construction. The standards provide specific
direction for a particular aspect of design. They are
considered important in achieving the objectives the
city has set for the Central business District.
(5) Administration
(a) The Clinton City Business District Design
Standards and Guidelines are authorized by and
relevant to the requirements of Performance
Standards Zone in the Zoning Ordinance of the City
of Clinton. A Design Review (DR) notation attached
to uses listed in the Performance Standard Zone will
require an Architectural Design Review and site plan
Evaluation by the City’s Planning Commission.
(b) In the case that a development design is not
approved, by the Planning Commission, the applicant
may do one of the following:
(i) Revise and re-submit, however, re-submittals may
incur additional processing fees. Or
(ii) Make an appeal to the City Council, to determine
if an error occurred during the Design Review
process.
(c) Amendments to the Design Standards and
Guidelines may be made following public hearings
and review held by both the Planning Commission
and the City Council.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Central Business District Design Standards Chapter 20
Page 20-2
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Central Business District Design Standards Chapter 20
Page 20-3
(6) Design Review Procedures
(a) The design review of all projects designated in the
Zoning Ordinance with a (DR) notation shall begin
with a pre-submittal conference. The conference
shall be attended by the applicant and City staff in the
Community Development Department to review the
submittal requirements and the design review
process. Following submittal of the development
design, additional staff reviews may occur prior to
scheduling a review by the Planning Commission.
(b) The City requires that all projects within the
Central Business District be approved through the
design review process before final site plan approval
can be granted, and before a building or other
development permit is granted.
(c) The Planning Commission will perform an
Architectural Design Review – Points Evaluation to
determine adherence to the Prairie Style architecture
and character as described in the Design Standards.
Points shall be awarded for each design component
listed below according to the committee’s evaluation
of the project. The standards and requirements found
in zoning, subdivision and other land development
regulations are not evaluated.
(d) Points are assigned as follows:
+2
points:
If a project exceeds or meets excellently the
intent of the standard or guideline.
+1
point:
If a project meets well the intent of the
standard or guideline.
0
points:
If a project adequately meets the minimum
intent of the standard or guideline.
-1
point:
If the project does not adequately meet the
intent of the standard or guideline.
-2
points:
If the project substantially fails to follow
the intent of the standard or guideline.
(e) The following chart is used to perform the
Architectural Design Review - Points Evaluation.
All applicable characteristics are rated and points are
totaled.
(f) In addition to the above, the Planning
Commission must make findings that the
development site plan will meet the general purpose
and spirit of the Performance Standard Zone
ordinance.
Table 20.1 Architectural Design Review – Points Evaluation
Point
Weight
(optional) Total
1. Building orientation ------- ------- -------
a. To the street
b. For future infill
2. Roofing type and pitch
3. Roof line length
4. Building height
5. Building materials
6. Façade length variation
7. Color schemes
8. Location and proportion of porches, and
entrances
9. Location and proportion of windows
10. Ornamentation and details
11. Parking integration
12. Sign integration
13. Site landscaping design ------- ------- -------
a. Fencing/walls
b. Sidewalks
c. Trees
d. Solid waste enclosures
e. Additional features
14. Exterior lighting
TOTAL
DESIGN REVIEW AVERAGE SCORE (Total / 19)
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Central Business District Design Standards Chapter 20
Page 20-4
(7) Approval and Incentives 136
(a) Any project with a Design Review Average Score
of “0”, or more, will receive recommendation for
approval. Chapter 19 (Performance Standard Zone)
demonstrates several incentives that may be awarded
for projects achieving a positive score.126
(b) Adjustment to requirements of §4.16 this
Ordinance may be awarded based upon;
(i) Requirements of UDOT when dealing with SR-37
(1800 North) and SR-108 (2000 West);
(ii) Recommendations of a qualified Utah State
Licensed Traffic Engineer as outlined in an
acceptable traffic study;
(iii) Parking Lot Design
(A) Reduction of drive isle width from twenty (26)
feet to twenty four (24) feet.
(B) An increase in the percentage of compact car
spaces.
(8) Modifications. If it becomes impossible or
impractical to complete construction of a project in
accordance with the approved design, an alternative
design may be submitted which follows as closely as
possible the original design. This shall be considered
a new application and be subject to the same review
process.
(9) Change of Use 149. When there is any change of
use, as defined by this title and in the IBC, with
existing residential of commercial buildings, and/or
any modifications to the exterior of the building,
including but not limited to material and color
changes, the exterior of the building must comply
with the requirements/provisions of this chapter with
regards to design standards and site standards as
found within this title.
28-20-2 Prairie Style Architecture.
(1) General
(a) The ideas and principles of Prairie Architecture
evolved on the drafting boards of Chicago, Illinois
beginning in the 1890’s. Following the lead of Frank
Lloyd Wright, a group of architects developed over
the course of the next 25 years a style of architecture
that was unique to America.
(b) Frank Lloyd Wright believed that rooms in
Victorian era homes were boxed-in and confining. He
attempted to refine American housing by designing
houses with low horizontal lines and open interior
spaces. Prairie houses were designed to blend in with
the flat, prairie landscape.
(c) Many other architects produced Prairie homes
throughout the American Midwest. The style was
popularized by pattern books, and a subtype of the
style, the American Foursquare, became one of the
most common housing forms in the United States.
(2) Elements of Prairie Style Architecture.
(a) Elements common to the Prairie style of
architecture include:
(i) Simple, clean and bold
(ii) Horizontal lines, massing and patterns
(iii) Predominance of hipped roofs with a low roof
pitch, gabled roofs used for accents, entries etc.
(iv) Large, wide overhanging eaves
(v) Detailing – ornamentation on windows, handrails,
etc emphasizing horizontal lines
(vi) Fenestration – clustering and repetition of
windows
(vii) Use of geometric shapes
(viii) Use of square columns
(ix) Long, low walls (fencing)
(x) Contrasting color schemes
(b) Similar to Prairie style
architecture is the Craftsman
style, which was a popular
style from the early 1900’s to
1930. Although the Prairie
style has been selected as the
preferred architectural style for
the Clinton City Central
Business District, use of the
Craftsman style architecture is also deemed
acceptable. Although many elements are the same
between the two styles, the following are examples of
some elements in the Craftsman style, which vary
from the Prairie style:
(i) Exposed rafters
(ii) More use of vertical patterns
(iii) More use of wood and siding
(iv) Trellises
(3) Why Was the Prairie Style Chosen for Clinton?
(a) In April of 1998, the City presented with its first
commercial development and during the development
of the project the Planning Commission and City
Council desired to create a cohesive look and
aesthetic theme within the central business district of
the City. At the direction of the Council, the
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Central Business District Design Standards Chapter 20
Page 20-5
Planning Commission surveyed the existing
structures within the City and surrounding area
looking for an architectural theme that could be
utilized to establish individuality within the district.
The Commission focused its attentions on the
existing “Old Church”, located at 1387 West on 1800
North, as a prominent architectural feature within the
City.
(b) Research determined that this structure,
constructed in 1910 was of a design that
predominately exhibited the features of Prairie
architecture, which was prominent in the eastern
portion of the U.S. at the time. The Commission,
after additional research recommended that the
Council direct staff to indicate to potential developers
the desire for this type of architecture in all future
commercial development in the central business
district. At that time the staff utilized, A Field Guide
to American Houses, by Virginia and Lee McAlester
as a reference. In the latter part of 2003, the Council
recognized that the pressure for commercial
development within the City mandated a greater
emphasis in order to maintain the architectural design
desired. It was this greater concern that dictated the
development of this document.
(4) Goal of Using the Prairie Style Architecture.
Goal: To achieve a professional and a uniform
appearance among all Clinton City downtown
businesses following the Prairie Style architecture, as
shown in the attached exhibits. Uniformity implies a
complimentary look, not cookie-cutter sameness,
with variance options and some flexibility within the
adopted design standards. The desired effect of the
downtown businesses will have an appearance that is
simple, clean and bold.
28-20-3 Residential Design Objectives.
(1) Design Standards (Requirements)
(a) Roofing type / pitch. Roofing shall be compatible
with Prairie style architecture, including the
encouraged use of hipped roofs with a low roof pitch,
with gabled roofs used for accents, entries, etc.
Eaves shall be no less than three (3) feet, which will
help maintain horizontality of the Prairie style
architecture. Pitch of roofing shall be no higher than
5 feet of rise to 12 feet of run.
(b) Roof Line Length. For sides of the building
facing a public street, roof lines shall vary in depth,
shape or dimension every 20 feet. The change in
depth, shape or dimension must run the length of the
changed roof line
(c) Height Limitation. Buildings shall be limited to
two stories with a maximum height limit of 35 feet.
Additional may be approved with a conditional use
permit, considering whether the proportionate design
of the building maintains a chiefly horizontal
appearance.
(d) Building Materials. Acceptable materials include
brick, stucco, horizontal rock or split face block, No
flat or smooth face block (Concrete Masonry Unit
[CMU]) is allowed. Additional materials compatible
with the Prairie style may be approved by the
Planning Commission
(e) Color schemes. All structures shall have
contrasting color schemes using earth tones
(f) Façade Length. Facades lengths shall vary in
depth, shape or dimension every 20 feet at a
minimum depth of twenty four (24) inches. The
change in depth, shape or dimension must run the
length of the changed façade length.
(g) Fenestration. The
use of windows shall
include repetition and
clustering of
rectangular, narrow
windows. Window
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Central Business District Design Standards Chapter 20
Page 20-6
framing shall have a bold appearance.
(h) Mechanical shielding. Mechanical equipment,
solar panels, and other rooftop equipment shall be
shielded from view with roofing materials or other
architectural features with a horizontal appearance
compatible with the architecture.
(i) Fencing / walls. When required, fencing shall
consist of long, low walls achieving a horizontal
appearance. Columns are acceptable as long as the
overall appearance remains horizontal in character.
Chain link fencing is not permissible. If a chain link
fence exists prior to the development occurs,
replacement of the fence will be required.
(j) Ornamentation.
Ornamentation
consistent with Prairie
style architecture is
encouraged, including
detailing on windows,
handrails, columns, etc.
Emphasis should be on
the use horizontal lines.
(2) Landscaping. Residential landscaping should be
compatible with the building architecture. The
installation of well designed landscaping, including
the use of green, drought resistant and native plants is
encouraged. (see 28-3-20) Trees are encouraged to be
planted, following the tree planting guidelines as
shown on table 20.2.
(3) Architectural Design Photos. Figure 1 on the
following page displays several examples of the
application of the Prairie style architecture on
residential buildings.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Central Business District Design Standards Chapter 20
Page 20-7
FIGURE 1
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Central Business District Design Standards Chapter 20
Page 20-8
28-20-4 Commercial Design Objectives.
(1) Design Standards (Requirements)
(a) Roofing type / pitch. Roofing shall be compatible
with Prairie style architecture, including the
encouraged use of hipped roofs with a low roof pitch,
with gabled roofs used for accents, entries, etc.
Eaves shall be no less than three (3) feet, which will
help maintain horizontality of the Prairie style
architecture. Pitch of roofing shall be no higher than
5 feet of rise to 12 feet of run. 183
(b) Roof Line Length. For sides of the building
facing a public street, roof lines shall vary in depth,
shape or dimension every twenty (20) feet. For sides
of the building which do not face a public street, roof
lines shall vary in depth, shape or dimension every
forty (40) feet. The change in depth, shape or
dimension must run the length of the changed roof
line.
(c) Height Limitation. Buildings shall be limited to
maximum height limit established in Chapter 19,
Performance Standard Zone. When designing and
approving buildings the architectural review must
always consider whether the proportionate design of
the building maintains a chiefly horizontal
appearance. 183
(d) Building Materials.
Acceptable materials
include brick, stucco,
horizontal rock, or split
face block. No flat or
smooth face block (CMU)
is allowed. Additional
materials compatible with
the Prairie style may be approved by the Planning
Commission.
(e) Color schemes. All structures shall have
contrasting color schemes using earth tones.
(f) Fenestration. The use of windows shall include
repetition and clustering of rectangular or tall, narrow
windows. Window framing shall have a bold
appearance.
(g) Facade Length. Facades lengths shall vary in
depth, shape or dimension every twenty (20) feet at a
minimum depth of twenty four (24) inches. For sides
of the building which do not face a public street,
facades shall vary in depth, shape or dimension every
forty (40) feet. The change in depth, shape or
dimension must run the length of the changed façade
length.
(h) Mechanical shielding. Mechanical equipment,
solar panels, and other rooftop equipment shall be
shielded from view with roofing materials or other
architectural features with a horizontal appearance
compatible with the architecture. This also includes
screening and sound proofing of the equipment that is
on the ground.
(i) Fencing / walls. When required, fencing shall
consist of long, low walls achieving a horizontal
appearance. Columns are acceptable as long as the
overall appearance remains horizontal in character.
Chain link fencing is not permissible. If a chain link
fence exists prior to the development occurs,
replacement of the fence will be required.
(j) Lighting.
(i) Parking Lot Lights within the development shall
have a decorative style reflecting the architectural
style of the building, and shall be in accordance with
City lighting requirements. No cobra-style light
standards are allowed.
(ii) Exterior building lighting shall reflect the
architectural style of the building.
(k) Solid Waste
Enclosure. Solid waste
receptacles and
compactors which are not
located within a building,
shall be gated and
enclosed on three sides
with the same materials as
used on the main structures and reflect a style
complimentary to the Prairie style architecture.
(l) Ornamentation. Ornamentation consistent with
Prairie style architecture is encouraged, including
detailing on windows, handrails, columns, etc.
Emphasis should be on the use horizontal lines.
(2) Landscaping. Residential landscaping should be
compatible with the building architecture. The
installation of well designed landscaping, including
the use of green, drought resistant and native plants is
encouraged. (see 28-3-20) Trees are encouraged to be
planted, following the tree planting guidelines as
shown on table 20.2.
(3) Architectural Design Photos. Figure 2 on the
following page displays several examples of the
application of the Prairie style architecture on
commercial buildings.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Central Business District Design Standards Chapter 20
Page 20-9
FIGURE 2
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Central Business District Design Standards Chapter 20
Page 20-10
28-20-5 Big Box Design Objectives. The following
design objectives apply to big box buildings, defined
as having at least 25,000 square feet. Two or more
buildings with less than 25,000 square feet each that
are attached by an enclosed walkway must also
comply with big box design requirements. Such
buildings attached by open breezeways are not
subject to big box design requirements.
(1) Design Standards
(a) Applications of Prairie Style Architecture.
Design options exist for the development of big box
commercial operations in order to comply with the
architectural standards. Big box design shall
emphasize the use of:
(i) horizontal lines, massing and patterns
(ii) low pitch roofs with large overhangs, fascia
(iii) square columns contrasting color schemes
(iv) low wall planters in front of the building
(b) Roofing type / pitch.
Roofing for all
entrances, drivethroughs,
accents, and
special architectural
features shall be
compatible with Prairie
style architecture,
including the use of
hipped or gabled roofs
with a low roof pitch. Eaves shall be no less than
three (3) feet, which will help maintain horizontality
of the Prairie style architecture. Pitch of roofing
should be no higher than 6 feet of rise to 12 feet of
run. Drive through areas should be covered with a
compatible roof style.
(c) Roof Line Length. For sides of the building
facing a public street, roof lines shall vary in depth,
shape or dimension every thirty (30) feet. For sides
of the building which do not face a public street, roof
lines shall vary in depth, shape or dimension every
sixty (60) feet. The change in depth, shape or
dimension must run the length of the changed roof
line.
(d) Height Limitation. Buildings shall be limited to
two stories with a maximum height limit 40 feet.
Increased height or additional stories may be
approved with a conditional use permit, considering
whether the proportionate design of the building
maintains a chiefly horizontal appearance.
(e) Building Materials. Acceptable materials include
brick, stucco, horizontal rock, or split face block. No
flat or smooth face block (CMU) is allowed.
Additional materials compatible with the Prairie style
may be approved by the Planning Commission.
(f) Color schemes . All structures shall have
contrasting color schemes using earth tones.
(g) Fenestration. The use of windows shall include
repetition and clustering of rectangular or tall, narrow
windows. Window framing shall have a bold
appearance.
(h) Façade Length. Façades lengths shall vary in
depth, shape or dimension every thirty (30) feet at a
minimum depth of twenty four (24) inches. For sides
of the building which do not face a public street,
façades shall vary in depth, shape or dimension every
sixty (60) feet. The change in depth, shape or
dimension must run the length of the changed façade
length.
(i) Solid Waste
Enclosure. Solid
waste receptacles and
compactors which are
not located within a
building, shall be
enclosed on three
sides with the same
materials as used on the main structures, and reflect a
style complimentary to the Prairie Architecture Style.
(j) Fencing / walls. When required, fencing should
consist of long, low walls achieving a horizontal
appearance. Columns are acceptable if overall
appearance is horizontal. Chain link fencing is not
permissible. If a chain link fence exists prior to the
development occurs, replacement of the fence will be
required.
(k) Lighting.
(i) Parking Lot Lights within the development shall
have a decorative style reflecting the architectural
style of the building, and shall be in accordance with
City lighting requirements. No cobra-style light
standards are allowed.
(ii) Exterior building lighting shall reflect the
architectural style of the building
(l) Mechanical shielding. Mechanical equipment,
solar panels, and other rooftop equipment shall be
shielded from view with roofing materials or other
architectural features with a horizontal appearance.
This also includes screening and sound proofing of
the equipment that is on the ground.
(m) Ornamentation. Ornamentation consistent with
Prairie style architecture is encouraged, including
detailing on windows, handrails, columns, etc.
Emphasis should be on the use horizontal lines.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Central Business District Design Standards Chapter 20
Page 20-11
(2) Landscaping. Residential landscaping should be
compatible with the building architecture. The
installation of well designed landscaping, including
the use of green, drought resistant and native plants is
encouraged. (see 28-3-20) Trees are encouraged to be
planted, following the tree planting guidelines as
shown on table 20.2.
(3) Architectural Design Photos. Figure 3 on the
following page displays several examples of the
application of the Prairie style architecture on big box
commercial buildings.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Central Business District Design Standards Chapter 20
Page 20-12
FIGURE 3
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Central Business District Design Standards Chapter 20
Page 20-13
28-20-6 Additional Design Objectives.
(1) Landscaping. The installation of streetscape
elements is required or all new developments along
2000 West and 1800 North Streets. Non-plant
elements shall be complimentary to the Prairie Style
Architecture, reflecting an old-fashioned, or pre-
1930’s style and appearance. Requirements for
streetscape elements shall be considered separate and
in addition to site design, landscaping and setback
requirements. At a minimum, the following
streetscape elements shall be installed by new
developments:
(2) Street Trees. Trees shall be planted in accordance
with the following:
(a) A minimum of two (2) trees shall be planted
every fifty feet (50’) in the landscaped strip, in tree
grates/wells on wide sidewalks, or in the on-site
buffer areas.
(b) Trees shall be two (2) inches in caliper measured
at ground level.
(c) Trimmed to a height of 7 feet over the sidewalk
and 14 feet over the street.
(d) Trees to be planted within the park-strip shall be
chosen from Table 20.2.
(3) Other Features. The following streetscape
features shall be encouraged to be installed, and will
offer a bonus multiplier in Architectural Design
Review points:
(a) drinking fountains
(b) outdoor clocks
(c) monuments
(d) public art, significant in size
(e) special surface walkways
(f) others approved by the Planning Commission.
Clinton City STREET Trees List Table 20.2
In a 3 to 4 foot park strip:
Columnar Norway Maple Chanticleer Pear Mountain Ash
Queen Elizabeth Hedge Maple Bradford Pear Bechtel Crabapple
Flowering Plum Aristocrat Pear Eastern Redbud
In a 4 to 5 ½ foot park strip:
Chanticleer Pear Imperial Honey locust Emerald Queen Norway Maple
Bradford Pear Sunburst Honey locust Schwedleri Norway Maple
Aristocrat Pear Shademaster Honey locust Deborah Norway Maple
Little Leaf Linden Hackberry Queen Elizabeth Hedge Maple
The following are not acceptable or allowed as street trees:
All varieties of Bearing Nut Trees All species of Willow (including
Walnut, Pecan & Hickory)
All up-right-growing species and
varieties of Conifers (including
Spruce, Pine, Fir, and Juniper)
Tree of Heaven (Bird of Paradise All species of Birch
Tree)
All varieties of bearing fruit trees
(including Crabapple, All species of Elm
All species of Cottonwood All species of Poplar Catalpa
Paul’s Scarlet Hawthorn Globe Catalpa Silver Maple
London Planetree Boxelder Black Locust
Apple, Pear, Plum & Cherry) Sycamore Mulberry
Umbrella Catalpa
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Central Business District Design Standards Chapter 20
Page 20-14
FIGURE 4
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Central Business District Design Standards Chapter 20
Page 20-15
Historic Changes to Chapter (see chapter 24 for
details)
3, 181
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Zoning Map Chapter 21
Page
Chapter 21. Zoning Map
18-21-1 Purpose and Intent
18-21-2 Interpretation of the Zoning Map
18-21-3 Appeals to Map Interpretations
28-21-1 Purpose and Intent. The Clinton City
Zoning Map is attached to this Ordinance and is
officially part of this Ordinance.
28-21-2 Interpretation of the Zoning Map.
Determinations of boundaries as established by the
Clinton City Zoning Map will be made by the
Community Development Department. These
decisions will be based upon the following guidelines.
(1) Boundaries are established based upon the legal
upon the legal description outlined in the ordinance
establishing the zone. 123
(2) Boundaries are established based upon natural
barriers, roads and features.
(3) Boundaries are established at the time of adoption
of the map based upon established property lines.
(4) Boundaries are established between property lines
at logical divisions of the sections, on section, 1/4
section, and 1/16 section lines.
(5) Performance Zone boundaries are interpreted
based upon the intended development application.
The Performance Zone boundary is intended to be
fluid in its application in that the Performance Zone of
an existing parcel may be extended into a parcel that
is not currently zoned Performance Zone. The
following are utilized in this interpretation:
(a) The property is all part of one proposed
development site plan.
(b) That the Performance Zone boundary created by
the development is contiguous.
(c) The development does not require that the
Performance Zone leapfrog over other zones.
(d) The property is recorded as one parcel at the time
the development is proposed.
(e) The property does not include residential use.
(f) The expansion of the Performance Zone does not
create any non-conforming uses within the zone.
28-21-3 Appeals to Map Interpretations. Appeals
to the decision of the Community Development
Department shall be made through the following line
of appeals and through the appropriate action
indicated.
(1) Community Development Director. Appeals may
be made in writing on a form provided by the city, if
available and shall be accompanied with the
following: 123
(a) Name address and phone number of the applicant.
(b) A copy of the city map indicating the property in
question.
(c) A fee paid as prescribed in the Clinton City
Consolidated Fee Schedule and set from time to time
and adopted by resolution of the City Council.
(2) Board of Zoning Adjustments. Appeal shall be in
accordance with Chapter 10 of this ordinance.
A-1
A-1
A-1
A-1
R-1-10
PZ
A-1
R-1-15
A-1
R-1-10
PH
PZ
A-1
R-1-10
A-1
A-1
A-E
R-1-8
R-1-9
R-1-15
R-1-8A
A-1
A-E
A-1
R-1-9
PZ
R-1-9
R-1-10
A-1
R-1-8
MP-1
R-1-9
R-1-10
A-E
R-1-10
R-1-6
R-M
R-1-9
R-1-8A
R-1-9
R-1-15
R-1-8A
R-1-15
R-1-10
A-1
R-1-9
R-1-10
R-1-9
R-1-6
A-1
R-1-9
A-1
A-1
A-1
A-1
CP-1
A-1
R-1-8
R-1-8
PZ
CP-2
A-E
CP-2
A-E
R-1-9
MP-1
CP-2
A-1
R-1-9
R-1-10
R-M
A-E
A-E
R-1-9
A-1
R-1-9
R-1-10
CP-2
CP-2
PZ R-1-8A
R-1-10
A-1
A-1
R-1-9
R-M
R-1-10
A-1
2300 N
2000 W
3000 W
1500 W
800 N
1300 N
1010 N
1000 W
2600 W
950 W
750 W
600 W
1145 N
910 N
2100 N
1800 N
725 W
1600 N
775 W
1425 N
1925 N
3125 W
2530 W
2700 W
1570 N
1075 N
2450 N
2220 N
2275 W
2500 N
2525 W
720 W
840 W
690 W
2600 N
2075 N
1520 N
2120 N
660 W
1300 W
1680 N
1750 N
730 W
2250 N
2175 N
1580 N
1500 N
3420 W
1470 N
810 W
1950 N
2050 N
1000 N
3250 W
1960 N
1225 W
550 W
1395 N
1120 W
1285 W
630 W
570 N
2775 W
2890 W
2835 W
1060 W
1375 W
1800 W
1060 N
1435 W 1450 W
3060 W
1720 W
1350 W
1740 N
2225 W
525 W
575 W
1630 N
3455 W
900 W
2405 W
1550 N
2475 W
890 W
735 N
2415 N
2250 W
1170 W
1235 W
1675 N
850 W
2200 N
1860 N
700 W
2350 N
1450 N
2500 W
2350 W
1175 N
2220 W
1700 N
1185 W
2550 N
970 W
1650 N
2930 W
2800 W
2670 W
670 W
1400 W
2150 N
1250 W
2740 W
1825 W
1900 W
780 W
1850 N
950 N
1350 N
1340 N
1220 W
1750 W
1400 N
1460 N
1900 N
1220 N
2575 N
1050 W
2290 W
173 W
1025 N
2090 W
2845 W
2225 N
1620 N
1045 N
2650 N
1230 W
2030 W
1130 N
1875 N
1200 N
1930 N
960 N
1320 W
1615 W
1635 N
1870 N
2000 N
2475 N
1730 N
1250 N
1360 N
1615 W
100 N
2165 W
2275 W
1500 W
950 W
2000 W
2650 N
810 W
950 W
800 N
1500 W
2300 N
1300 N
2120 N
1580 N
1520 N
2250 N
630 W
1300 N
2175 N
1300 W
720 W
800 N
1680 N
3000 W
2300 N
2120 N
1000 N
550 W
1000 W
1170 W
2600 N
2050 N
2775 W
2175 N
1600 N 1400 N
3000 W
1200 N
2050 N
800 N
1850 N
1680 N
750 W
1740 N
1000 W
2075 N
1400 N
2930 W
2600 N
1250 W
2075 N
2000 W
1350 W
1500 W
750 W
1750 N
900 W
2300 N
1000 W
2500 N
1500 N
2175 N
1550 N
1950 N
2225 W
1300 N
Ê
1,500 750 0 1,500
Feet
ZONING MAP
OF
CLINTON CITY
REVISIONS
Descriptions Date Ordinance
A-1 to R-1-9 3/22/05 05-01Z
A-1 to AE 5/17/05 05-03Z
A-1 to MP-1 (2277 We. 1300 No.) 10/11/05 05-05Z
A-1 to AE (3362 We. 1800 No.) 11/22/05 05-06Z
A-1 to AE (3269 We. 1800 No.) 11/22/05 05-07Z
A-1 to AE (3223 We. 1800 No.) 11/22/05 05-08Z
A-1 to R-1-15 (912 No. 3000 We.) 11/22/05 05-09Z
A-1 to R-1-10 (822 North 3000 We.) 1/24/06 06-02Z
R-1-10 to PZ (1906 We. 1800 No.) 2/14/06 06-03Z
A-1- to R-1-10 (1870 We. 2300 No.) 4/11/06 06-04Z
A-1 to R-1-9 (570 No. 1700 We.) 7/25/06 06-05Z
A-1 to R-1-15 (2225 We. 2300 No.) 6/20/06 06-07Z
A-1 to PZ (2375 No. 2000 We.) 6/20/06 06-08Z
A-1 to PZ (2580 No. 2000 We.) 6/27/06 06-09Z
A-1 to R-1-15 (1600 We. 2300 No.) 6/27/06 06-10Z
A-1 to R-1-10 (1500 We. 2300 No.) 6/27/06 06-11Z
A-1 to R-1-10 (2941 We. 1800 No.) 6/27/06 06-12Z
PZ to PH (Shady Grove Subdivision) 7/18/06 06-13Z
A-1 to R-1-15 (approx 2750 We. 800 No.) 2/27/07 07-04Z
A-1 to A-E (approx 1457 No. 3000 We.) 5/22/07 07-08Z
A-1 to PZ (approx 975 No. 2000 We.)
A-1 to R-1-15 (approx 2500 We. 800 No.)
6/12/07 07-07Z
A-1 to R-1-9 (approx 632 No. 1500 We.) 6/12/07 07-09Z
A-1 to R-1-15 (approx 2500 No. 3000 We.) 6/12/07 07-10Z
A-1 to A-E (1627 & 1637 No. 3000 We.) 7/17/07 07-11Z
A-1 to A-E (1307 We. 800 No.) 8/14/07 07-12Z
R-1-15 to PZ (2600 No. 1750 We.) 4/8/08 08-01Z
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Patio Home Zone (PH) Chapter 22
Page 22-1
Chapter 22. Patio Home Zone (PH) 139, 182, 195,
211, 212, 219
28-22-1 Purpose
28-22-2 Permitted Uses
28-22-3 Conditional Uses
28-22-4 Minimum Lot Development
28-22-5 Homeowners Association Required
28-22-6 Application Process
28-22-1 Purpose. The purpose of the Patio Home
Zone is to provide an acceptable housing style for
single family “empty nest” type housing that is a
sustainable quality product within Clinton City. The
Zone is intended for infill use within the guidelines
established within this Title. Development within
any subdivision within the Zone is to be based upon
an overall site design created by and developed
completely by one developer and home builder.
28-22-2 Permitted Uses. 182
(1) Single-family dwelling.
(2) Home Office.
(3) Household Pets.
(4) Sign – One nameplate and identification sign in
accordance with the Clinton City Sign Ordinance.
(5) Accessory buildings and uses customarily
incidental to any permitted use.
(6) Common area and amenities maintained by the
homeowners association.
(7) Temporary on site storage containers for
emergency construction or repair of residences, with
the following stipulations:
(a) Must be placed on a hard surface.
(b) Can only be present for 3 months out of a 12
month period.
28-22-3 Infill Site Development Characteristics.195,
211
(1) Use of this Zone is only permitted to be applied
for within the R-1-6, R-1-8, R-1-8a, and R-1-9
Zones.
(2) Infill will only be permitted on parcels meeting
the following criteria:
(a) Maximum of 18 acres;
(b) Property can not have been subdivided from a
larger parcel to meet requirements for this zone
within the last ten (10) years;
(c) Property surrounding the parcel being developed
must be fully developed; and,
(3) Development requirements shall comply with the
minimum lot standards outlined in § 28-22-4.
28-22-4 Minimum Lot Development Standards.
(1) Area –
(a) Minimum: 5,100 square feet
(b) Average: 6,300
(c) Corner minimum: 5,400 square feet
(2) Width –
(a) Minimum: 57 feet
(b) Average: 64 feet
(i) Corner: 61 feet
(3) Yard Setback:
TABLE 22.4.3
Dwelling Design Rear
Lot
Patio
Side Lot
Patio
Adjacent
Zone
Front of Dwelling
Major Street As
Described in the
Clinton City
Transportation
Master Plan
Not Allowed
Front 20 20 20
Side w/o Side Patio 5 / 5 8 / 5
Side with Side Patio 5 / 16 8 / 16
Street Side 16 / 5 16 / 16 16 / 16
Street Side Patio
toward street
21 / 5
Rear 20 10 20
Patio Awning
Unenclosed
Shall not extend into more
than ½ of required setback
Patio Awning
Enclosed
Shall not extend into the
required setback
Accessory
Building219
The size and location of any
accessory buildings shall be
evaluated and approved
during the approval process
and shall be outlined in the
development agreement and
CC&R’s. Otherwise none
allowed.
Shed (Yard Shed)
Less than 200 SF in
size219
Permitted when all zoning
requirements of Chapter 3
(Section 28-3-25(5)) are met.
Note: 5-foot side lots cannot be adjacent if fence is
going to be part of the development design.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Patio Home Zone (PH) Chapter 22
Page 22-2
(4) Building Height:
TABLE 22.4.4
Main Building Story 1 story*
Height 25 feet
Accessory
Building
Minimum 6 feet
Maximum 1 story or
15 feet **
*Habitable attic space permitted over garage area. No
alteration of roofline or dormers allowed. 211
** Not to exceed height of main building on lot
(5) Building size:
TABLE 22.4.5
Minimum Dwelling Unit
Square Footage
1,430
Minimum Finished Living
Space
1,430
Minimum Garage Size 2 car
Accessory Building 400 sq. ft. maximum
(6) Aesthetics: 212
TABLE 22.4.6
Exterior Front 100% Brick, stone or
fiber cement board
Sides 100% Brick, stone or
fiber cement board
Rear 100% Brick, stone or
fiber cement board
Patio Minimum 200 square feet
Landscaping and Automatic
Sprinkler System
Installed with
construction contract*
Park strip trees 1 per frontage, 1.5
average per frontage*
Fencing Standardized within
development
Architecture Consistent theme
among all structures
*Developer shall pay a Landscape Cash Bond of
$8,500, specifically for the landscape installation, at
the time of issuance of the Building Permit. The
normal landscape installation will be required within
30 days of the C/O issuance. However, when that 30
day period cannot be achieved due to the short
secondary water season, the landscape shall be
installed by or prior to the next May 15th. The entire
Landscape Cash Bond amount shall be held by the
City until final completion of the required
landscaping.
(7) Site Development Characteristics: 211
TABLE 22.4.7
Maximum Acreage 18
Maximum Density/Acre 5
Maximum Lots 90
Public Streets Public
Utilities Public
Street Design Standard City Design
Street Lights City Design
28-22-5 Homeowners Association Required: All
developments within the Zone shall have a
Homeowners Association established with
Conditions, Covenants and Restrictions (CC&R’s).
CC&R’s, at a minimum, are to establish the
requirements of this Chapter, the Development
Agreement and CC&R’s shall be consistent between
all phases of the development and apply equally to all
property owners.
28-22-6 Application Process. 211
(1) A rezone request shall be applied for on forms
provided by the City and as outlined in Chapter 1 of
this Title.
(2) Rezone, if approved, shall be conditional upon
final approval of a subdivision and development
design; and,
(3) Subdivision and development design may be
submitted simultaneous with the rezone application,
however this will not have any bearing upon the
approval or denial of the rezone application.
A Patio Home Infill development may create a
development agreement during the approval process.
If a development agreement is used, it will outline the
design requirements and stipulations established
between the developer and city. The agreement shall
be recorded against the property and be binding upon
the developer and future owners of property within
the development.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Kiosks, Mobile Stores, Swap Meets, Sidewalk and Parking Lot Sales Chapter 23
Page 23-1
Chapter 23. Kiosks, Mobile Stores, Swap
Meets, Sidewalk and Parking Lot Sales
28-23-1 Definitions
28-23-2 General Regulations
28-23-3 Kiosk Regulations
28-23-4 Mobile Store Regulations
28-23-5 Resource Recycling Collection Point
Regulations
28-23-6 Reverse Vending Machine Regulations
28-23-7 Off-Site Sales Regulations
28-23-8 Swap Meet
28-23-9 Sidewalk and Parking Lot Sales
28-23-10 Performance Assurance
28-23-11 Removal of Abandoned Uses
28-23-12 Exceptions
28-23-13 Violations
28-23-1 Definitions.
“Kiosk” shall mean a structure two hundred square
feet or smaller in area and affixed to a permanent
foundation. A Kiosk is secondary to a main use
found on the site but not necessarily related to the
main use. Therefore, a kiosk does not require a
separate lot. A Kiosk may be used for the purpose of
giving information, retailing goods, or providing
services.
“Mobile Store” shall mean a portable structure,
including vehicles, without a permanent foundation,
for use on a temporary or seasonal basis, from which
goods or merchandise are sold or where a service is
provided which is utilized on the premises. This
definition shall also include such operations as
Christmas tree sales.
“Off-Site Sale” shall mean the temporary use of
property for the purpose of selling any type of
merchandise, in which said property is not under the
direct ownership of the seller.
“Owner” shall mean the person having ownership.
Person includes any individual, group of individuals,
partnership, corporation, association or other legal
entity.
“Recyclable Materials” shall mean aluminum, steel,
copper, plastic, glass, paper and/or other similar
items that may be recycled for remanufacturing or
reprocessing of similar materials.
“Resource Recycling Collection Point” shall mean
a portable structure, enclosed bin or trailer, where
recyclable materials are exchanged for money or
deposited as a donation.
“Reverse Vending Machine” shall mean a machine
for the collection of recyclable materials which will
dispense U.S. coins or receipts redeemable for U.S.
currency to the depositor according to the number or
weight of collected recyclable materials.
“Seller” shall mean any person or persons offering
for sale any item at a swap meet.
“Sidewalk or Parking Lot Sale” shall mean a city
licensed business offering goods for sale at a
temporary, special event where a parking lot or
sidewalk associated with the business, other than
public right-of-way is utilized for display of goods.
“Swap Meet” shall mean a location where the owner
or lessee rents, lends or leases portions of the
premises to persons for use as an open market place
to barter, exchange or sell goods. A flea market shall
be considered a swap meet. Yard sales and garage
sales at residences are not swap meets.
28-23-2 General Regulations. The Building
Official shall review all applications for uses
described in this chapter to ensure the protection of
the public health, safety, and general welfare. The
Building Official shall not authorize a kiosk, mobile
store, resource recycling or reverse vending machine
use permit unless all of the following conditions are
met:
(1) The use will not be materially detrimental to the
public health, safety, or welfare, nor injurious to
property or improvements in the immediate vicinity
of the use; and
(2) The use is compatible with the purpose and intent
of this code and the specific land use in which it will
be located; and
(3) The use is compatible in intensity and appearance
with the existing land uses in the immediate vicinity
of the use; and
(4) Structures proposed for the use comply with
setback and clear view requirements of the zoning
ordinance and the applicable Building and Fire Code
standards; and
(5) Access is provided such that on-street parking is
not required. The use shall be placed so as not to
disrupt the traffic flow into or on the site; and
(6) Adequate parking is provided to serve the use,
and if applicable, the use does not create a parking
shortage for other existing uses on the site; and
(7) Hours of operation of the use are specified and
are noted on any structure, trailer, bin or vehicle on
the site where the operation is conducted; and
(8) The use will not cause noise, light, or glare which
adversely impacts surrounding uses; and
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Kiosks, Mobile Stores, Swap Meets, Sidewalk and Parking Lot Sales Chapter 23
Page 23-2
(9) The applicant has obtained written permission
from the property owner to locate the proposed use;
and
(10) No other kiosk, mobile store or resource
recycling collection point is found within two
hundred fifty feet of another such use; and
(11) The use complies with all sign requirements as
described in Title 24 “Signs and Advertising
Devices;” and
(12) The use shall be located on improved property
including a main building, paved parking, curb and
gutter, sidewalk, landscaping and fire protection
systems as required by the city; and
(13) Each kiosk, mobile store, swap meet, sidewalk
and parking lot sale shall have a current Clinton City
business license except when said use is a part of the
main use found on the site. Each company or
individual operating one or more resource recycling
collection points and/or reverse vending machines
shall have a single current business license.
(14) Each kiosk, mobile store, swap meet, sidewalk
and parking lot sale shall apply for and gain a
conditional use permit as outlined in Chapter 5, of
this Ordinance.
28-23-3 Kiosk Regulations. In addition to the
regulations listed in 23.02, kiosks shall also meet the
following requirements;
(1) A kiosk shall have appropriate utility connections,
inspected for compliance to city codes.
(2) When applicable, a kiosk shall have written
acceptance of the operation from the Davis county
Health Department.
(3) No kiosk shall be located closer than one hundred
(100) feet to any residentially zoned property.
(4) A kiosk shall be surrounded by a minimum fourfoot
wide landscape strip except at the entrance
drive-up window or walk-up-window.
(5) The site shall be cared for so as to keep it in a
clean, neat and orderly manner.
(6) A kiosk shall collect and keep all waste within the
structure except at time of pick-up.
(7) A kiosk shall be illuminated to ensure the comfort
and safety of patrons during nighttime hours.
28-23-4 Mobile Store Regulations. In addition to
the regulations listed in 23.02, mobile stores shall
also meet the following requirements:
(1) The structure shall have a maximum outside
display area of one hundred square feet located a
minimum of ten feet from all property lines, not in
landscaped areas and not obstructing access to the
property; except that Christmas tree sales lots may be
located as approved by the planning commission.
(2) The structure shall be secured to or placed on the
ground so as to be stable in a seventy-five mph wind.
(3) The structure shall have appropriate utility
connections, inspected for compliance to city codes.
(4) When applicable, a mobile store shall have
written acceptance of the operation from the Davis
County Health Department.
(5) No mobile store shall be located closer than one
hundred (100) feet to any residentially zoned
property.
28-23-5 Resource Recycling Collection Point
Regulations. In addition to the regulations listed in
23.02, resource collection points shall also meet the
following requirements:
(1) All recyclable materials shall be contained within
an enclosed container.
(2) The site shall be cared for so as to keep it clean,
neat, free of snow, and in an orderly manner. All lids
to the bin must be kept closed. The host property
owner and/or the sponsoring party must check bins
on a daily basis. If the site is not kept clean the host
and sponsor will be sent a letter requiring them to
bring the site into compliance. If the site receives two
(2) such letters the Planning Commission may revoke
the right of the sponsor and the host to locate a
recycling collection bin at the site. If this right is
revoked letters will be sent to the sponsoring party
and the recycling bin owner. The recycling bin must
be removed within fourteen (14) days of the action by
the Planning Commission or the City will remove the
bin and the cost of removal and storage will be
charged to the recycling bin owner.
(3) The structure shall be secured to or placed on the
ground so as to be stable in a seventy-five mph wind.
(4) The structure shall have appropriate utility
connections, inspected for compliance to City codes.
(5) No receptacle shall exceed forty feet in length.
(6) No receptacle shall be located closer than one
hundred (100) feet from any residentially zoned
property unless specifically approved by the Planning
Commission. Resource recycling collection points in
single family residential zones shall be allowed only
on institutional use properties with Planning
Commission approval. Resource recycling collection
points may also be located in apartment complexes in
multi-family zones with Planning Commission
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Kiosks, Mobile Stores, Swap Meets, Sidewalk and Parking Lot Sales Chapter 23
Page 23-3
approval if the resource recycling collection point
does not interfere with required parking.
The following criteria shall be used in determining if
a resource recycling collection point shall be allowed
in commercial or residentially zoned property or
located closer than 100' to residentially zoned
property:
(a) Existing landscape buffers and screening walls
between the recycling collection point and the
residential use.
(b) Consideration regarding existing lighting in the
area where the recycling collection point is proposed.
(c) The recycling collection point must be a
minimum of fifty-feet (50’) from residential
structures.
(d) Consideration regarding proximity and view from
existing streets.
(e) Resource recycling bins must be colored using
neutral earth tones.
(f) If two units are placed on a single parcel they
must be compatible and similar in size.
(g) Each receptacle shall be clearly marked with the
owner's name, address and telephone number, and
notice that no recyclable materials or waste shall be
left outside the approved container.
28-23-6 Reverse Vending Machine Regulations.
In addition to the regulations listed in 23.02, reverse
vending machines shall also meet the following
requirements:
(1) The reverse vending machine shall not exceed
two hundred (200) square feet in area.
(2) The reverse vending machine shall be of durable
construction.
(3) The structure shall be secured to or placed on the
ground so as to be stable in a 75 mph wind.
(4) The structure shall have appropriate utility
connections, inspected for compliance to City codes.
(5) The reverse vending machine shall be clearly
identified with the permittee's name, address,
telephone number, hours of operation, and notice that
no recyclable materials or waste shall be left outside
the machine.
(6) The site shall be cared for so as to keep it in a
clean, neat and orderly manner.
(7) The reverse vending machine shall have a wholly
self-contained mechanical process inaccessible to the
public, designed for the specific purpose of
dispensing coins or issuing receipts in exchange for
the return of recyclable materials.
(8) The reverse vending machine shall retain all
recyclable materials deposited into the machine. It
may retain, reject, or not accept non-recyclable
material.
(9) The reverse vending machine shall have an
electronic weighing or counting system shall be
certifiable by the State Department of Weights and
Measures to ensure proper posted payments to the
public.
(10) The reverse vending machine shall inform the
user by visual display or audio communication the
number or weight equivalent of recyclable materials
deposited and the coin or currency value being paid
for such recyclable materials.
(11) The reverse vending machine shall be serviced
and unloaded as required to maintain continuous
operation and clean appearance.
(12) The reverse vending machine shall be
illuminated to ensure the comfortable and safe
operation of the machine between dusk and dawn.
(13) No reverse vending machine shall be located
closer than one hundred (100) feet to any
residentially zoned property.
28-23-7 Off-Site Sales Regulations. Off-site sales
shall comply with all of the following requirements:
(1) Purpose and Intent: It is the purpose and intent of
this section to facilitate the mutually beneficial
activity of off-site sales while protecting the public's
health, safety, and welfare. The City desires that
businesses within the City be able to use their
property to enhance the business and that creative
marketing strategies not be encumbered. The City
also desires the integrity of traffic flows, fire lanes,
pedestrian traffic, and aesthetic objectives not be
compromised.
(2) Property owner responsibilities. An application
for a conditional use for conducting off-site sales
shall be submitted by the property owner to the
Community Development Department at least four
(4) Mondays prior to the Planning Commission
meeting the applicant requests to be scheduled for. A
conditional use application for an off-site sale shall
contain:
(a) A site plan which shall contain the following
information:
(i) The area that will be utilized by the off-site sale in
detail, including the existing parking, landscaping,
fire access lanes, drive accesses, etc.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Kiosks, Mobile Stores, Swap Meets, Sidewalk and Parking Lot Sales Chapter 23
Page 23-4
(ii) The location of any signs to be placed for the offsite
sale.
(iii) The location of any temporary structure
including, but not limited to, fences, tents, canopies,
food sales equipment, etc.
(iv) Completed conditional use application with the
required fee.
(3) Vendor responsibilities. The vendor shall be
responsible for submitting the application for the
temporary business license/off-site sales permit to the
Community Development Department no later than
seven (7) days prior to the sale. The applicant shall
comply with all of the following requirements:
(a) Proof that the Utah State Tax Commission has
been notified of the off-site sale or proof of
exemption.
(b) Each individual off-site sale shall require a
separate temporary business license.
(c) No off-site sale shall be conducted for more than
five (5) consecutive days.
(d) No portion of any off-site sale may be conducted
within the landscaped areas on the site including the
placement of signs.
(e) The off-site sale shall not utilize more than thirtyfive
percent (35%) of the required off-street parking
for the on-site merchant. In no situation shall public
streets be used for parking.
(f) There may be multiple vendors using one off-site
sale site if they are within the approved site plan area
and each has obtained a temporary business license.
(g) The on-site merchant or property owner may also
utilize designated parking area as long as it is in
compliance with the approved site plan.
(h) The off-site sale shall not cause any designated
fire lane to become blocked at any time.
(i) No merchandise shall be placed in a manner that
constitutes a hazard to the walking or driving public,
i.e., the blocking of clear view areas.
(j) Any applicant that is denied a temporary business
license by the Community Development Department
may appeal such decision to the Planning
Commission at the next practical, regularly scheduled
meeting which is at least fourteen (14) days in
advance of the first day of the off-site sale.
28-23-8 Swap Meet.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person, firm,
corporation, or charity to hold a swap meet or flea
market without having first obtained a license
therefore, as is herein provided; but the license for a
charity may be waived by the City Council.
(2) An application for swap meet license shall be
made to the Community Development Department
and shall state thereon the name of the applicant, the
place of business, and the number of employees
intended to be engaged. The applicant shall provide a
faithful performance bond for the amount of $1,000
acceptable to the Community Development Director,
as an agent of Clinton City engaged in selling of
business licenses as required in Section 20.8.3. The
fee for issuing a swap meet license shall be as set
forth in the Clinton City Consolidated Fee Schedule.
The applicant shall provide a Utah Criminal History
and National Child protection Act Background
Check, BCI WIN check. In addition, an inspection by
the Clinton City Building Division and the Clinton
City Fire Department shall be conducted to verify
compliance with applicable building and fire code
requirements.
(3) All sellers shall either apply for a separate
business license in order to sell on the premises of a
swap meet licensee, or shall pay to the City, through
the licensee, a fee of $1.00 per sales day and shall
furnish to the swap meet licensee a written
application containing the following information:
(a) His or her name, address, occupation, and driver's
license number and State of issue. If the applicant has
no driver's license, he or she shall show some other
form of positive picture identification, and the
identifying numbers shall be recorded on the
application.
(b) A general description of the articles he or she is
offering for sale. If any of the articles have serial
numbers, the specific article, its description and its
serial number shall be listed.
(c) The following certification is to be signed by the
applicant: "I certify that I am the lawful and legal
owner of the listed property which is free and clear
from all liens and encumbrances, I further certify that
the property descriptions are true and correct, and I
am aware that a copy of this application shall be
forwarded to the Chief of Police immediately after it
is submitted to the owner of the premises where the
sale is held."
(4) A swap meet licensee shall have the right to issue
daily business licenses to individual sellers upon
receiving the required $1.00 per sales day fee and the
signed application as required by this Chapter. This
fee shall be remitted to the City. A licensee shall have
the right to refuse to issue a daily business license to
any applicant who does not have positive
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Kiosks, Mobile Stores, Swap Meets, Sidewalk and Parking Lot Sales Chapter 23
Page 23-5
identification or who the licensee has reasonable
cause to believe is attempting to sell stolen property.
(5) The information required in Section 20.8.4, above
shall be recorded in triplicate on a form provided by
the City. One copy shall be delivered to the
Community Development Department along with the
proceeds from licenses sold, on a weekly basis. The
reports are due on Monday mornings. One copy shall
be delivered to the seller and the licensee shall retain
the remaining copy.
(6) No sales of firearms, pyrotechnics, ammunition,
explosives, alcoholic beverages, pornography, drug
paraphernalia, medicines, drinks or food or any
contraband, shall be made by daily sellers on the
swap meet licensee's premises; except the sale of
food or drink prepared on the premises where the
seller thereof has applied for and obtained the
necessary health department permits; or where such
sale of food and drink only involves packaged or
canned goods obtained from another licensed and
regulated business. In addition, any animals that are
sold at a swap meet shall be sold in accordance with
the rules and regulations established by Davis County
Animal Control and are subject to their inspection.
Animals shall be kept in a shaded area, and shall have
food and water immediately available.
(7) It shall be the duty of every swap meet licensee to
report to the Clinton City Police Department any
article he or she has reason to believe was stolen, or
lost, and for sale by a seller at the swap meet.
(8) A business license or a one-day license shall be
denied, suspended or revoked without refund where
the applicant, licensee, one-day licensee, or manager
or operator of the swap meet:
(a) Is not 18 years or older; or
(b) Is not found to be of good moral character; or
(c) Who has, in the past seven years, been convicted
of or is presently charged with a felony in violation
of any law relating to burglary, theft, robbery,
receiving stolen property, or any law involving moral
turpitude;
(d) Who has, in the past five years, been convicted of
or is presently charged with a misdemeanor in
violation of any law or ordinance relating to theft,
receiving stolen property, or any law or ordinance
involving moral turpitude; or
(e) Who has any outstanding warrants, or who pled
guilty to or forfeited his bail on a charge of having
committed a felony; or
(f) Who is a partnership, any member of which lacks
any of the qualifications of this section; or
(g) Who is a corporation in which an officer or
director lacks any of the qualifications of this section.
(h) In addition to the other penalties provided by law,
any swap meet licensee violating the provision of this
Chapter may have his or her license revoked or
suspended.
(9) A swap meet operator shall obtain a temporary
business license, shall not conduct the business of
pawnbroker or secondhand dealer without having
obtained the licenses required for such businesses as
provided in Title 15.
(10) A swap meet operator shall hire Uniformed
Category 1 peace officers to be present at each swap
meet to insure that the provisions of this Chapter are
complied with and that other applicable City
ordinances and State statutes are not violated. The
number of officers required shall be as follows:
(a) One officer shall be required for all swap meets
with 25 or less one-day licensees.
(b) Two officers shall be required for all swap meets
with more than 25 but less than 100 one-day
licensees.
(c) One additional officer shall be required for each
100 daily licensees above the first 100. The costs for
providing said peace officers shall be paid for by the
swap meet licensee.
(11) A swap meet shall not operate for more than two
days in any seven-day period.
28-23-9 Sidewalk and Parking Lot Sales.
(1) All businesses are limited to two parking lot or
sidewalk sales per year and all such sales shall run no
longer than three days unless otherwise accepted by
issuance of a conditional use permit as outlined in
Chapter 5 of this ordinance. During consideration of
any conditional use permit the Commission will also
consider the following items 117:
(a) Establish a date of expiration of the permit not to
exceed five (5) years from the date of issue. If the
Planning Commission does not stipulate an
expiration date the permit is assumed to expire five
(5) years from the date of issue.
(b) Parking lot sales lasting longer than three (3) days
shall be fenced with a temporary structure suitable to
the Commission.
(c) Sale of gravel, fertilizer, seed, or other such items
that can be carried by the wind, create obnoxious
odors, or easily scattered shall only be allowed in
packaged quantities, not as bulk sales.
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Kiosks, Mobile Stores, Swap Meets, Sidewalk and Parking Lot Sales Chapter 23
Page 23-6
(d) Specific consideration shall be given to the length
of time the sale is permitted and an end of sale date
shall be established during as part of the permit. If
the Planning Commission does not establish an end
of sale date the assumed end of sale date shall be four
(4) months from the date of issue.
(2) All parking lot and/or sidewalk sales shall be
associated with a City licensed business. All sales
shall be of material normally or significantly similar
to those items sold by the business hosting the sale.
(3) Parking lot sales shall not reduce the number of
parking stalls required to normally support the
business and shall not require additional parking
within the public right-of-way.
(4) Placement of goods within a parking lot shall be
so as not to disrupt the traffic flow into or on the site.
(5) Entry into and from the sales area shall be at a
controlled point that will not inhibit traffic or create
an unsafe situation for pedestrians.
(6) The perimeter of the sales area shall be fenced
with a minimum four (4) foot high fence.
(7) Sales shall be conducted during normal business
operating hours for the host business however; they
shall not extend past sunset.
(8) Temporary exterior lighting shall not be erected
to facilitate a sale of this type.
28-23-10 Performance Assurance. A bond
or other valuable assurance in favor of Clinton City
may be required by the Planning Commission. The
amount of said bond or other assurance shall be
established by the planning director and shall not
exceed the cost of removing the use from the
premises or as otherwise prescribed by law.
28-23-11 Removal of Abandoned Uses.
Any kiosk, mobile store, resource recycling
collection point, reverse vending machine, or
structures or equipment associated with an off-site
sale that is abandoned from use for fifteen (15) or
more consecutive days, shall be removed from the
site at the request of the Community Development
Director or his representative. Failure to remove the
structure from the site within thirty (30) days after
receiving written notice may result in forfeiture of the
performance assurance and prosecution as a
violation.
28-23-12 Exceptions. City sponsored
functions containing or involving one or more kiosk,
mobile store, resource recycling collection point,
reverse vending machine shall be established,
operated and maintained in accordance with rules and
procedures established by the Clinton City Council
utilizing the standards established in this ordinance as
guidelines.
28-23-13 Violations. Violations of any of
the prescribed criteria for kiosks, mobile stores,
resource recycling collection points, reverse vending
machines, swap meets, sidewalk sales, parking lot
sales or off-site sales will result in revocation of
permits and/or licenses and prosecution as outlined in
Chapter 1 “Administration and Permits.”
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance Chapter 24
Page?24?1
Chapter 24. Amendments to the Zoning
Ordinance
28-24-1 Purpose and Intent
28-24-2 Amendments
23.01 PURPOSE AND INTENT ............. 1
23.02 Amendments ................................. 1
1-10 ............................................................. 1
11-29 ........................................................... 1
30-56 ........................................................... 2
76-97 ........................................................... 3
98-122 ......................................................... 4
28-24-1 Purpose and Intent. This chapter lists
ordinances which have effected a change upon this
ordinance and the zoning map it contains.
Ordinances outlining changes to the zoning map were
not kept prior to July 13, 1993. Prior to this date
changes were maintained through correspondence
with the applicant and required public hearing action
by the Planning Commission and City Council.
28-24-2 Amendments. Amendments made to the
Comprehensive Zoning Plan of the City of Clinton,
Ordinance 84-1Z are indicated by footnotes and
references are as follows:
(1) Ordinance 84-2Z ADDS a provision for a new R-
1-6 Zone. (Adopted April 24, 1984)
(2) Ordinance 84-3Z ADDS a provision for twin
homes. (Adopted April 24, 1984)
(3) Averaging interpreted to include distances
measured from all rear corners of a dwelling by
Board of Adjustments on May 16, 1984.
(4) Ordinance 84-4Z AMENDS the definition of
Boarding House and allows Boarding Houses as a
conditional use in the R-1-6, R-1-8, R-1-10, A-1, and
A-E Zones. (Adopted September 25, 1984)
(5) Ordinance 84-5Z ADDS definitions for Animal
Unit, Minor, and Rural Residential Land, and
establishes Chapter 18, Buffer Zone. (Adopted
December 11, 1984)
(6) Ordinance 85-6Z ELIMINATES the mandatory
dedication of 7% of property for parks. (Adopted
April 23, 1985)
(7) Ordinance 85-7Z CLARIFIES the definition of
Rural Residential Land for buffering purposes.
(Adopted September 24, 1985)
(8) Ordinance 85-8Z AMENDS the definition of
"Family" to limit the number of unrelated individuals
living together to two. (Adopted October 22, 1985)
(9) Ordinance 86-9Z ADDS an impervious surface
ratio to residential zones, requires a zoning
compliance permit for minor improvements, and
provides an exception to the hard-surfaced parking
requirement. (Adopted February 11, 1986)
(10) Ordinance 86-10Z REVISES Chapter 5,
Conditional Uses, and provides for a revocation
procedure for conditional use permits. (Adopted
March 25, 1986)
(11) Ordinance 86-11Z INCREASES the maximum
size for accessory buildings in the R-1-8 and R-1-10
zones. (Adopted April 22, 1986)
(12) Ordinance 86-12Z AMENDS the definition of
"Dwelling Unit, Immediate Family" to include
grandparents as immediate family members.
(Adopted July 8, 1986)
(13) Ordinance 86-13Z ADDS definitions and
regulations for swimming pools. (Adopted August
26, 1986)
(14) Ordinance 86-14Z ALLOWS averaging of sideyard
distances where the side lot lines are not
parallel. (Adopted October 14, 1986)
(15) Ordinance 87-15Z ALLOWS averaging of lot
frontage in the R-1-10 and R-1-8 Zones. (Adopted
March 24, 1987)
(16) Ordinance 87-16Z CHANGES fencing
requirements to allow six-foot fencing in the rear
yard on corner lots. (Adopted June 9, 1987)
(17) Ordinance 87-17Z AMENDS the definition of
"Preschool" to increase the maximum number of
children to twelve and to allow the preschool to be
held five times per week. (Adopted September 8,
1987)
(18) Ordinance 87-18Z ESTABLISHES a new
Performance Standard Zone (Chapter 19) and
designates a portion of the City as a performance
standard zone. (Adopted August 25, 1987)
(19) Ordinance 87-19Z ADDS definitions for
industry and light industry and allows light industry
as a conditional use in the performance zone.
(October 27, 1987)
(20) Ordinance 88-20Z ADDS definition for family
group day-care, allows it as a conditional use, and
establishes requirements for family group day-care
centers. Also amends the definition of family daycare
to include the resident's children under age six,
changes notification time for conditional use permits
to seven days, and eliminates the requirement that
side-yards be unobstructed and provide access to the
backyard. (Adopted December 13, 1988)
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance Chapter 24
Page?24?2
(21) Ordinance 88-21Z ESTABLISHES an R-1-9
Zone, changes setback requirements in the R-1-8
Zone and eliminates the buffer for rural residential
land. (Adopted September 13, 1988)
(22) Ordinance 89-22Z REQUIRES appeals on
decisions concerning conditional use permits to go
before the Board of Adjustments. (Adopted January
24, 1989)
(23) Ordinance 89-23Z REQUIRES appeals on
decisions concerning conditional use permits to go
before the City Council. (Adopted June 22, 1989)
(24) Ordinance 90-24Z ESTABLISHES averaging
standards in the R-1-9 zone, amends averaging to be
over the entire subdivision, amends site development
standards for larger side-lot setbacks when a 2 car
garage is not built. (Adopted November 27, 1990)
(25) Ordinance 91-25Z ESTABLISHES the R-1-8a
zone, a modification to the R-1-8 zone which allows
smaller side-lots to facilitate addition of garages to
existing housing stock. (Adopted July 30, 1991)
(26) Ordinance 91-26Z AMENDS all residential
zones to allow Family Day Care Centers as a
permitted use and establishes special requirements
for family day care centers and procedures for filing
complaints against home occupations. (Adopted
August 13, 1991)
(27) Ordinance 92-27Z ADDS "Assisted Living
Centers as a conditional use in the CP-1 zone.
(Adopted February 13, 1992)
(28) Ordinance 92-28Z REQUIRES site plan and
architectural approval in the performance zone, adds
definitions, amends use intensity standards in PZ.
(Adopted May 12, 1992)
(29) Ordinance 93-29Z DEFINES and regulates use
of above ground storage of flammable, combustible
liquids. (Adopted April 27, 1993)
(30) Ordinance 93-30Z REZONE Archibald property
from A-1 to R-1-9. (Adopted July 13, 1993)
(31) Ordinance 93-31Z REZONE Draayer property
from R-1-10 to R-1-9. (Adopted September 14,
1993)
(32) Ordinance 93-32Z REZONE Draayer property
from R-1-10 to R-1-9. (Adopted September 14,
1993)
(33) Ordinance 93-33Z REZONE Youngberg
property from R-1-10 to R-1-9. (Adopted November
9, 1993)
(34) Ordinance 94-34Z REZONE Bassett property
from A-1 to R-1-9. (Adopted January 11, 1994)
(35) Ordinance 94-35Z DEFINES and regulates
home business, rewrite of Chapter 6, adds home
offices as a permitted use in residential zones and
establishes criteria for mail box design and location.
(Adopted April 12, 1994)
(36) Ordinance 94-36Z REZONE Weaver property
from A-1 to R-1-9. (Adopted April 12, 1994)
(37) Ordinance 94-37Z REZONE Patterson property
from A-1 to CP-2. (Adopted April 26, 1994)
(38) Ordinance 94-38Z DEFINES yard fence location
and design, amends board of adjustment
appointments, rewrite of CP Zone uses, establishes
definitions for manufactured, mobile and modular
homes. (Adopted June 15, 1994)
(39) Ordinance 94-39Z REZONE North Davis
Cabinet Inc., property from R-1-6 to A-E. (Adopted
August 23, 1994)
(40) Ordinance 94-40Z REZONE Martinez property
from A-1 to R-1-6. (Adopted September 13, 1994)
(41) Ordinance 95-41Z REZONE Child property
from A-1 to R-1-9. (Adopted January 10, 1995)
(42) Ordinance 95-42Z AMENDS maximum tank
size for above ground storage of flammable,
combustible liquids in the MP-1, CP-2 and A-1
Zones. (Adopted February 14, 1995)
(43) Ordinance 95-43Z DEVELOPS codes, standards
and esthetics for dwellings in all zones within the
city. (adopted March 28, 1995)
(44) Ordinance 95-44Z REZONE Pope property from
A-1 to R-1-9. (Adopted April 11, 1995)
(45) Ordinance 95-45Z REZONE Miller property
from R-1-10 to R-1-9. (Adopted April 11, 1995)
(46) Ordinance 95-46Z REZONECity Development
Inc. property from R-1-8 to PZ. (Adopted April 11,
1995)
(47) Ordinance 95-47Z REZONE Martin property
from A-1 to R-1-9. (Adopted April 11, 1995)
(48) Ordinance 95-48Z Rezone Ericksen property
from R-1-10 to CP-1. (Adopted May 9, 1995)
(49) Ordinance 95-49Z REZONE Turley property
from A-1 to R-1-6. (Adopted May 23, 1995)
(50) Ordinance 95-50Z REZONE Draayer property
from A-1 to R-1-9. (Adopted May 23, 1995)
(51) Ordinance 95-51Z ADDS "Feed packaging and
Processing Facility, Contained Wholly Within a
Building" to the CP-2 zone as a conditional use.
(Adopted August 8, 1995)
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance Chapter 24
Page?24?3
(52) Ordinance 96-52Z ADDS "R-1-15 Zone"
(Adopted January 23, 1996)
(53) Ordinance 96-53Z REZONE Amcor and
Yamamoto property on 1000 West from R-1-10 to R-
1-9. (Adopted January 23, 1996)
(54) Ordinance 96-54Z REZONE Oleson Family
Limited Partnership property on 1300 North from A-
1 to A-E. (Adopted February 13, 1996)
(55) Ordinance 96-55Z REZONE Ben Toone Trustee
for Elmer Parker Trust property at southeast corner of
2300 North 3000 West from A-1 to R-1-15.
(Adopted February 27, 1996)
(56) Ordinance 96-56Z REZONE Blake N. Hazen
representing jack B. Parson Co., property located at
approximately 2430 West on the south side of 1300
North from A-1 to MP-1. (Adopted March 26, 1996)
(57) Omitted
(58) Ordinance 96-57Z REZONE Ron Bassett,
property located at the south end of 1350 West at
approximately 2100 North from A-1 to R-1-9.
(Adopted May 28, 1996)
(59) Ordinance 96-58Z REZONE Ken and Cheryl
Mitchell, property located at the northwest corner of
1000 West and 1800 North, to be developed as
Harvest Ridge, from R-1-10 to R-1-9. (Adopted June
11, 1996)
(60) Ordinance 96-60Z REZONE John W. and Nelva
S. Birt, property located at the northwest corner of
1000 West and 1800 North, to be developed by
Maverick Stores, from R-1-10 to PZ. (Adopted
October 8, 1996)
(61) Ordinance 97-1Z ADDS Regulations Applicable
to All Zones in Chapter 3, Amends Table 18.4 and
Adds areas restricted from residential development
within the PZ. (Adopted January 14, 1997)
(62) Ordinance 97-2Z AMENDS the definition of
light industry and Rewrites Chapter 17. (Adopted
January 14, 1997)
(63) Ordinance 97-3Z REZONE Troy Thompson of
RKT Development property located at approximately
2275 West on the south side of 1800 North to be
developed as Taylor Estates From A-1 to PZ
(Adopted January 17, 1997)
(64) Ordinance 97-4Z REZONE Clinton City
property located at the Southwest corner of 1700
West 1800 North, from R-1-10 to PZ. (Adopted
March 11, 1997)
(65) Ordinance 97-5-Z REZONE Ronald Whittle
property located at approximately 1340 West on the
north side of 800 North from A-1 to AE. (Adopted
March 11, 1997)
(66) Ordinance 97-6Z REZONE Higley and Higley
Construction property located on the north side of
1800 North between approximately 800 and 1000
West. R-1-8 to PZ (Adopted July 22, 1997)
(67) Ordinance 98-1Z ADDS Definitions of
Accessory Building- Residential, Dwelling Unit
Footprint- Single Family, Floor Area, Finished Floor
Area- Residential, Living Space, Living Space-
Minimum. Amends definitions of Dwelling Unit-
Single Family, Dwelling Unit, Family, Floor Area.
Standardized the minimum square footage
requirements in all the zones. (Adopted January 27,
1998)
(68) Ordinance 98-2Z REZONE Benchmark Real
Estates Co., Brent Nelson located approximately
2300 North and 2500 West, from A-1 to R-1-15.
(Adopted April 28, 1998)
(69) Ordinance 98-3Z ADDS the definitions of
Private Lane, Commercial Lot, and Private Street.
Amends the definition of Building Lot. Adds “model
homes” to Chapter 6. Also adds High-Volume and
Low-Volume Traffic Generation to Chapter 18.
(Adopted May 26, 1998)
(70) Ordinance 98-4Z REZONE Ken Mitchell, Ken
Mitchell Development Co. Inc. property located at
approximately 1800 North and 1500 West, From R-
1-10 to R-1-9. (Adopted October 13, 1998)
(71) Ordinance 98-5Z ADDS definitions of Retail,
Sexually Oriented Business. Also Adds Sexual
Oriented Business to Chapter 3. (Adopted October
13, 1998)
(72) Ordinance 99-1Z REZONE Karla V. Johnson’s
property located at 2618 West 800 North, from A-1
to AE. (Adopted March 9, 1999)
(73) Ordinance 99-2Z REZONE Chestnut
Investments L.L.C. property located at the Castledale
Subdivision, from PZ to R-1-9. (Adopted July
27,1999)
(74) Ordinance 99-3Z REZONE Blake Hazen, New
Hampton Manor Assoc. property located
approximately 1300 North and 2000 West, from A1
to R-1-15. (Adopted September 28, 1999)
(75) Ordinance 99-4Z REZONE Blake James
Flinders, Golda Flinders property located
approximately at 3000 West and 1600 North, from A-
1 to R-1-9. (Adopted September 14, 1999)
(76) Ordinance 99-5Z REZONE Benchmark Real
Estates Co. property located approximately 2500
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance Chapter 24
Page?24?4
West and 2580 North, from A-1 to R-1-15. (Adopted
October 26, 1999)
(77) Ordinance 99-6Z REZONE Mark Higley,
Bernice Kendell property located approximately 2000
North and 1600 West, Dawson Estates, from R-1-10
to R-1-9. (Adopted November 23, 1999)
(78) Ordinance 99-7Z REZONE U.S. Development
property located at Maple Park Subdivision., from R-
1-10 to R-1-9. (Adopted November 23, 1999)
(79) Ordinance 99-8Z REZONE Mark Higley
property located at Clinton Fields Subdivision, from
A-1 to R-1-15. (Adopted November 23, 1999)
(80) Ordinance 00-1Z REZONE Greg Backus
Construction property located at Childs Subdivision,
from PZ to R-1-9. (Adopted January 11, 2000 )
(81) Ordinance 00-2Z CHANGES the regulations on
locations of Sexually Oriented Businesses for
Chapter 3. (Adopted February 8, 2000)
(82) Ordinance 00-03Z CHANGES Chapter 3 for
Mailbox Regulations. (Adopted February 22, 2000)
(83) Ordinance 00-4Z ADDS “3.17 Agricultural
Protection Areas” to Chapter 3. (Adopted March 14,
2000)
(84) Ordinance 00-5Z the creation of Agriculture
Protection Area requested by The Corporation of the
Presiding Bishop that boundaries are 800 North on
the South, 2000 West on the West, 1300 North on the
North, and 1500 West on the East. (Adopted April
25, 2000)
(85) Ordinance 00-6Z REZONE Doug Hamblin
property located at approximately 2050 North 1500
West, From R-1-10 to R-1-9. (Adopted May 9,
2000)
(86) Ordinance 00-7Z REZONE Shron Builders Inc.
property located at Shron Subdivision, From R-1-10
and R-1-9. (Adopted August 22, 2000)
(87) Ordinance 00-8Z REZONE DHI Construction
property located Woodland Park Subdivision, from
A1 to R-1-10. (Adopted August 22, 2000)
(88) Ordinance 00-9Z AMENDING uses and
applications within the Performance zone as well as
administrative changes. (Adopted September 26,
2000)
(89) Ordinance 00-10Z REZONE Dennis Higley,
DHI Construction, property located Woodland Park
Subdivision, from R-1-10 to R-1-9 (Adopted
November 14, 2000)
(90) Ordinance 01-1Z REZONE Doug Hamblin
property located at West Fairfield Estates, from A-1
to R-1-9. (Adopted February 6, 2001)
(91) Ordinance 01-2Z REZONE Dan J. Evans
property located approximately 1300 North 1435
West, from R-1-10 to R-1-9. (Adopted March 6,
2001)
(92) Ordinance 01-3Z CHANGE minimum lot
development in the A-E Zone. (Adopted June 26,
2001)
(93) Ordinance 01-4Z REZONE Ivory Homes
property located at Southfork Farms, from A-1 to R-
1-15. (Adopted August 14, 2001)
(94) Ordinance 01-5Z REZONE Kenneth and Cheryl
Mitchell property located approximately 800 North
1500 West. (Adopted August 14, 2001)
(95) Ordinance 01-6Z Changes made by adding
telecommunication structures. Amending sections to
clarify porch and patio requirements. (Adopted
August 11, 2001)
(96) Ordinance 01-7Z REZONE Doug Hamblin
property located Lovell Subdivision, from R-1-10 to
R-1-9. (Adopted October 9, 2001)
(97) Ordinance 01-8Z REZONE David and Ganine
Phillips property located at 1693 West 1800 North,
from R-1-10 to PZ. (Adopted October 9, 2001)
(98) Ordinance 01-9Z number does not exist.
(99) Ordinance 01-10Z REZONE Mike Shultz
property located at Lovell Subdivision, from R-1-10
to R-1-9 (Adopted October 16, 2001)
(100) Ordinance 02-1Z REWRITE of Chapter 4,
Parking and Loading Space Vehicle Traffic and
Access Regulations. (Adopted October 16, 2001)
(101) Ordinance 02-2Z AMEND parts of Chapter 1
and 3. (Adopted October 16, 2001)
(102) Ordinance 02-3Z REZONE Tom Gorman
property located at Country Homes Subdivision
phase 1, from R-1-10 to R-1-9. (Adopted June 25,
2002
(103) Ordinance 02-4Z REZONE Bruce Nilson,
Nilson Homes property located at Maplewood
Village Town Homes, from R-1-8 to RM. (Adopted
August 6, 2002)
(104) Ordinance 02-5Z AMEND Chapter 2, 4, and 13
in regards to garages. (Adopted October 15, 2002)
(105) Ordinance 02-6Z ADD Chapter 20, Kiosks,
Mobile Stores, Swap Meets, Sidewalk and Parking
Lot Sales. (Adopted January 14, 2003)
(106) Ordinance 02-07Z AMEND Chapters 2 and 6
in regards to Daycare Centers. (Adopted January 14,
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance Chapter 24
Page?24?5
2003)
(107) Ordinance 02-8Z REZONE Ivory North, Gary
Wright property located approximately 1300 North
and 2700 West (Around BDH), from A-1 to R-1-9.
(Adopted January 14, 2003)
(108) Ordinance 02-09Z REZONE Ivory North, Gary
Wright property located at Regency Park and
Lexington Estates, from A-1 to R-1-9. (Adopted
January 14, 2003)
(109) Ordinance 03-01Z REZONE L Dean and
Bonnie Hill property located at BDH, from A-1 to
AE. (Adopted January 28,2003)
(110) Ordinance 03-02Z REZONE L Dean and
Bonnie Hill property located approximately 1300
North and 2600 West, from A-1 to A-E. (Adopted
January 28,2003)
(111) Ordinance 03-03Z REZONE M&D Developers
LLC property located at Fife Estates Subdivision,
from A-1 to R-1-9. (Adopted February 25, 2003)
(112) Ordinance 03-05Z REZONE Bluespruce
Investments LLC property located at Bluespruce
Subdivision, from R-1-10 to R-1-9. (Adopted March
18, 2003)
(113) Ordinance 03-06Z REZONE Frank and Mickey
K. Theall property located approximately 1800 North
and 850 West, from R-1-8 to PZ. (Adopted May 27,
2003)
(114) Ordinance 03-07Z REZONE Karen Waite
property located approximately1850 North and 2615
West, from R-1-10 to R-1-9. (Adopted May 27,
2003)
(115) Ordinance 03-08Z REZONE Joel G and Ileen
Brown property located approximately 1800 North
2650 West, from R-1-10 to R-1-9. (Adopted May 27,
2003)
(116) Ordinance 03-09Z AMEND Chapter 20
Section 9 in regards to sidewalk sales. (Adopted June
10, 2003)
(117) Ordinance 03-10Z REZONE Edwin Miya
property located approximately 500 North and 1500
West, from A-1 to R-1-9. (Adopted May 27, 2003)
(118) Ordinance 03-11Z ADD and AMEND
Definitions to Chapter 2, amend and add to Chapter
3, amend Chapter 6, Amend Chapter 13 Tables in
regards to camp trailers, regulations to residential
dwellings. (Adopted May 27, 2003)
(119) Ordinance 03-12Z REZONE Guy Bingham
property located approximately 900 North and 1100
West, from A-1 to R-1-10. (Adopted September 23,
2003)
(120) Ordinance 03-13Z REZONE M&D
Development property located approximately 700
North and 1500 West, from A-1 to R-1-9. (Adopted
December 23, 2003)
(121) Ordinance 03-14Z REZONE Robert Worden
property located approximately 800 North and 2100
West. (Adopted September 23, 2003)
(122) Ordinance 03-15Z REZONE William and
Shelley Allen property located approximately 1400
North 3000 West. (Adopted November 25, 2003)
(123) Ordinance 04-01Z ADD Chapter 19, add
Chapter 3.15.14, amend Chapter 4, Chapter 13,
Chapter 18, and Chapter 19. In regards to the New
Commercial Regulations. (Adopted April 13, 2004)
(124) Ordinance 04-02Z REJECTED CHANGE to
Chapter 3 regarding CBU’s required in all new
subdivisions. (Rejected September 7, 2004)
(125) Ordinance 05-01Z REZONE F. David and
Marie Patterson property located approximately 1500
West 2050 North, from A-1 to R-1-9. (Adopted
March 15, 2005)
(126) Ordinance 05-02Z ADD definitions in Chapter
2, Amend Chapter 7 PRUDs, Amend fence heights in
visual triangle and Sexually Oriented Business
locations in Chapter 3, Amend parking for
recreational vehicles in Chapter 4, Amend home
business requirements in Chapter 6, Amend Chapter
12, 13, 14, and 19 to be in accordance with Chapter
7, Amend Chapter 15 in regards to requiring a letter
from Home Owner to be part of Home Occupation
permit, Amend Table 19.4 in regards to motor
vehicle-related sales and restaurants, Amend Table
19.14 Class VII and VIII, Amend Table 20.2 in
regards to Commercial projects, Add Chapter 8
Condominium Development, Add uses in A-1 and
A-E zone located in Chapter 12 and 13, Amend
Chapter 14 in regards to special provisions for
Residential, Delete uses in A-1 and A-E zones
located in Chapter 12 and 13. (Adopted March 29,
2005)
(127) Ordinance 05-03Z REZONE A-1 to A-E.
(Adopted May 24, 2005)
(128) Ordinance 05-04Z Table 14.3 Amended.
(Adopted June 14, 2005)
(129) Ordinance 05-05Z REZONE Aaron J and
Sandee Shock property located approximately 2277
West 1300 North, 14-053-0061 and 14-053-0062,
from A-1 to MP-1. (Adopted September 27, 2005)
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance Chapter 24
Page?24?6
(130) Ordinance 05-06Z REZONE Wayne
Rasmussen and Cory Rasmussen of North Davis
Cabinet Inc. property located approximately 3362
West 1800 North, 14-032-055, 14-032-0072, and 14-
032-0076 to 14-032-0080, from A-1 to AE. (Adopted
November 22, 2005)
(131) Ordinance 05-07Z REZONE John W. Diamond
III property located approximately 3269 West 1800
North, 14-032-0075, from A-1 to AE. (Adopted
November 22, 2005)
(132) Ordinance 05-08Z REZONE Rodney Vaterlaus
property located approximately 3223 West 1800
North, 14-032-0073, from A-1 to AE. (adopted
November 22, 2005)
(133) Ordinance 05-09Z REZONE Charles C and
Geraldine T Farrell property located approximately
912 North 3000 West, 14-052-0030, from A-1 to R-
1-15. (Adopted November 22, 2005)
(134) Ordinance 06-01Z AMEND Chapters
2,3,4,6,12, 13,14,15,19,20, & 21. (Adopted February
14, 2006)
(135) Ordinance 06-02Z REZONE Joyce H. Bybee
Trustee property located approximately 822 North
3000 West, 14-052-0031, from A-1 to R-1-10.
(Adopted January 24, 2005)
(136) Ordinance 06-03Z REZONE property located
approximately 1906 West 1800 North, 14-001-
0002:0022:0036, from R-1-10 to PZ. (Adopted
February 14, 2005)
(137) Ordinance 06-04Z – REZONE property located
at approximately 1870 West 2300 North; 14-001-
0006 & part of 14-001-0073, from A-1 to R-1-10
(Adopted April 11, 2006)
(138) Ordinance 06-05Z – REZONE Doug Hamblin
property located at 570 North 1700 West; from A-1
to R-1-9. (Adopted July 25, 2006)
(139) Ordinance 06-06Z – AMEND table 11.2.1,
Add Chapter 22 Patio Home Zone (PH), re-label
“Kiosks, Mobile Stores, Swap Meets, Sidewalk and
Parking Lot Sales” as Chapter 23 and “Amendment
to the Zoning Ordinance” as Chapter 24. (Adopted
June 14, 2006)
(140) Ordinance 06-07Z – REZONE PRI property
located at approximately 2300 North 2225 West; part
of 13-049-0003 & 13-049-0034; from A-1 to R-1-15.
(Adopted June 27, 2006)
(141) Ordinance 06-08Z – REZONE PRI property
located at approximately 2375 North 2000 West; part
of 13-049-0003 & 13-049-0034; from A-1 to PZ.
(Adopted June 27, 2006)
(142) Ordinance 06-09Z – REZONE PRI property
located at approximately 2580 North 2000 West; part
of 13-051-0035; from A-1 to PZ. (Adopted June 27,
2006)
(143) Ordinance 06-10Z – REZONE PRI property
located at approximately 2300 North 1600 West; part
of 13-051-0035; from A-1 to R-1-15. (Adopted June
27, 2006)
(144) Ordinance 06-11Z – Rezone PRI property
located at approximately 2300 North 1500 West; part
of 13-021-0007 & 13-052-0039; from A-1 to R-1-10.
(Adopted June 27, 2006)
(145) Ordinance 06-12Z – Rezone Gale and Eldon
Flinders property located at 2941 West 1800 North;
part of 14-020-0003; from A-1 to R-1-10. (Adopted
June 27, 2006)
(146) Ordinance 06-13Z – Rezone Shady Grove
PRUD Phases 1, 2 & 3 located at 900 West 1600
North; lots 1 thru 85; from PZ to PH. (Adopted June
27, 2006)
(147) Ordinance 06-14Z - Add and Amend to
Chapter 3, Landscaping Requirements; Add to
Chapter 4, Parking Lot Landscaping; Amend chapter
5. (Adopted November 14, 2006)
(148) Ordinance 07-01Z – ADD and
RECONFIGURE Chapter 2, definitions; AMEND
Chapter 3, Fencing requirements; ADD Chapter 3
Special Provisions related to the keeping of Animals
and Fowls; NEW Chapter 3, Required Residential
Landscaping; AMEND Chapter 4, Parking space for
all residential dwellings; ADD Chapter 12, Detached
Garages; ADD Chapter 13, Detached Garages;
DELETE Chapter 14, Attached Garage. (Adopted
February 20, 2007)
(149) Ordinance 07-02Z – REZONE property located
at approximately 1925 North 3400 West; 14-030-
0007; from A-1 to R-1-15. (Rejected August 28,
2007)
(150) Ordinance 07-04Z – REZONE property located
at approximately 2750 West 800 North; 14-052-0035
& 14-052-0042; from A-1 to R-1-15. (Adopted
February 27, 2007)
(151) Ordinance 07-06Z – AMEND Chapter 3,
Private Swimming pools, Tennis Courts and
Skateboard Ramps; AMEND Chapter 4, Number of
Approaches and Width of Drives; AMEND Chapter
14, Site Development Standards [Table 14.3];
DELETE Chapter 18, Landscaping Requirements;
DELETE Chapter 19, Off-Street Parking
Landscaping Requirements; ADD Chapter 20 Change
of Use. (Adopted April 24, 2007)
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance Chapter 24
Page?24?7
(152) Ordinance 07-07Z – REZONE property located
at approximately 975 North 2000 West; portions of
14-053-0039, 14-053-0064, 14-053-0067; from A-1
to PZ. AND – REZONE property located at
approximately 2500 West 800 North; all of 14-053-
0030& portions of 14-053-0039, 14-053-0064, 14-
053-0067; from A-1 to R-1-15. (Adopted June 12,
2007)
(153) Ordinance 07-08Z – REZONE property located
at approximately1457 North 3000 West; 14-032-
0016, 14-032-0044, 14-032-0045, 14-032-0047, 14-
032-0048, 14-032-0049, 14-032-0069, 14-032-0070;
from A-1 to A-E. (Adopted May 22, 2007)
(154) Ordinance 07-09Z – REZONE property located
at approximately 632 North 1500 West; 14-065-
0107; from A-1 to R-1-9. (Adopted June 12, 2007)
(155) Ordinance 07-10Z – REZONE property located
at approximately 2500 North 3000 West; 13-048-
0016; from A-1 to R-1-15. (Adopted June 12, 2007)
(156) Ordinance 07-11Z – REZONE property located
at approximately 1627 & 1637 North 3000 West; 14-
032-0015 & 14-032-0043; from A-1 to A-E.
(Adopted July 25, 2007)
(157) Ordinance 07-12Z – REZONE property located
at approximately 1307 West 800 North; 14-065-
0014; from A-1 to A-E. (Adopted August 14, 2007)
(158) Ordinance 07-13Z – AMEND Chapter 2,
Definition of “Family” [2.02]; AMEND Chapter 4,
Accessible Parking Spaces [4.09]; AMEND Chapter
14, Site Development Standards [Table 14.3];
(Adopted August 14, 2007)
(159) Ordinance 07-14Z – AMEND Chapter 12,
Minimum Lot Development Standards [12.05.5];
AMEND Chapter 13, Minimum Lot Development
Standards [13.05.5] (Adopted November 13, 2008)
(160) Ordinance 08-01Z – REZONE property located
at approximately 1750 West 2600 North; portion of
13-051-0035; from R-1-15 to PZ. (Adopted April 9,
2008)
(161) Ordinance 08-02Z – DELETE Chapter 2,
“Lane Private” [2.02]; AMEND Chapter 3, Site Plan
& Architectural Review Approval [3.10.2.C]; ADD
Chapter 3, Special Provisions for Development
Adjacent to Arterial, Sub-Arterial & Collector Street
[3.15.15]; DELETE Chapter 4, Proximity to Property
Line [4.15.4]; DELETE Chapter 4, Drainage [4.15.5];
AMEND Chapter 4, Parking Lot Interior
Landscaping [4.18.C.1.a]; DELETE Chapter 14,
Special Provisions for Development Adjacent to
Arterial, Sub-Arterial & Collector Street [14.08];
DELETE Chapter 19, Bufferyard Requirements
[19.18.4.e & table 19.18.1]; AMEND Chapter 19,
Use of Bufferyards [19.18]. (Adopted March 26,
2008)
(162) Ordinance 08-03Z – Amendments to 08-01Z
(Adopted May 14, 2008)
(163) Ordinance 08-04Z – ADD Chapter 2,
Barber/Beautician Shops [2.02]; ADD Chapter 19,
Streetscape Landscaping Requirements [19.16.5 &
Table 19.16.1]; ADD Chapter 19, Available
Bufferyards [19.18.5 & table 19.18.1]; AMEND
tables 19.18.2; (Adopted July 28, 2008)
(164) Ordinance 08-05Z – AMEND Chapter 19
Streetscape Landscaping Requirements [§ 19.16.5];
ADD Chapter 19, Streetscape Landscaping
Reduction Options [Table 19.16.2]. (Adopted
September 23, 2008)
(165) Ordinance 09-01Z – ADD definition “Check
Cashing” [§ 2.02]; AMEND § 4.05 – Parking space
for Commercial, Industrial & Institutional Uses;
ADD § 3.240 – Check Cashing or Deferred Deposit
Loan Business; ADD § 17.100 – Temporary storage
containers; AMEND table 19.4 – Performance Zone
Uses; AMEND § 19.16.5.f – Exceptions to the
streetscape landscaping requirements. (Adopted
April 28, 2009)
(166) Ordinance 09-02Z – AMEND chapter 20 –
Central Business District. (Adopted July 28, 2009)
(167) Ordinance 09-03Z – AMEND § 3.12.2.b Use
of LP-Gas in Residential Zones. (Adopted
November 10, 2009)
(168) Ordinance 09-04Z – Changed to Ordinance 10-
01Z. (Adopted April 27, 2010)
(169) Ordinance 09-05Z – ADD/AMEND Chapter 2
definitions of “Accessory Building Large Lot”,
“Garage, Private”, “ Shed” or “Yard Shed”; ADD §
3.25 Garage, Accessory Building – Shed – Single
Family Dwelling; AMEND/ADD § 12.05 Minimum
Lot Development Standards; DELETE § 12.06 Single
Family Dwelling Garage; AMEND/ADD § 13.05
Minimum Lot Development Standards; DELETE §
13.06 Single Family Dwelling Garage;
ADD/AMEND § 14.02 Uses; ADD/AMEND § 14.03
Site Development Standards; DELETE § 14.06
Single Family Dwelling Garage; ADD/AMEND
15.04 Site Development Standards. (Adopted April
27, 2010)
(170) Ordinance 10-01Z – AMEND §2.02 definition
of Animal Unit & Fowl Unit (Agricultural &
Residential); ADD §3.09 Special provisions relating
to the keeping of animals and fowl. (Adopted April
27, 2010)
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance Chapter 24
Page?24?8
(171) Ordinance 10-02Z - REZONE property located
at approximately 614 North 1500 West; 14-438-
0002; from R-1-9 to R-M. (DENIED August 10,
2010)
(172) Ordinance 10-03Z – AMEND §2.02 definition
of “Dwelling Unit, Immediate Family”; ADD § 12.02
Permitted Uses; DELETE § 12.04 Conditional Uses;
ADD § 13.02 Permitted Uses; DELETE § 13.04
Conditional Uses; AMEND §14.02 Uses; ADD
§19.04 Use Regulations; ADD §19.29 Existing
Residential Uses. (Adopted August 10, 2010)
(173) Ordinance 10-04Z – ADD § definition of
“Accessory Parking” and “Driveway”; AMEND
§4.15.4 Hard Surfaces. (Adopted August 24, 2010)
(174) Ordinance 10-05Z – ADD §2.02 definition of
“Garage & Yard Sales. (Adopted August 10, 2010)
(175) Ordinance 10-06Z – ADD §2.02 definition of
“Home, Model”; ADD §20.2 definition of “Home,
Display”; ADD §3.26 Model & Display Homes.
(Adopted August 10, 2010)
(176) Ordinance 10-07Z – AMEND Chapter 5 –
Conditional Use Permits (Adopted January 11, 2011)
(177) Ordinance 10-08Z – AMEND Chapter 9 –
Non-Conforming Regulations (Adopted – January
25, 2011)
(178) Ordinance 10-09Z – AMEND Chapter 10 –
Board of Zoning Adjustments (Adopted – January
25, 2011)
(179) Ordinance 10-10Z – RESCIND Chapter 6 –
Accessory Use; AMEND 28-2-2 definition of
“Preschool, Residential Neighborhood”; ADD 28-12-
2 Permitted Uses; DELETE 28-12-3 Accessory Uses;
ADD 28-13-2 Permitted Uses; DELETE 28-12-3
Accessory Uses; ADD 28-14-2 Permitted Uses
[Table 14.2]; ADD 28-19-4 Use Regulations [Table
19.4]. (Adopted January 11, 2011)
(180) Ordinance 10-11Z – RESCIND Chapter 16 –
Mobile Home Park (MHP) (Adopted January 11,
2011)
(181) Ordinance 11-01Z – RESCIND Chapter 7 –
Planned Development (PRUD/PUD) Overlay and
AMEND Chapter 2 Definitions; AMEND Chapter 3
Regulations Applicable to All Zones; AMEND
Chapter 4 Parking and Loading Space, Vehicle
Traffic and Access Regulations; AMEND Chapter 8
Condominium Development; AMEND Chapter 12
Agricultural Zone; AMEND Chapter 13 Agricultural
Estates Zone; AMEND Chapter 14 Residential,
Single Family; AMEND Chapter 18 Light
Manufacturing; AMEND Chapter 19 Performance
Zone. (Adopted November 8, 2011)
(182) Ordinance 11-02Z – AMENDED
Permitted/Conditional Uses within the following
zones – Chapter 12 Agricultural Zone; Chapter 13
Agricultural Estates Zone; Chapter 14 Residential,
Single Family; Chapter 15 Residential, Multi-Family;
Chapter 18 Light Manufacturing; Chapter 19
Performance Zone; Chapter 22 Patio Homes.
(Adopted October 25, 2011)
(183) Ordinance 12-03Z – AMEND Table 14.3 Shed
Maximum Height; AMEND 28-3-35 eave lengths:
AMEND 28-3-14 & 28-3-15 references to UBC;
AMEND definition “Garage, Private”; AMEND 28-
3-10(2)(e)(viii) Street Tree spacing; ADD 28-1-5(5);
AMEND 28-20-4(1)(a) Roofing Type/Pitch;
AMEND 28-20-4(1)(c) Height Limitation.
(184) 12-01Z REZONE All of Lot 1 and Lot 2,
Marvins Subdivision No. 1 (1604 W 1800 N) from
R-1-10 to PZ (Adopted – January 24, 2012)
(185) 12-02Z REJECTED Amending Front Yard
Impervious Area (Rejected – October 9, 2012)
(185a) – 12-03Z-Building Height, Ch 14, Street
Trees, Chap 3, Structures w/o building permit –
nuisance ,Ch 20 Roof pitch and height.
(186) 12-04Z REZONE Property located at 1122 N
1500 W from R-1-10 to A-E (Adopted – October 9,
2012)
(187) 12-05Z AMEND Chapter 3 – AMEND 3-
21(1)(a) park strip landscape requirements;
DELETING 3-21(2)(c) tree required in every yard.
(188) 12-06Z REZONE Property located at 2084
North 2000 West from MP-1 to P-Z (Adopted –
December 4, 2012)
(189) 13-01Z – No action taken – reference
Ordinance 14-01Z
(190) Ordinance 13-02Z AMEND Chapter 2 –
Definition of “Setback”(Adopted – April 9, 2013)
(191) 13-03Z REZONE Property located at 3420
West south side of 2300 North (Petitioner pulled
application prior to final action)
(192) 13-04Z ADD § 28-3-25 (8) Carport –
DELETING 28-4-4(3) (Adopted – June 11, 2013)
(193) 13-05Z REZONE REJECTED Property located
at 1564 North 1500 West from R-1-10 to R-1-9
(194) 13-06Z REZONE Property located at 948
North 3000 West from A-1 to R-1-15.(Adopted -
October 22, 2013)
(195) 14-01Z AMEND Chapter 22, PH Zone creating
an infill capability for the PH Zone. (Adopted April
8, 2014)
Clinton City Zoning Ordinance Title 28
Amendments to the Zoning Ordinance Chapter 24
Page?24?9
(196) 14-02Z – REZONE- REJECTED- Property
located at approx. 3420 West 2300 N A-1 TO R-1-15
(May 7, 2013)
(197) 14-03Z – REZONE- Property located at
approx. 2501 W 1725 N R-1-8 to PH (Adopted May
13, 2014)
(198) Ordinance14-04Z – Changes-AMEND
Chapter 2- Definitions: AMEND Table 3.12.1
Chapter 3§28-3-15 AMEND §28-3-25(2) Garage and
Accessory Bldg. Chap. 4 – parking, Chapter 12
Conditional uses, Table 14.2, Table 19.29.2 Chapter
19, Municipal wells. (Adopted July 8, 2014)
(199) Ordinance 15-01Z – Changes- AMEND
Chapter 2 – definitions – AMEND §28-3-25 Garages,
Accessory Buildings, AMEND §28-4-4 Parking
Space for residential dwellings. AMEND §28-4-5
AMEND Table 12.4.1 AMEND §28-12-2 thru 28-12-
4 (7), AMEND –Chapter 13 & Table 13.4.1 AMEND
Table 14.2 & 14.3 AMEND – Chapter 15 & table
15.4, AMEND Table 19.4 (Adopted Feb. 24, 2015)
(200) 15-02 REZONE- property at approx.3400
West 1925 North A-1 to A-E (Adopted Feb. 24,
2015)
(201) 15-03Z REZONE property at Approximately
3400 West 1800 North A-1 to A-E (Adopted Feb. 24,
2015)
(202) 15-04Z REZONE property at approximately
2337 North 2000 West (Adopted May 12, 2105)
(203) Ordinance 15-05Z AMEND §28-4-15
Accessory to Residential Property Including Four or
Less Dwellings – Driveways and Accessory Parking
(Adopted July 14, 2015)
(204) Ordinance 15-06Z- AMEND §28-4 Parking
and loading space, vehicle traffic and access
regulation by adding a new subsection 28-4 (Adopted
October 13, 2015)
(205) Ordinance 15-07Z – AMEND add 28-15-2
Permitted Uses (11) Home Office. (Adopted Oct. 13,
2015.)
(206) Ordinance 15-08Z – Ordinance 15-08Z
REZONE- property at approximately 1600 W 600 N
south side of 600 North (Adopted Dec. 8, 2015)
(207) 15-09Z – REZONE – property at 1104 North
1000 West R-1-8 to R-1-10 (Adopted December 8,
2015)
(208) Ordinance 15-10Z AMEND §28-3-9
Residential Chickens and Household Pets Chapter 14
Table 14.2 clarifying regulations for keeping
chickens. (Adopted December 8, 2015)
(209) Ordinance 15-11Z REZONE – property at
approximately 2118 North 2000 West A-1 to PZ
(Adopted December 8, 2015)
(210) Ordinance 15-12Z REZONE – property at
approximately 2382 West 1800 North R-1-9 to PH
(Adopted March 8, 2016)
(211) Ordinance 16-01Z – AMEND chapter 22 –
Patio Home Zone (Adopted March 8, 2016)
(212) Ordinance 17-03Z – AMEND chapter 22 Patio
Home Zone (Adopted June 28, 2017)
(213) Ordinance 17-04Z – Changes- AMEND
Chapter 3 -25(5)(e) – Carport Attached (Adopted
Aug 8, 2017)
(214) Ordinance 17-05Z – REZONE property at
approximately 2513 West 1300 North. A-1 to R-1-15
(Adopted Sept. 12, 2017)
(215) Ordinance 17-06Z – AMEND chapter 4-7
Location of Parking Facilities (Adopted Dec. 12,
2017)
(216) Ordinance 18-01Z – REZONE at
approximately 2650 North 2775 West. A-1 to R-1-15
(Adopted April 11, 2018)
(217) Ordinance 18-02Z – Changes – AMEND
Chapter 2-6 Section 28-2 Definition of Frontage
(Adopted Sept 11, 2018)
(218) Ordinance 18-03Z – Changes – AMEND
Chapter 4-2 Section 28-4-5(2) Parking Requirement
for Assembly Use (Adopted Sept 11, 2018)
(219) Ordinance 19-04Z—Changes—AMEND
Section 28-2 Shed Definition, Section 28-3-4 (5) and
ADD 28-3-25(5), Section 28-12-4, Section 28-13-4,
Section 28-14 Table 14.2 & Table 14.3, Section 28-
22-4. (Adopted August 27, 2019.)
(220) Ordinance 20-01Z Changes—AMEND Section
28-2 Setback definition allowing for certain
projections in residential setbacks. (Adopted June 9,
2020.)

SUBDIVISION STANDARDS OF CLINTON CITY TITLE 26
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
FOR
CLINTON CITY
TITLE 26: SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION 2: DEFINITIONS
CHAPTER 3: SUBDIVISION APPLICATION PROCEDURE AND APPROVAL PROCESS
CHAPTER 4: ASSURANCE FOR COMPLETION AND MAINTENANCE OF
IMPROVEMENTS
SECTION 5: REQUIREMENTS FOR IMPROVEMENTS, RESERVATIONS, AND
DESIGN
CHAPTER 6: IMPACT FEES RELATED TO DEVELOPMENT
SECTION 7: SPECIFICATION FOR DOCUMENTS TO BE SUBMEITTED
SECTION 8: VALIDITY AND EFFECTIVE DATE
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 1
Page 1 - 1
Chapter 1. General Provisions
26-1-1 Title
26-1-2 Policy
26-1-3 Public Interest
26-1-4 Purpose
26-1-5 Availability of Utility Services
26-1-6 Land Use Authority
26-1-7 Jurisdiction
26-1-8 Interpretation, Conflict and Severability
26-1-9 Savings Provision
26-1-10 Reservations and Repeal
26-1-11 Amendments
26-1-12 Variances
26-1-13 Development Guidelines and Design
Standards
26-1-14 Enforcement, Violations, and Penalties
26-1-15 Constructive Notice of Time Periods
26-1-1 Title. In order that land may be
subdivided in accordance with the purposes and
policies herein, these subdivision regulations are
hereby adopted and made effective as of December
13, 2016. All applications for subdivision approval,
including final plats, pending on the effective date of
these regulations shall be reviewed under the
regulations existing at the time such application was
made unless the City Council determines on the
record that application of these regulations is
necessary to avoid a risk of injury to public health,
safety, and general welfare. These regulations shall
officially be known, cited, and referred to as the
Subdivision Ordinance of Clinton City.
26-1-2 Policy.
(1) Regulation of the subdivision of land and the
attachment of reasonable conditions to land
subdivision is an exercise of valid police power
delegated by the state to this City. The developer has
the duty of compliance with reasonable conditions of
this Ordinance for design, dedication, improvement,
and restrictive use of the land to conform to the
physical and economic development of the City and
to the health, safety, and general welfare of the future
lot owners in the subdivision and of the community at
large.
(2) It is declared to be the policy of the city to
consider the subdivision of land and any subsequent
development of any portion of a subdivided piece or
plat as subject to the control of the City pursuant to
the General Plan of the City for the orderly, planned,
efficient, and economical development of the City.
(3) Land to be subdivided shall be of such character
that it can be used safely for building purposes
without danger to health or peril from fire, flood or
other menace, and land shall not be subdivided unless
adequate public facilities and improvements will
exist to properly provide for drainage, water,
sewerage, and capital improvements such as parks,
recreational facilities, transportation facilities, and
improvements.
(4) The existing and proposed public improvements
shall conform to and be properly related to the master
infrastructure plans and the capital budget and
program of the City. Land that has been subdivided
prior to the effective date of these regulations should,
whenever possible, be brought within the scope of
these regulations to further the purposes of
regulation(s) identified in Section 26-1-4.
26-1-3 Public Interest. Any proposed subdivision
and its ultimate use shall be in the best interest of the
public and shall be in harmony with good
neighborhood development of the area concerned,
and the subdivider shall present evidence to this
effect when requested to do so by the Planning
Commission.
26-1-4 Purpose. These regulations are adopted for
the following purposes:
(1) To protect and provide for the public health,
safety, and general welfare of the City.
(2) To guide the future growth and development of
the City in accordance with the General Plan.
(3) To provide for adequate light, air, and privacy, to
secure safety from fire, flood, and other danger, and
to prevent overcrowding of the land and undue
congestion of population.
(4) To protect the character, the social and economic
stability of all parts of the City and to encourage the
orderly and beneficial development of the community
through appropriate growth management techniques
assuring the timing and sequencing of development,
promotion of infill development in existing
neighborhoods and nonresidential areas with
adequate public facilities, to assure proper urban
form and open space separation of urban areas, to
protect environmentally critical areas and areas
premature for urban development.
(5) To protect and conserve the value of land
throughout the City and the value of buildings and
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 1
Page 1 - 2
improvements upon the land, and to minimize the
conflicts among the uses of land and buildings.
(6) To guide public and private policy and action in
order to provide adequate and efficient transportation,
water, sewerage, parks, playgrounds, recreation, and
other public requirements and facilities.
(7) To provide the most beneficial relationship
between the uses of land and buildings and the
circulation of traffic throughout the City, having
particular regard to the avoidance of congestion in
the streets and highways and the pedestrian traffic
movements appropriate to the various uses of land
and buildings, and to provide for the proper location
and width of streets and building lines.
(8) To establish reasonable standards of design and
procedures for subdivisions and re-subdivisions in
order to further the orderly layout and use of land,
and to ensure proper legal descriptions and
establishment of survey monuments of subdivided
land.
(9) To ensure that public facilities and services are
available concurrent with development and will have
a sufficient capacity to serve the proposed
subdivision and that the community will be required
to bear no more than its fair share of the cost of
providing the facilities and services by requiring the
developer to pay fees, furnish land, or establish
mitigation measures to ensure that the development
provides its fair share of capital facilities needs
generated by the development.
(10) To prevent the pollution of air, streams, and
ponds; to assure the adequacy of drainage facilities;
to safeguard the water table, and to encourage the
wise use and management of natural resources
throughout the City in order to preserve the integrity,
stability, and beauty of the community and the value
of the land.
(11) To preserve and/or improve the natural beauty
and topography of the City and to ensure appropriate
development with regard to these natural features.
(12) To provide for open spaces through the most
efficient design and layout of the land, including the
use of average density in providing for minimum
width and area of lots, while preserving the density of
development as established in the zoning ordinance
of the City.
(13) To remedy the problems associated with
inappropriately subdivided lands.
(14) To provide for safety and security of residents,
subdivisions, commercial properties, and traffic by
planning, developing, executing and requiring a city
wide street lighting and general lighting design and
requirement.
26-1-5 Availability of Utility Services. No
development, nor permit for development, shall be
granted, approved, or issued unless the necessary
public facilities in the applicable area have been
determined to exist and have adequate capacity to
accommodate the proposed development and are
available or are to be available when the development
occurs. The applicable area includes all facilities that
directly or indirectly deliver the services to or are
impacted by the proposed development. Such a
determination is to be made by the Public Works
Department based upon the approved infrastructure
master plans.
26-1-6 Land Use Authority.
(1) City Council. The City Council of the City of
Clinton is vested with the authority to approve,
amend and approve, conditionally approve or
disapprove an application for the final plat of a
subdivision of land unless specifically excepted by
this ordinance. The Board of Zoning Adjustment is
the appeal authority to hear and decide appeals from
decisions regarding final plats.
(2) Planning Commission.
(a) The Planning Commission of Clinton City is
vested with the authority to review, approve,
conditionally approve and disapprove applications for
the preliminary plats of subdivision of land. The City
Council is the appeal authority to hear and decide
appeals from decisions regarding preliminary plats.
(b) The Planning Commission is vested with the
responsibility to review and make recommendation to
the City Council concerning the approval, conditional
approval or disapproval of the final plat of a
subdivision of land unless specifically excepted by
this ordinance.
(3) Community Development Director. The
Community Development Director of Clinton City is
vested with the authority to:
(a) Review and recommend approval to the Mayor of
Clinton City the approval of minor subdivisions of
three (3) lots or less which comply with the
requirements of Chapter 3.
(b) Review conceptual plats proposed by developers
to be utilized in the creation of a preliminary plat.
The efforts of the Community Development Director
are intended to assist developers. However
discussions with the Community Development
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 1
Page 1 - 3
Director are not binding upon the Commission or
Council nor are they to imply approval of any
development.
(c) Approve amendments to subdivisions that do not
include vacating rights-of-way or easements and
which comply with the requirements of this Title;
(d) Approve lot line adjustments which comply with
the requirements of this Title;
(e) Approve property combinations which comply
with the requirements of this Title;
(f) Approve transfers, not to include vacation of
rights-of-way and easements which comply with the
requirements of this Title;
The Board of Zoning Adjustment is the appeal
authority to hear and decide appeals for the above
decisions.
26-1-7 Jurisdiction.
(1) Applicability. These regulations apply to all
subdivisions of land, as defined herein and in Chapter
2, located within the corporate limits of the City or
outside the corporate limits as provided by law.
(2) Means. No land may be subdivided through the
use of any legal description other than with reference
to a plat approved by the City Council, in accordance
with this Ordinance, except as specifically stated
otherwise in this Ordinance.
(3) Issue of Permits. No building permit or
certificate of occupancy shall be issued, nor shall the
City have any obligation to extend utility services to
any parcel created in violation of these regulations,
for any parcel or plat of land which was created by
subdivision after the effective date of, and not in
conformity with, the provisions of this Ordinance,
and no excavation of land or construction of any
public or private improvements shall take place or be
commenced except in conformity with this Ordinance
and applicable regulations unless otherwise allowed
by law.
(4) Requirements. No land described in this section
shall be subdivided or developed until each of the
following conditions has been met in accordance with
these regulations:
(a) The subdivider or his agent has submitted a
conforming preliminary plat and final plat of the
subdivision to the Community Development Director
as outlined by this ordinance; and
(b) The subdivider or his agent has obtained approval
of the preliminary plat when required, and the final
plat as outlined by this ordinance; and
(c) The final plat and construction drawings have
been approved for construction by the Clinton City
Engineer and the construction drawings have been
marked “APPROVED FOR CONSTRUCTION” and
issued by the Community Development Department;
and
(d) The subdivider or his agent has paid fees
associated with the subdivision of property and
inspection of improvements related to the
development of a subdivision as outlined by this
ordinance; and
(e) The subdivider has provided to the City
documentation from the Davis and Weber Counties
Canal Company indicating that all fees associated
with the secondary water system have been paid; and
(f) The subdivider or his agent files and causes to
have recorded the final plat with the Recorder for
Davis County; or the City Council has authorized the
subdivider to start construction prior to recording of
the final plat.
26-1-8 Interpretation, Conflict, and Severability.
(1) Interpretation: In their interpretation and
application, the provisions of these regulations shall
be held to be the minimum requirements for the
promotion of the public health, safety, and general
welfare. These regulations shall be construed
broadly to promote the purposes for which they are
adopted.
(2) Public Provisions: These regulations are not
intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any
other ordinance, rule or regulation, statute, or other
provision of law except as provided in these
regulations. Where any provision of these
regulations imposes restrictions different from those
imposed by any other provision of these regulations
or any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other
provision of law, the provision which is more
restrictive or imposes higher standards shall control.
(3) Private Provisions: These regulations are not
intended to abrogate any easement, covenant or any
other private agreement or restriction, provided that
where the provisions of these regulations are more
restrictive or impose higher standards or regulations
than such easement, covenant, or other private
agreement or restriction, the requirements of these
regulations shall govern.
(4) Severability. If any part or provision of these
regulations or the application of these regulations to
any person or circumstances is adjudged invalid by
any court of competent jurisdiction, as provided by
Utah law, the judgment shall be confined in its
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 1
Page 1 - 4
operation to the part, provision, or application
directly involved in the controversy in which the
judgment shall be rendered and it shall not affect or
impair the validity of the remainder of these
regulations or the application of them to other
persons or circumstances. The City Council hereby
declares that it would have enacted the remainder of
these regulations even without any such part,
provision, or application which is judged to be
invalid.
26-1-9 Savings Provision. These regulations shall
not be construed as abating any action now pending
under, or by virtue of, prior existing subdivision
regulations, or as discontinuing, abating, modifying,
or altering any penalty accruing or about to accrue, or
as affecting the liability or any person, firm, or
corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under
any section or provision existing at the time or
adoption of these regulations, or as vacating or
annulling any rights obtained by any person, firm, or
corporation, by lawful action of the City except as
shall be expressly provided for in these regulations.
26-1-10 Reservations and Repeals. Upon the
adoption of these regulations according to law, the
Subdivision Regulations of Clinton City adopted
April 9, 1985, as amended, are hereby repealed,
except to the extent expressly retained in these
regulations.
26-1-11 Amendments.
(1) Amendments to the Ordinance.
This Ordinance may be amended from time to time in
accordance with Utah law governing amendments to
a land use ordinance, currently found at Utah Code
Section 10-9a-503.
26-1-12 Variances.
Any person or entity desiring a waiver or
modification of the requirements of this Ordinance as
applied to a parcel of property that he owns, leases,
or in which he holds some other beneficial interest
may apply to the Board of Zoning Adjustments for a
variance from the terms of the Ordinance. The Board
of Zoning Adjustments is bound by Utah law
governing variances, currently found at Utah Code
Section 10-9a-702, and may only grant a variance if
the application meets the requirements found therein.
26-1-13 Development Guidelines and Design
Standards. The Community Development Director
with the assistance of the City Engineer or a designee
of the City Engineer may draft, interpret and
recommend a set of development guidelines and
design standards for subdivision approvals in the
City. Such guidelines and standards are subject to
approval by the City Council. The standards and
guidelines shall be based upon reasonable
engineering standards and practices. Any appeal from
a guideline or design standard imposed by the
guidelines and standards, shall be made to the Board
of Adjustment, pursuant to Chapter 10 of the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Clinton.
26-1-14 Enforcement, Violations, and Penalties.
(1) General.
(a) It shall be the duty of the Community
Development Director to enforce these requirements
and to bring to the attention of the City Attorney or
his designated agent any violations of these
regulations.
(b) No owner or agent of the owner, of any parcel of
the land located in a final plat of a subdivision that
has been approved by the Land Use Authority in
accordance with the provisions of these regulations
may transfer or sell any part of the parcel before the
final plat has been recorded with the Davis County
Recorder’s Office.
(2) Inspections. Appropriate departments of Clinton
City shall inspect or cause to be inspected all
buildings, streets, cement work, fire hydrants, and
water supply, storm water disposal and waste water
disposal systems in the course of construction,
installation or repair. Excavation for fire hydrants,
water and sewer mains and laterals shall not be
covered or backfilled until such installation shall
have been approved by Clinton City. If any such
installation is covered before being inspected and
approved, it shall be uncovered after notice to
uncover has been issued to the responsible person by
the inspector. Funds held in bond or escrow will not
be released for any work that has not been inspected
by the appropriate City Department. Fees related to
inspections shall be paid by the subdivider, developer
or his representative as outlined in the Consolidated
Fee Schedule.
(3) Violations and Penalties. Any violations of this
Ordinance shall be a Class ‘C’ misdemeanor.
Where applicable, each day of noncompliance shall
constitute a separate violation.
(4) Civil Enforcement. Appropriate actions and
proceedings may be taken in law or in equity to
prevent any violation of these regulations, to prevent
unlawful construction, to recover damages, to
restrain, correct, or abate a violation and to prevent
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 1
Page 1 - 5
illegal occupancy of a building structure or premises.
These remedies shall be in addition to the penalties
described above.
26-1-15 Constructive Notice of Time Periods.
(1) All land owners, subdividers, contractors,
developers, or applicants are obligated to be aware of
and are deemed to have constructive notice of all
time periods and/or deadlines and the effect of
noncompliance with said time periods and/or
deadlines as set forth in this Ordinance relating to the
application, processing and approval or other action
relating to the development and subdivision of a
project.
(2) Nothing in this Ordinance shall be construed as
requiring the City to take any affirmative action to
notify land owners, subdividers, developers, owners,
builders, or applicants of any time periods and/or
deadlines or the effect of noncompliance with said
processing requirements set forth in this Ordinance
relating to the processing and approval or other
action relating to the development and subdivision of
a project.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Section 2
Page 2 - 1
Section 2. Definitions
26-2-1 Usage
26-2-1 Definitions
26-2-1 Usage:
(1) For the purpose of these regulations, certain,
numbers, abbreviations, terms, and words used herein
shall be used, interpreted, and defined as set forth in
this section.
(2) Unless the context clearly indicates to the
contrary, words used in the present tense include the
future tense; words used in the plural include
singular; the word “herein: means “in these
regulations”; the word “regulations” means “these
regulations”.
26-2-2 Definitions:
“Adjacent Landowners” Any property owner of
record, according to the records of the County
Recorder, whose property adjoins or abuts property
proposed for subdivision, or any portion thereof.
“Alley” A public or private right-of-way which is
less than 26 feet wide primarily designed to serve as
secondary access to the side or rear of those
properties whose principal frontage is on some other
street.
“Applicant” The owner of land proposed to be
subdivided or its representative. A representative
shall be required to provide legal documentation to
prove he has consent from the legal owner or the
property.
“Block” A tract of land bounded by streets, or by a
combination of streets and public parks, cemeteries,
railroads rights-of-way, or boundary lines of
municipalities.
“Bona Fide Division of Partition of Agricultural
Land for Agricultural Purposes” The division of a
parcel of land into two or more lots or parcels, none
of which is less than ten (10) acres in area, and
provided that no dedication of any streets is required
to serve any such lots or parcels of agricultural land
so created and providing that each lot or parcel has
the minimum required frontage on an existing city
street with the required, dedicated right-of-way.
Refer to the Clinton City Major Street Plan for street
designations. Such a lot is an agricultural lot,
reference the Zoning Ordinance.
“Bond” Any form of security including a cash
deposit, surety bond, collateral, property, or
instrument of credit in an amount and form
satisfactory to the City Council. All bonds shall be
approved by the City Council whenever a bond is
required by these regulations.
“Building” Any structure built for the support,
shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or
movable property of any kind and includes any
structure.
“Capital Improvements Program” A proposed
schedule of all future projects listed in order of
construction priority together with cost estimates and
the anticipated means of financing each project. All
major projects requiring the expenditure of public
funds, over and above the annual City’s operating
expenses, for the purchase, construction, or
replacement of the physical assets for the community
are included.
“City” Clinton City, Utah
“City Council” The City Council of Clinton City,
Utah.
“City Engineer” A professional, registered engineer
retained by Clinton City, Utah.
“Construction Plan” The maps or drawing
accompanying a subdivision plat and showing the
specific location and design of improvements to be
installed in the subdivision in accordance with the
requirements of the City Council as a condition of the
approval of the plat.
“Developer” The owner of land proposed to be
subdivided or its representative who is responsible
for any undertaking that requires review and/or
approval under these regulations. See Subdivider.
“Easement” Authorization by a property owner for
the use by another, and for a specified purpose, of
any designated part of his property.
“Frontage” All the property fronting on one side of
the street between intersecting or intercepting streets,
or between a street and a right-of-way, waterway, end
of dead-end street, or political subdivision boundary,
measured along the street line. An intercepting street
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Section 2
Page 2 - 2
shall determine only the boundary of the frontage of
the side of the street which it intercepts.
“Grade” The slope of a road, street, or other public
way specified in percentage (%) terms.
“Joint Ownership” Joint ownership among persons
shall be construed as the same owner; “constructive
ownership” for the purpose of imposing subdivision
relations.
“Lot, Agricultural, Building, Corner, Interior,
Development Standards” refer to the Zoning
Ordinance of the City of Clinton.
“Lot Improvement” Any building, structure, place,
work of art, or other object or improvement of the
land on which they are situated constituting a
physical betterment of real property or any part of
such betterment. Certain lot improvements shall be
properly bonded or escrowed as provided in these
regulations.
“Major Street Plan” See Official Map.
“Master Plan” A comprehensive plan for
development of the City, prepared and adopted by the
Planning Commission, pursuant to state law, and
including any part of such plan separately adopted
and any amendment to such plan, or parts thereof.
“Minor Subdivision” Any subdivision containing
not more than five (5) lots fronting on an existing
street, not involving any new street or road, or the
extension of municipal facilities or the creation of
any public improvements, and not adversely affecting
the remainder of the parcel or adjoining property, and
not in conflict with any provision or portion of the
General Plan, Official Map, Zoning Ordinance, or
these regulations.
“Off-Site Facilities/Improvements” Improvements
not on individual lots but generally within the
boundaries of the subdivision which they serve. Offsite
facilities are indicated on the construction
drawings, plat and outlined in the subdivider’s
escrow agreement, agreements with secondary water
companies, public utility companies, covenants
conditions and restrictions, irrigation companies
and/or similar agreements.
“Official Map” The map established by the City
Council pursuant to law showing the streets,
highways, parks, drainage systems, and setback lines
theretofore laid out, adopted, and established by law,
and any amendments or additions to adopted by the
City Council.
“Owner” Any person, group of persons, firm or
firms, corporation or corporations, or any other legal
entity having legal title to or sufficient proprietary
interest in the land sought to be subdivided under
these regulations.
“Parcel of Land” Contiguous quantity of land, in
possession of, or owned by, or recorded as the
property of, the same claimant person. Land in one
ownership, but physically divided by a public
highway, road or street, in not considered contiguous
under this definition, and may therefore be used as
two (2) or more individual parcels of land.
“Planning Commission” The City Planning
Commission of Clinton City.
“Planning Staff” Professional City Staff or hired
consultants charged with administering the planning
activities of the City.
“Plat” A map or depiction of a subdivision, showing
theron the division of a tract or parcel of land into
lots, blocks, streets, and alleys or other divisions and
dedications.
“Plat, Final” A proposed subdivision drawn
accurately to scale and which has all measurements,
data, certificates and dedications thereon, which are
required for approval and acceptance by the proper
agencies and for recording in the office of the County
Recorder.
“Plat, Preliminary” The preliminary drawing or
drawings, described in these regulations, indicating
the proposed manner or layout of the subdivision to
be submitted to the Planning Commission for
approval.
“Plat, Sketch” A sketch preparatory to the
preparation of the preliminary plat (or subdivision
plat in the case of minor subdivisions) to enable the
developer to save time and expense in reaching
general agreement with the Planning Staff as to the
form of the plat and the objectives of these
regulations.
“Property, Intervening” Property located between
the existing utilities and public service facilities, and
the property under development.
“Protection Strip” A strip of land bordering both
the boundary of a subdivision and a street within the
subdivision for the purpose of controlling the access
to the street of property owners abutting the
subdivision.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Section 2
Page 2 - 3
“Public Improvements” Any drainage ditch,
subsurface drainage system, storm drainage system,
roadway, parkway, sidewalk, pedestrianway, tree,
lawn, off-street parking area, lot improvement, or
other facility for which the City must ultimately
assume the responsibility for maintenance and
operation, or which may affect an improvement for
which the City responsibility is established. All such
improvements shall be properly bonded or escrowed.
“Public Notice, Sign” A two (2) foot by two (2)
foot sign which, in contrasting letters announces a
public hearing, the phone number at the city offices
where additional information may be obtained, and a
copy of the notice of public hearing. Lettering will
be of contrasting color to the background and “Public
Notice” will be three (3) inch tall letters, the phone
number will be one and one-half (1½) inch tall
letters. The copy of the public notice will be on an
8½” x 11” piece of paper contained in a weather
resistant, transparent cover.
“Resubdivision” Any change in a map of an
approved or recorded subdivision plat that affects any
street layout on the map or area reserved thereon for
public use or any lot line, or that affects any map or
plan legally recorded prior to the adoption of any
regulations controlling subdivisions.
“Right-of-Way” A strip of land occupied or
intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk,
railroad, road, electric transmission line, oil or gas
pipeline, water main, sanitary or storm sewer main,
shade trees, or for any other special use. The usage of
the term “right-of-way” for land platting purposes
shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter
established and shown on a final plat is to be separate
and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such
right-of-way and not included within the dimensions
or areas of such lots or parcels. Rights-of-way
intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary
sewers, storm drains, shade trees, or any other use
involving maintenance by a public agency shall be
dedicated to public use by the maker of the plat on
which such right-of-way is established.
“Road” (See Street)
“Screening” Either (a) a strip at least five (5) feet
wide of densely planted (or having equivalent natural
growth) shrubs or trees at least four (4) feet high at
the time of planting, of a type that will form a yearround
dense screen at least six (6) feet high; or (b) an
opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at
least six (6) feet high.
“Street” A thoroughfare which has been dedicated
or abandoned to the public and accepted by proper
public authority, or a thoroughfare not less than
twenty-six (26) feet wide which has been made
public by right of use and which affords the principal
access to abutting property.
“Street, Arterial” A street, existing or proposed,
which serves or is intended to serve as a major traffic
way and is designated on the Major Street Plan as a
controlled-access highway, major street, parkway, or
other equivalent term to identify those streets
comprising the basic structure of the street plan.
“Street, Collector” A street, existing or proposed,
of considerable continuity, which is the main means
of access to the Major Street System.
“Street, Cul-de-sac” A minor terminal street
provided with a turnaround with a 100-foot minimum
diameter. Cul-de-sac streets shall not be any longer
than four hundred feet (400’) from the centerline of
the adjoining street to the center of the turnaround,
and cannot provide frontage for more than fifteen
(15) dwelling units.
“Street, Minor” A street, existing or proposed,
which is supplementary to a collector street and of
limited continuity, which serves or is intended to
serve the local needs of a neighborhood.
“Street, Private” A thoroughfare within a
subdivision which has been reserved by dedication
unto the developer or lot owners to be used as a
private access to serve the lots platted within the
subdivision. Private streets shall comply with the
adopted street cross section standards of the City and
shall be maintained by the developer or other private
agency.
“Subdivision” The division of any tract, lot, or
parcel of land as an undivided tract by one individual,
or by joint tenants, or tenants in common or by the
entirety, into two (2) or more lots, plots, sites, parts,
or other divisions of land for the purpose, whether
immediate or future, of sale, lease, or of building
development. This definition shall not include bona
fide division or partition of agricultural land for
agricultural purpose, or to a court decree for the
distribution of property. The word “subdivide” and
any derivative thereof shall have reference to the
term “subdivision” as herein defined.
“Subdivision, Minor” A “minor subdivision” shall
be any division of land which: (1) consists of fewer
than (5) lots; (2) does not require the dedication of
any land for streets or other public uses; (3) will not
be traversed or abutted by a proposed street or a
street to be widened as portrayed on the Major Street
Plan or on the Official Map; (4) each of the lots
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Section 2
Page 2 - 4
complies with the width and area requirements of the
Zoning Ordinances; and (5) the lots are not part of a
minor subdivision approved less than three years
earlier.
“Utilities” Gas lines, culinary water lines, sewer
lines, electric power transmission lines, telephone
transmission lines, with all poles, wires, pipes, guy
wires, bracing, pertaining thereto, and irrigation
water.
“Zoning Ordinances” The Zoning Ordinances for
Clinton City, as adopted and amended by the City
Council.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 3
Page 3 - 1
Chapter 3. Subdivision Application Procedure
and Approval Process
26-3-1 General Procedure
26-3-2 Notice of Public Hearing
26-3-3 Preliminary Plat
26-3-4 Amendments to Preliminary Plat
26-3-5 Final Subdivision Plat
26-3-6 Vested Rights and Development
Agreements
26-3-7 Signing and Recordation of Subdivision
Plat
26-3-8 Suspension and Invalidation of Final Plat
26-3-1 General Procedure.
(1) Classification of Subdivisions: Before any land is
subdivided the owner of the property proposed to be
subdivided, or his authorized agent, shall apply for
and secure approval of the proposed subdivision in
accordance with the following procedures, which
includes one (1) principal step for a minor
subdivision and two (2) principal steps for a major
subdivision:
(a) Minor Subdivision.
(i) Final Subdivision Plat
(b) Major Subdivision.
(i) Preliminary Plat
(ii) Final Subdivision Plat
(2) Discussion of Requirements: Before preparing
the plat, either preliminary or final for a minor or
major subdivision, the applicant shall schedule an
appointment and meet with the Community
Development Director to discuss the procedure for
approval of a subdivision plat and the requirements
as to general layout of streets and for reservations of
land, street improvements, drainage, sewerage, fire
protection, and similar matters, as well as the
availability of existing services. The Community
Development Director shall also advise the applicant,
when appropriate, to discuss the proposed
subdivision with those officials who must eventually
approve those aspects of the subdivision plat coming
within their jurisdiction. The Community
Development Director shall determine whether the
development constitutes a minor or major subdivision
and notify the applicant of the classification within
thirty (30) working days.
26-3-2 Notice of Public Hearing.
(1) Notice: Notice of City Council, Planning
Commission or other meetings, addressing the
subdivision of land which requires Public Notice, the
required notice shall be provided as required by Utah
Code 10-9a-205.
(2) Assumption of Validity of Notice of Hearing: If
no protest of the processing of the public hearing has
been received in writing by the Community
Development Director within 30 days of the public
hearing the notice of public hearing is assumed to
have been processed properly.
26-3-3 Preliminary Plat.
(1) Phasing Major Subdivision Plats: A preliminary
plat may be divided into two or more phases and the
Planning Commission may impose such conditions
upon the filing of the phases as it may deem
necessary to assure the orderly development of the
subdivision.
(2) Application Procedure and Requirements: The
application for preliminary plat shall:
(a) Be made on forms available at the office of the
Community Development Director together with a
fee that is set, from time to time and passed in
resolution by the City Council;
(b) Include all land which the applicant proposes to
subdivide and all land immediately adjacent
extending one hundred (100) feet from the subject
property, or if applicable, of that directly opposite the
subject property, extending one hundred (100) feet
from the street frontage of opposite land, with the
names of owners as shown in the County Assessor’s
files. This information may be shown on a separate
current Tax Map reproduction from the County
Recorder’s Office showing the subdivision
superimposed on the Tax Map;
(c) Be accompanied by a minimum of six (6) copies
of the existing condition drawings as described in
these regulations;
(d) Be accompanied by a minimum of six (6) copies
of the complete preliminary plat as described in these
regulations;
(e) Be accompanied by a minimum of six (6) copies
of construction plans for the preliminary plat as
described in these regulations;
(f) Additional copies of the preliminary plans may be
required when dealing with services, districts, or
roadways that are not under the control of the City;
and
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 3
Page 3 - 2
(g) Be presented to the Community Development
Director a minimum of four (4) weeks prior to a
regular meeting of the Planning Commission.
(3) Public Hearing: Upon determination that the
application for preliminary plat is complete, the
Community Development Director shall notice a
public hearing before the Planning Commission in
accordance with 26-3-2.
(4) Preliminary Approval: After the Planning
Commission has reviewed the preliminary plat and
construction plans, the report of the Community
Development Director, any municipal
recommendations and testimony and exhibits
submitted at the public hearing, the applicant shall be
advised of any required changes and/or additions.
The Planning Commission shall approve,
conditionally approve, or disapprove the preliminary
plat. One (1) copy of the proposed preliminary plat
shall be returned to the developer with the date of
approval, conditional approval, or disapproval and
the reasons therefore accompanying the plat. If the
preliminary plat is disapproved by the Planning
Commission, the applicant may appeal to the City
Council as provided in 26-1-6(2)(a). Subsequent to
an approval or conditional approval by the Planning
Commission, the applicant may proceed directly to
the filing of an application for approval of a final
subdivision plat as provided in these regulations.
(5) Standards for Approval of Preliminary Plats: No
preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision shall be
approved by the Planning Commission unless the
applicant proves by clear and convincing evidence
that:
(a) Definite provision has been made for a water
supply system that is sufficient in terms of quantity,
dependability, and quality to provide an appropriate
supply of water for the type of subdivision proposed;
(b) If a public sewage system is proposed, adequate
provision has been made for such a system and, if
other methods of sewage disposal are proposed, that
such systems will comply with federal, state, and
local laws and regulations;
(c) All areas of the proposed subdivision which may
involve soil or topographical conditions presenting
hazards or requiring special precautions have been
identified by the subdivider and that the proposed
uses of these areas are compatible with such
conditions;
(d) The subdivider has the financial ability to
complete the proposed subdivision in accordance
with all applicable federal, state, and local laws and
regulations;
(e) The proposed subdivision will not result in the
scattered subdivision of land that leaves undeveloped
parcels of land lacking urban services between
developed parcels;
(f) The subdivider has taken every effort to mitigate
the impact of the proposed subdivision on public
health, safety, and welfare.
(6) Disapproval on Appropriate Findings: The
Planning Commission is authorized to disapprove the
preliminary plat based on findings even though the
land proposed for subdivision is zoned for the use to
which the proposed subdivision will be put and the
proposed use is consistent with the General Plan.
(7) Effective Period of Preliminary Plat Approval:
All approvals, conditions, and agreements regarding
a preliminary plat shall expire one (1) year from the
date of preliminary plat approval, by either the
Planning Commission or City Council, if required,
whichever is later, unless:
(a) The respective final plat, or a phase thereof, has
been approved; or
(b) The respective final plat, or a phase thereof, has
been submitted to the City, is scheduled for review,
and it complies with the City Codes and the
preliminary plat approval and requirements.
(c) If done by phases, the developer must continually
file for the approval of at least one phase within one
year of the most recent plat or phase approval. Said
filing must comply with the City Code and the
preliminary plat approval and requirements.
(8) Zoning and Subdivision Regulations: Every
preliminary plat shall conform to existing zoning
regulations and subdivision regulations applicable at
the time that the proposed preliminary is submitted
for the approval of the Planning Commission unless
the Planning Commission or City Council has taken
official action toward amending the applicable
zoning and subdivision regulations and the applicant
has reason to know of that action.
(9) Grading of Site Prior to Final Approval:
Subsequent to preliminary approval the developer
may apply for a topsoil and excavation permit from
the City or such other agency or person as the City
Council shall direct, and upon receipt of the permit
may commence construction to the grades and
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 3
Page 3 - 3
elevations required by the approved preliminary plat.
(10) Model Homes: For the purpose of allowing the
early construction of model homes in a subdivision,
the Planning Commission may permit a portion of a
major subdivision involving no more than two (2)
lots to be created in accordance with the procedures
for minor subdivisions, provided the portion derives
access from an existing city, county, or state
roadway, and provided no future road or other
improvement is anticipated where the lots are
proposed. The final plat for the “minor” portion shall
be submitted to the Planning Commission
simultaneously with the preliminary plat for the
entire major subdivision. Subsequent to final
approval by the City Council the model homes may
be constructed, subject to such additional
requirements as the Planning Commission may
require.
26-3-4 Amendments to Preliminary Plat. At any
time after preliminary plat approval and before
submission of a final plat, the applicant may request
of the Community Development Director that an
amendment be made in the approval or conditional
approval of the preliminary plat. The Community
Development Director may authorize the proposed
amendments that are deemed to be minor. If the
proposed amendment is major, the Planning
Commission shall hold a public hearing on the
proposed major amendment in accordance with the
same notice requirements found in Section 26-3-2.
Any public hearing on a proposed major amendment
shall be limited to whether the proposed major
amendment should or should not be approved. The
Planning Commission shall approve or disapprove
any proposed major amendment and may make any
modifications in the terms and conditions of
preliminary plat approval reasonably related to the
proposed amendment. If the applicant is unwilling to
accept the proposed major amendment under the
terms and conditions required by the Planning
Commission, the applicant may withdraw the
proposed major amendment. A major amendment
shall include, but is not limited to, any amendment
that results in or has the effect of decreasing open
space in the subdivision by ten percent (10%) or
more or increasing density in the subdivision by ten
percent (10%) or more. An applicant may not
propose more than two (2) major amendments to any
preliminary plat. The Planning Commission shall,
approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove the
proposed major amendment.
26-3-5 Final Subdivision Plat.
(1) Application Procedure and Requirements:
Following the approval of the preliminary plat the
applicant, if wishing to proceed with the subdivision,
shall file with the Planning Commission an
application for recommendation to the City Council
for approval of a subdivision final plat. The
application shall:
(a) Be made on forms available at the Office of the
Community Development Director, together with a
fee as set forth in the Consolidated Fee Schedule.
(b) Include the entire subdivision, or section thereof,
which derives access from an existing state, county,
or City street.
(c) Be accompanied by a minimum of six (6) copies
of the subdivision plat and the construction plans, as
described in these regulations.
(d) Comply in all respects with the preliminary plat,
as approved.
(e) Be presented to the Community Development
Director at least four (4) weeks prior to a regular
meeting of the Commission in order that a public
meeting may be scheduled.
(f) Be accompanied by all formal irrevocable offers
of dedication to the public of all streets, City uses,
utilities, parks, and easements, in a form approved by
Clinton City Attorney; and the subdivision plat shall
be marked with a notation indicating the formal
offers of dedication. The applicant shall deliver a full
covenant and warranty deed to all dedicated lands
and improvements in proper form for recording,
together with a title policy for Clinton City in the
sum not less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000),
which sum shall be determined by Clinton City
Attorney before signing of the final subdivision plat.
(g) Be accompanied by the subdivision improvement
agreement and security, if required, in a form
satisfactory to the Clinton City Attorney and in an
amount established by the City Council upon
recommendation of the Clinton City Engineer and
shall include a provision that the subdivider shall
comply with all the terms of the resolution of final
subdivision plat approval as determined by the City
Council and shall include, but not be limited to, the
performance of all required subdivision and offsite
improvements, and that all improvements and land
included in the irrevocable offer of dedication shall
be dedicated to Clinton City free and clear of all liens
and encumbrances on the premises.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 3
Page 3 - 4
(2) Be accompanied by an inspection fee in an
amount to be set from time to time by the City
Council and published in the Clinton City
Consolidated Fee Schedule and by written assurance
from the public utility companies and improvement
districts that necessary utilities will be installed and
proof that the applicant has submitted petitions in
writing for the creation or extension of any
improvement districts as required by the Planning
Commission upon preliminary plat approval. See 26-
5-3(1)(j) for required subdivision street signs.
(3) Planning Commission Action: Following the
public hearing noticed in accordance with 26-3-2, the
Planning Commission will review the application for
subdivision and shall forward to the City Council a
recommendation for approval, approval with
conditions or disapproval.
(4) Notice of Public Hearing: Upon recommendation
of the Planning Commission the Community
Development Director shall notice a public hearing
before the City Council in accordance with 26-3-2.
(5) Public Hearing and Determination: After the date
of the public hearing, including any adjourned date
thereof, is closed, the City Council shall approve or
disapprove the subdivision application by resolution
which shall set forth in detail any reasons for
disapproval. One copy of the final subdivision plat
shall be returned to the applicant with the date of
approval or disapproval noted on the plat, and, if the
plat is disapproved, the reasons for disapproval
accompanying the plat.
(6) Submission Requirements: Subsequent to the
resolution of the City Council, six (6) paper copies of
the construction plans and plat, and one (1) copy of
the original of the subdivision plat on tracing cloth,
and/or reproduction Mylar, and one (1) electronic file
of the subdivision plat and one (1) copy of the
subdivision plat on an 11” x 17” paper shall be
submitted to the Community Development Director
for final review. A check payable to the County
Recorder in the amount of the current filing fee shall
be provided. No final approval shall be endorsed on
the plat until a review has indicated that all
requirements of the resolution have been met.
(7) Minor Subdivision: In the case of a minor
subdivision, the foregoing requirements apply, except
for the following:
(a) the application for final plat is filed with the
Community Development Director without first
seeking preliminary plat approval;
(b) the notice shall be posted in the same manner as
identified in 26-3-2, but will identify an opportunity
for the public to submit comments on the application
to the Community Development Director;
(c) following the public comment period, the
Community Development Director will review the
application for minor subdivision and shall forward
to the Mayor a recommendation for approval,
approval with conditions or disapproval.
26-3-6 Vested Rights and Development
Agreements.
(1) Effect of Approval: Except as otherwise provided
in this Section 3-6, no vested rights shall accrue to
the owner or developer of any subdivision by reason
of preliminary or final plat approval until the actual
signing of the final plat by the Mayor.
(2) Effect of Recordation: Except as otherwise
provided in this Section 3-6, no vested rights shall
accrue to the owner or developer of any subdivision
by virtue of the recordation of a final plat.
(3) Applicable Laws: To obtain final plat approval,
the applicant shall be in compliance with all federal
and state laws applicable at the time that the final plat
is considered for approval by the City Council. The
applicant also shall be in compliance with all local
laws and regulations applicable at the time that the
preliminary plat was submitted to the Planning
Commission in accordance with Section 3-3, except
that the applicant shall comply with those local laws
and regulations in effect at the time that the final plat
is considered for approval by the City Council if the
City Council makes a determination on the record
that compliance with any of those local laws and
regulations is reasonably necessary to protect public
health and safety.
(4) Development Agreements: The City Council is
hereby authorized, but under no circumstances is
required to, enter into development agreements with
individuals and/or entities.
(a) Requirements: The City Council may enter into a
development agreement for any development,
rehabilitation, reconstruction, or placement of
improvements upon any property, for which a permit
would be required, for the purpose of:
(i) Protecting the health, welfare, and safety of the
citizenry;
(ii) Developing or maintaining aesthetics within a
neighborhood or district;
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 3
Page 3 - 5
(iii) Addressing proposed projects, and the impacts of
such projects, which may not have been
contemplated by the Code;
(iv) Addressing issues of the density of developments
when required to balance competing interests;
(v) Refining uses within the development in
furtherance of the general plan when considering
neighboring properties;
(vi) Resolving issues regarding unique features or
challenges confronting development;
(vii) Protecting sensitive lands;
(viii) Protecting public properties and interests, both
tangible and intangible;
(ix) Clarifying the application of code requirements
or City standards;
(x) Ensuring adherence to the overall intent of the
City Code; and
(xi) For any other purpose consistent herewith; or,
(xii) When mutually agreed upon with the developer.
(b) General: The Development Agreement shall
constitute a binding contract between the subdivider
of the proposed subdivision and the municipality (the
“parties”) and shall contain those terms and
conditions agreed to by the parties and those required
by this section. The Community Development
Director is authorized to negotiate Development
Agreements on behalf of the City.
(c) Covenants: Any covenant by the municipality
contained in the Development Agreement to refrain
from exercising any legislative, quasi-legislative,
quasi-judicial or other discretionary power, including
rezoning or the adoption of any rule or regulation that
would affect the proposed subdivision, shall be
limited to a period of five (5) years. The covenant
shall also contain a provision that the municipality
may, without incurring any liability, engage in action
that otherwise would constitute a breach of the
covenant if the action is required by federal or state
law.
(d) Third Party Rights: Except as otherwise
expressly provided in the Development Agreement,
the Development Agreement shall create no rights
enforceable by any party who/which is not a party to
the Development Agreement.
(e) Limitation on Liability: The Development
Agreement shall contain a clause that any breach of
the Development Agreement by the municipality
shall give rise only to damages under state contract
law and shall not give rise to any liability for
violation of the fifth and fourteenth amendments of
the U.S. Constitution or similar state constitutional
provisions.
(f) Developer’s Compliance: The Development
Agreement shall include a clause that the City’s
duties under the Agreement are expressly conditioned
upon the subdivider’s substantial compliance with
each and every term, condition, provision, and
covenant of the Agreement, all applicable federal,
state and local laws and regulations, and its
obligations under the subdivision improvement
agreement.
(g) Adoption: The approved Development
Agreement shall be adopted by the City Council
pursuant to applicable state and local laws and shall
be recorded in the Recorder’s Office of Davis
County.
(h) Incorporation as Matter of Law: All clauses,
covenants, and provisions required by these
regulations to be included in a Development
Agreement shall be incorporated into the
Development Agreement as a matter of law without
respect to the intent of the parties.
26-3-7 Signing and Recordation of Subdivision
Plat:
(1) Signing of Plat:
(a) When a subdivision improvement agreement and
security are required, the Mayor shall endorse
approval on the final plat after the agreement and
security have been approved by the Community
Development Director and City Engineer, and all the
conditions of the resolution pertaining to the final
plat have been satisfied.
(b) When installation of improvement is required
prior to recordation of the final plat, the Mayor shall
endorse approval on the final plat after all conditions
of the resolution have been satisfied and all
improvements satisfactorily completed. There shall
be written evidence that the required public facilities
have been installed in a manner satisfactory to
Clinton City as shown by a certificate signed by
Clinton City Engineer/Public Facilities Inspector and
Clinton City Attorney stating that the necessary
dedication of public lands and improvements have
been accomplished.
(2) Recordation of Plat: It shall be the responsibility
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 3
Page 3 - 6
of the Community Development Director to file the
final plat with the County Recorder’s Office within
ten (10) days of the date of the last signature on the
final plat. Simultaneously with the filing of the final
plat, the Community Development Director shall
record the agreement of dedication together with such
legal documents as shall be required to be recorded
by the Clinton City Attorney.
26-3-8 Suspension and Invalidation of Final Plat:
If the municipality suspends final plat approval for
any subdivision plat under these regulations, it shall
record a document with the Recorder’s Office for
Davis County declaring that final approval for the
subdivision is suspended and that the further sale,
lease, or development of property within the
subdivision is prohibited except that this prohibition
shall not apply to persons or parties who have
acquired property from the subdivider unless the
person or party acquiring property meets the
definition of “common ownership” in Chapter 2. If
any court of competent jurisdiction invalidates final
plat approval for any subdivision, the City shall
record a document with the Recorder’s Office for
Davis County declaring that the final plat for the
subdivision is no longer valid and that further
subdivision activity is prohibited.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 4
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Page 4 - 1
Chapter 4 Assurance for Completion and
Maintenance of Improvements
26-4-1 Improvements and Subdivision
Improvement Agreement
26-4-2 Inspection of Improvements
26-4-3 Acceptance of Off-Site Improvements
26-4-4 Deferral or Waiver of Required
Improvements
26-4-5 Escrow Deposits for Lot Improvements
26-4-6 Issuance of Building Permits and
Certificates of Occupancy
26-4-1 Improvements and Subdivision
Improvement Agreement:
(1) Completion of Improvements: Before the final
plat of the subdivision is signed by the Mayor or
recorded with the Davis County Recorder’s Office,
all subdividers shall be required to either complete
and dedicate all the necessary public improvements
or establish a Subdivision Improvement Agreement
(SIA) and Cash Escrow as outlined in this Chapter.
These improvements include all street, sanitary and
other public improvements, including lot
improvements on the individual lots of the
subdivision, as required in these regulations,
specified in the final plat of the subdivision and
approved construction drawings. The subdivider is to
dedicate these public improvements to the City free
and clear of all liens and encumbrances on the
dedicated property and public improvements.
(2) Subdivision Improvement Agreement and
Guarantee:
(a) Agreement: If the subdivider chooses to enter
into a SIA with the City for the subdivision public
improvements, the Community Development
Director may permit the subdivider to enter into a
SIA by which the subdivider covenants to complete
all required public improvements no later than two
(2) years following the date on which the Council
approves the final plat of the subdivision.
Additionally, at the time of City Council Conditional
Approval of these public improvements, the
subdivider shall warrant, as defined in Utah Code 10-
9a-103(19), that they shall be free from defect for a
one (1) year period following the Conditional
Acceptance. The SIA shall contain such other terms
and conditions agreed to by the subdivider and the
City Council.
(b) Security: Whenever the Community
Development Director permits a subdivider to enter
into a SIA, it shall require the subdivider to provide a
cash escrow as security for the promises contained in
the SIA. The cash escrow shall be in an amount
equal to one hundred ten percent (110%) of the
estimated cost of completion of the required public
improvements, including lot improvements. The
estimated cost shall be reviewed and verified by the
City Engineer. The escrow agent shall be a statelicensed
institution approved to conduct business in
this capacity and must be acceptable to the
Community Development Director. The subdivider
may also have a cash escrow with the City, but
without interest amenities available with banks.
(c) Cash Escrow: When the subdivider posts a cash
escrow as security for its promises contained in the
SIA, the escrow instructions shall provide:
(i) That the subdivider will have no right to a return
of any of the funds except as provided in section 26-
4-2(2).
(ii) That should the subdivider fail or refuse to make
the improvements required as outlined in this SIA, the
City Subdivision Ordinance or approved construction
drawings within two (2) years following the date on
which the Council approves the final subdivision plat,
the City may declare the funds on deposit with the
Escrow Agent forfeited, and the escrow agent shall
have a legal duty to deliver the proceeds of the account
[see 26-4-1(6) (b)]. The funds shall be used to install
the improvements required by the City Subdivision
Ordinance and approved construction drawings. If
these escrowed funds prove to be insufficient for the
improvement construction, the City shall follow the
basic format found in subsection (d). If the additional
funding is not received by the City within the allotted
time, the City may place a lien against the subdivision
property for the unpaid amount plus administrative
fees.
(d) Escrow Deficiency: If at any time prior to
completion of the subdivision by the subdivider or
acceptance of the improvements by the City, the City
determines the amount held in escrow (exclusive of the
10% reserve) is not sufficient to complete the needed
improvements, the subdivider shall put such additional
amounts into escrow within 30 days of receiving
written notice from the City.
(e) Appeal: The subdivider may request a hearing
before the City Council for a review of the decision
of the Community Development Director, Public
Works Inspector or City Engineer or upon action by
the City to seize a cash escrow, provided said request
is made in writing and served by certified mail within
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 4
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Page 4 - 2
thirty (30) days after written notification of any
nonconformity with City ordinances, rules,
regulations, requirements and standards or the SIA or
Approved Construction Drawing or as to the
insufficiency of any work.
If and when the City conditionally accepts the offer
of dedication for the last completed required public
improvement, the City shall execute a waiver of its
right to receive all but ten percent (10%) of the funds
represented by the cash escrow, if the subdivider is
not in breach of the SIA. This ten percent (10%) of
the original funds shall be held as security for the
subdivider’s covenant to maintain the required public
improvements for the required time period and its
warranty that they are free from defect.
(3) Temporary Improvement: If temporary
improvements are required for the subdivision, the
subdivider shall build and pay for all costs of such
temporary improvements required by the Council and
shall maintain those temporary improvements for the
period specified by the Council. Prior to construction
of any temporary facility or improvement, the
developer shall file with the City a separate
Subdivision Improvement Agreement and a cash
escrow in an appropriate amount for the temporary
facilities to be properly constructed, maintained, and
removed.
(4) Required Improvements: All required
improvements shall be made by the subdivider or
developer, at their expense, without reimbursement
by the City or any improvement district except that,
as may be allowed under state law and approved by
the Council.
(5) Governmental Units: Governmental units to
which these contract and security provisions apply
may file, in lieu of the contract and security, a
certified resolution or ordinance from officers or
agencies authorized to act in their behalf, agreeing to
comply with the provisions of this Ordinance.
(6) Failure to Complete Improvement:
(a) Prior to the end of the SIA two-year improvement
construction period, the City Council may grant an
extension of up to one (1) additional year for
completion of the improvements within the
subdivision. The subdivider in writing shall make
application for an extension with a copy provided to
the Escrow Agent of record, if any. Upon action by
the Council, the Community Development Director
shall notify the subdivider and Escrow Agent of any
action taken by the Council. The decision to grant
any extension period shall be within the sole
discretion of the Council.
(b) In those cases where no time extension has been
granted and a SIA escrow is in effect, the City may
then:
(i) Declare the agreement to be in default and require
that all the improvements be installed regardless of
the extent of the building development at that time;
(ii) Obtain funds under the escrow and complete
improvements itself or through a third party;
(iii) Assign its right to receive funds under the
escrow to any third party, including a subsequent
owner of the subdivision for which improvements
were not constructed, in whole or in part, after that
subsequent owner posts his own escrow for those
same uncompleted improvements; or
(iv) Exercise any other rights available under the law.
(7) Acceptance of Dedication Offers: Acceptance
of formal offers of dedication of streets, public areas,
easements, and parks shall be by resolution of the
City Council as part of the subdivision final plat
approval and authorization of the Mayor to sign the
final plat. The approval of a subdivision plat by the
Planning Commission or Council, whether
preliminary or final, shall not be deemed to constitute
or imply the acceptance by the City of any required
public improvements. The Council may require the
final plat to be endorsed with appropriate notes to this
effect.
26-4-2 Inspection of Improvements:
(1) General Procedure and Fees: The Public
Works Inspector shall inspect required improvements
during construction and ensure their satisfactory
completion. The subdivider shall pay to the City an
inspection fee based on the estimated cost of
inspection. Where the improvements are completed
prior to approval of the final plat of the subdivision,
the subdivision plat shall not be signed by the Mayor
unless the inspection fee has been paid. These fees
shall be due and payable upon demand of the
Community Development Director and no building
permits nor certificates of occupancy shall be issued
until all fees are paid. The amount of the fees shall
be established by resolution, from time to time by the
Council and included in the Consolidated Fee
Schedule. If the Public Works Inspector finds upon
inspection that any one or more of the required
improvements have not been constructed in
accordance with the municipality’s construction
standards, specifications or approved construction
drawings, the subdivider shall be responsible for
properly completing the improvements.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 4
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Page 4 - 3
(2) Release or Reduction of Security: The
Community Development Director may release funds
from an established escrow in an amount equal to that
set in the SIA for said improvements. Prior to release
of any funds the Public Works Inspector shall inspect
all improvements for which the release of funds is
being requested and verify proper material,
construction, and compliance with city standards and
approved construction drawings. For improvements
that are not to be City owned, infrastructure
inspection shall be done by and verified by an
inspector authorized by the appropriate utility. The
amount of the escrow shall be reduced upon
satisfactory inspection of the public improvements
and then only to the ratio that the cost of the public
improvement inspected bears to the total cost of
public improvements for the subdivision. In no event
shall a release be greater than the amount of the
inspected item established in the escrow nor shall the
cash escrow be reduced below ten percent (10%) of
the principal amount.
26-4-3 Acceptance of Off-Site Improvements:
(1) Conditional Acceptance of Improvements: The
City Council will not conditionally accept dedication
of required improvements, release nor reduce the
amount of any security posted by the subdivider until
the Public Works Inspector has submitted a
certificate stating that all required improvements
have been satisfactorily completed and until:
(a) The Community Development Director has
verified that all fees, charges, transfers, and deposits
related to the development have been paid to the
City;
(b) The subdivider’s engineer or surveyor has
certified to the Public Works Inspector, through
submission of a detailed “as-built” survey plat of the
subdivision, indicating location, dimensions,
materials, and other information required by the
Public Works Inspector, that the layout of the line
and grade of all public improvements are in
accordance with construction plans for the
subdivision;
(c) A title insurance policy has been furnished to and
approved by the Community Development Director
indicating that the improvements have been
completed, are ready for dedication to the City, and
are free and clear of any and all liens and
encumbrances; and
(d) Upon such approval and recommendation by the
Public Works Inspector, the Community
Development Director shall present to the City
Council and the Council shall thereafter conditionally
accept the improvements in accordance with the
established procedure.
(2) Special Exceptions to Conditional Acceptance:
(a) The subdivider or developer shall be required to
maintain all required public improvements on the
individual subdivided lots and provide for snow
removal on streets and sidewalks until Final
Acceptance of the improvements by the City Council.
(b) If there are any certificates of occupancy on a
street not dedicated to the City, the City may, on
twelve (12) hours notice, plow the street or effect
emergency repairs and charge those costs to the
subdivider or developer.
(c) At the time of conditional acceptance the City
Council may hold back, in addition to the required
guarantee funds, the amount for seal coat, provided
that the season is not right for seal coat, and the
subdivider has indicated his willingness to participate
in the City annual seal coat contract.
(3) Final Acceptance:
(a) The subdivider shall initiate the request for final
acceptance of all improvements no earlier than one
year after conditional acceptance. Final inspection
by the Public Works Inspector shall be made upon
the request of the subdivider. All defects as noted in
the final inspection report of the Inspector shall be
corrected to the satisfaction of the Inspector. After
any defects are corrected and confirmed by the
Inspector, final acceptance of public improvements
shall be sent to the City Council for their action.
(b) Where the time required to complete the defects
and repairs indentified by the Public Works Inspector
extends past the normal one (1) year conditional
acceptance time period, the subdivider shall be
required to extend the guarantee period until such
time as the defects and repairs are confirmed
complete by the Inspector and the City Council has
formally approved final acceptance of all the public
improvements.
(4) Authority to Release: Funds held in the escrow
account after conditional acceptance shall not be
released to the subdivider, except upon express
written instructions of the City after final acceptance
by the City.
26-4-4 Deferral or Waiver of Required
Improvements:
(1) City Council Action: The Council may defer or
waive, at the time of approval of the final plat of the
subdivision, subject to appropriate conditions, the
provision of any or all public improvements as, in its
judgment, are not requisite in the interests of the
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 4
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Page 4 - 4
public health, safety, and general welfare, or which
are inappropriate because of the inadequacy or nonexistence
of connecting facilities. Any determination
to defer or waive the provision of any public
improvement must be made on the record and the
reasons for the deferral or waiver also shall be
expressly made on the record.
(2) Subdivider’s Obligation: In the rare occasion it
is deemed necessary by the Council to defer the
construction of any improvement required under
these regulations because of incompatible grades,
future planning, inadequate or nonexistent connecting
facilities, or for other reasons, the subdivider shall
pay his share of the cost of the future improvements
to the City prior to signing of the final plat of the
subdivision by the Mayor, or the developer may
execute a separate SIA secured by a cash escrow
guaranteeing completion of the deferred
improvements upon demand of the City.
26-4-5 Escrow Deposits for Lot Improvements:
(1) Non-Developer Builders:
(a) Builders seeking a building permit in a
subdivision that they are not the guarantor for, shall
deposit with the City a cash escrow in the amount
established by resolution by the Council and
published in the Consolidated Fee Schedule. Said
cash escrow shall be paid at the time a building
permit is issued and shall insure and guarantee the lot
improvements from damage during construction.
Such improvements include but are not limited to
curb, gutter, sidewalk, water meter structures,
streetlights, grading, and other on lot improvements.
(b) Escrows deposited by non-developer builders
shall not be returned until a structure has passed final
inspection, a certificate of occupancy has been issued
and the Public Facilities/Building Inspector has
approved all lot improvements. Once authorized,
escrows shall be returned to the person paying for the
building permit by the end of the month following the
date of authorization of approval for release. No
interest shall be paid at the time of release of escrows
deposited with the City.
(2) Acceptance of Escrow Funds: Whenever, by
reason of the season of the year, any lot
improvements required by the subdivision regulations
cannot be performed, a certificate of occupancy may
be issued, provided there is no danger to health,
safety, or general welfare upon accepting a cash
escrow deposit in an amount to be determined by the
Community Development Director for the cost of the
needed lot improvements. The SIA and escrow funds
covering the lot improvements shall remain in full
force and effect.
(3) Procedures on Escrow Fund: All required
improvements for which escrow monies have been
accepted by the Community Development Director at
the time of issuance of a certificate of occupancy
shall be installed by the subdivider within a period of
six (6) months from the date of deposit and issuance
of the certificate of occupancy. If the improvements
have not been properly installed at the end of the time
period, the Community Development Director shall
give two (2) weeks written notice to the developer
requiring it to install the improvements, and if they
are not then installed properly, the Community
Development Director may request the Council to
proceed to contract out the work for the installation
of the necessary improvements in a sum not to
exceed the amount of the escrow deposit. At the time
of the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for
which escrow monies are being deposited with the
City, the builder shall obtain and file with the City
prior to obtaining the certificate of occupancy a
notarized statement from the purchaser or purchasers
of the premises authorizing the City to have the
improvements installed at the end of the six-month
period if the improvements have not been duly
installed by the subdivider.
(4) Escrow With Authorized Agent:
(a) The Community Development Director may
accept proof of an escrow, established with a state
licensed title company that guarantees any lot
improvements required by the subdivision
regulations. The escrow shall guarantee any lot
improvements not completed due to seasonal
conditions as outlined in 26-4-5(2) above. Upon
acceptance of the Title Company escrow, the
certificate of occupancy may be issued, provided
there is no danger to health, safety, or general
welfare. The amount of the escrow is to be
determined by Community Development Director for
the cost of the lot improvements being escrowed.
(b) The guarantee from the Title Company shall state
that the Title Company will have the required
improvements installed by a professional contractor
upon demand of the City.
26-4-6 Issuance of Building Permits and
Certificates of Occupancy:
(1) Escrow Funds Required: When an escrow has
not been provided for a subdivision, no building
permit or certificate of occupancy for any building in
the subdivision shall be issued prior to the
completion of the required public improvements and
the acceptance of the dedication of those
improvements by the City unless otherwise stipulated
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 4
____________________________________________________________________________________________________________________
Page 4 - 5
in the Council’s approval of the final plat of the
subdivision.
(2) Street Improvements Required: The extent of
street improvement shall be adequate for vehicular
access by the prospective occupant(s) and by police
and fire equipment prior to the issuance of a
certificate of occupancy. For the purposes of this
section, adequate generally means “Hard Surfaced”,
however at the discretion of the Fire Chief and
Community Development Director a temporary
certificate of occupancy may be granted under the
following conditions:
(a) The developer can show that asphalt for the
subdivision has been scheduled;
(b) All underground improvements that would cause
a street to be dug in are installed and inspected and
approved by the Public Works Inspector; and
(c) Required road base is to be installed and
compacted, and it may be reasonably assumed that
the weather will not preclude access to a structure.
Prior to the temporary certificate of occupancy being
issued the developer shall provide a letter to the City
signed by the occupants and stating that they are
aware of limitations of service and that the City will
not service the roadway until after the subdivision
improvements receive final acceptance from the City
Council.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 5
Page 5 - 1
Chapter 5. Requirements for Improvements,
Reservations, and Design
26-5-1 General Improvements
26-5-2 Lot Improvements
26-5-3 Roads
26-5-4 Drainage and Storm Sewers
26-5-5 Subsurface Drainage
26-5-6 Water Facilities
26-5-7 Secondary Water System
26-5-8 Sewerage Facilities
26-5-9 Sidewalks
26-5-10 Utilities
26-5-11 Public Uses
26-5-12 Irrigation Water
26-5-13 Preservation of Natural Features and
Amenities
26-5-14 Nonresidential Subdivisions
26-5-1 General Improvements:
(1) Conformance to Applicable Rules and
Regulations: In addition to the requirements
established herein, all subdivision plats shall comply
with the following laws, rules, and regulations:
(a) All applicable statutory provisions.
(b) The Clinton City Zoning Ordinance, building and
housing codes, and all other applicable laws of the
appropriate jurisdictions.
(c) The Official Master Plan, Official Street Map, and
Capital Facilities Plan of the City including all
streets, drainage systems and parks shown on the
Official Street Map or Master Plan as adopted.
(d) The special requirements of these regulations and
any rules of the Health Department and/or
appropriate state or substate agencies.
(e) Secondary Water: All properties and buildable
lots shall be connected to the Davis and Weber
Counties Canal Company or current managers of the
system pressure irrigation system. There shall be no
physical connection between a public or private
potable water supply system and a secondary water
pressure irrigations system.
(f) The Clinton City Development Standards.
(g) Secondary Water: All properties and buildable
lots shall be connected to the Davis and Weber
Counties Canal Company or current managers of the
system pressure irrigation system. There shall be no
physical connection between a public or private
potable water supply system and a secondary water
pressure irrigations system.
(2) Self-Imposed Restrictions: If the owner places
restrictions on any of the land contained in the
subdivision greater than those required by the Zoning
Ordinance or these regulations, such restrictions or
reference to those restrictions shall be required to be
indicated on the subdivision plat, or be recorded with
the Davis County Recorder in a form to be approved
by Clinton City Attorney.
(3) Plats Straddling Municipal Boundaries:
Whenever access to the subdivision is required across
land in another local government, the Planning
Commission may request assurance from Clinton
City Attorney that access is legally established, and
from Clinton City Engineer that the access road is
adequately improved, or that a performance bond has
been duly executed and is sufficient in amount to
assure the construction of the access road. In general,
lot lines should be laid out so as not to cross
municipal boundary lines.
(4) Monuments: The applicant shall place permanent
reference monuments in the subdivision as required
in these regulations and as approved by the City
Engineer.
(a) Monuments shall be located on street right-ofway
lines, at street intersections, angle points of
curve and block corner. They shall be spaced so as to
be within sight of each other, the sight lines being
contained wholly within the street limits.
(b) All monuments required by these regulations
shall be set flush with the ground and planted in such
a manner that they will not be removed by frost. All
monuments in the right-of-way shall be constructed
as outlined in the Engineering and standard
Specifications and Standard Drawings of Clinton
City.
(c) All monuments shall be properly set in the ground
and approved by the City Engineer or his
representative prior to the time the City Council
grants conditional acceptance of the subdivision.
(5) Character of the Land: Land that the Planning
Commission finds to be unsuitable for subdivision or
development due to flooding, improper drainage,
steep slopes, rock formations, adverse earth
formations or topography, utility easements, or other
features that will reasonably be harmful to the safety,
health, and general welfare of the present or future
inhabitants of the subdivision and/or its surrounding
areas, shall not be subdivided or developed unless
adequate methods are formulated by the developer
and approved by the Planning Commission, upon
recommendation of Clinton City Engineer, to solve
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 5
Page 5 - 2
the problems created by the unsuitable land
conditions. Such land shall be set aside for uses as
shall not involve any danger to public health, safety,
and welfare.
(6) Soil Conditions: Buildings or structures shall not
be sited on soft or unsuitable soils, where there is a
high water table, or a site subject to flooding or on
uncompacted fill in accordance with the Engineering
and Standard Specifications and Standard Drawings
of Clinton City.
26-5-2 Lot Improvements:
(1) Lot Arrangement: The lot arrangement shall be
such that there will be no foreseeable difficulties, for
reasons of topography or other conditions, in
securing building permits to build on all lots in
compliance with the Zoning Ordinance and Health
Regulations and in providing driveway access to
buildings on the lots from an approved street.
(2) Lot Dimensions: Lot dimensions shall comply
with the minimum standards of the Zoning
Ordinance. Where lots are more than double the
minimum required area for the zoning district, the
Planning Commission may require that those lots be
arranged so as to allow further subdivision and the
opening of future streets where they would be
necessary to serve potential lots, all in compliance
with the Zoning Ordinance and these regulation. In
general, side lot lines shall be at right angles to street
lines (or radial to curving street lines) unless a
variation from this rule will give a better street or lot
plat. Dimensions of corner lots shall be large enough
to allow for erection of buildings, observing the
minimum front-yard setback from both streets.
Depth and width of properties reserved or laid out for
business, commercial, or industrial purposes shall be
adequate to provide for the off-street parking and
loading facilities required for the type of use and
development contemplated, as established in the
Zoning Ordinance.
(3) Double Frontage Lots and Access to Lots:
(a) Double Frontage Lots: Double frontage and
reversed frontage lots shall be avoided except where
necessary to provide separation of residential
development from traffic arterial or to overcome
specific disadvantages of topography and orientation.
(b) Access from Major and Secondary Arterials:
Lots shall not, in general, derive access exclusively
from a major or secondary street. Where driveway
access from a major or secondary street may be
necessary for several adjoining lots, the Planning
Commission may require that such lots be served by
a combined access drive in order to limit possible
traffic hazards on the street. Where possible,
driveways should be designed and arranged so as to
avoid requiring vehicles to back into traffic on major
and secondary arterials.
(4) Debris and Waste: No cut trees, timber, debris,
earth, rocks, stones, soil, junk, rubbish, or other waste
materials of any kind shall be buried in any land, or
left or deposited on any lot or street at the time of the
final acceptance, and removal of those items and
materials shall be required prior to final acceptance
of the subdivision.
26-5-3 Fencing: Each developer shall be required
to furnish and install fences wherever the planning
commission determines that a hazardous condition or
incompatibilities in land use may exist. The fences
shall be constructed according to standards
established by the Clinton City Development
Standards and shall be noted to the height and
material on the final construction plans. No
certificate of occupancy shall be issued until said
fence improvements have been duly installed.
26-5-4 Staking of Lots: Survey stakes shall be
placed at both front and back lot corners to
completely identify the lot boundaries on the ground.
Back lot corners shall be marked with a metal pipe or
rod driven into the ground and shall be three feet
above the ground. Front lot corners shall be
identified with permanent plugs in the sidewalk or
back of the curb. All lot corners must be in place
prior to the issue of building permits and after
completion of all subdivision improvements. It shall
be the responsibility of the lot owner to insure that all
lot corners are in place prior to the issuance of the
building permit.
26-5-5 Roads:
(1) General Requirements:
(a) Frontage on Improved Roads: No subdivision
shall be approved unless the area to be subdivided
shall have frontage on and access from an existing
street unless such street is:
(i) An existing state road or county street; or
(ii) A street shown upon a plat approved by the City
Council and recorded in the Davis County Recorder’s
office. Such street must be suitably improved as
required by the Clinton City Development or be
secured by a performance bond required under these
subdivision regulations, with the width and right-ofway
required by these subdivision regulations or the
Official Map Plan.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 5
Page 5 - 3
(b) Wherever the area to be subdivided is to utilize
existing road frontage, the road shall be suitably
improved as provided above.
(c) Grading and Improvement Plan: Roads shall be
graded and improved and conform the Clinton City
Development Standards and shall be approved as to
design and specifications by the Clinton City
Engineer, in accordance with the construction plans
required to be submitted prior to final plat approval.
(d) Topography and Arrangement:
(e) Roads shall be related appropriately to the
topography. Local roads shall be curved wherever
possible to avoid conformity of lot appearance. All
streets shall be arranged so as to obtain building sites
at or above the grades of the streets. Grades of
streets shall conform as closely as possible to the
original topography. A combination of steep grades
and curves shall be avoided. Specific standards are
contained in the Engineering and Standard
Specifications and Standard Drawings of Clinton
City.
(i) All streets shall be properly integrated with the
existing and proposed system of thoroughfares and
dedicated rights-of-way as established on the Official
Map and/or Comprehensive Plan. Such integration
shall take topographical conditions into
consideration. The street arrangement shall not cause
unnecessary hardship to owners of adjoining property
when they plat their own land and seek to provide
convenient access to it.
(ii) All thoroughfares shall be properly related to
special traffic, generators such as industries, business
districts, schools, churches, and shopping centers; to
population densities; and to the pattern of existing
and proposed land uses.
(iii) Minor or local streets shall be laid out to
conform as much as possible to the topography to
discourage use by through traffic, to permit efficient
drainage and utility systems, and to require the
minimum number of streets necessary to provide
convenient and safe access to property.
(iv) Proposed streets shall be extended to the
boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, unless
prevented by topography or other physical
conditions, or unless in the opinion of the Planning
Commission such extension is not necessary or
desirable for the coordination of the layout of the
subdivision with the existing layout or the most
advantageous future development of adjacent tracks.
All streets required to be extended to the boundary
lines of the subdivision shall be properly barricaded
to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
(v) In business and industrial developments, the
streets and other accessways shall be planned in
connection with the grouping of buildings, provision
of alleys, truck loading and maneuvering areas, and
walks and parking areas so as to minimize conflict of
movement between the various types of traffic,
including pedestrian.
(f) Blocks:
(i) Blocks shall have sufficient width to provide two
tiers of lost of appropriate depths. Exceptions to this
prescribed block width shall be permitted in blocks
adjacent to major streets, railroads or waterways.
(ii) The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be
such as are appropriate for the locality and the type of
development contemplated, but block lengths in
residential areas shall no exceed one thousand three
hundred twenty (1,320) feet or twelve (12) times the
minimum lot width required in the zoning district,
nor be less than four hundred (400) feet in length.
Wherever practicable, blocks along major arterials
and collector streets shall be not less than one
thousand (660) feet in length.
(iii) In long blocks the Planning Commission may
require the reservation of an easement through the
block to accommodate utilities, drainage facilities, or
pedestrian traffic.
Pedestrian ways or crosswalks, not less than ten (10)
feet wide, may be required by the Planning
Commission through the center of blocks more than
eight hundred (800) feet long where deemed essential
to provide circulation or access to schools,
playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, or
other community facilities. Blocks designed for
industrial uses shall be of such length and width as
may be determined suitable by the Planning
Commission for prospective use.
(g) Access to Primary and Secondary Arterials:
Where a subdivision borders on or contains an
existing or proposed primary arterial, the Planning
Commission may require that access to such streets
be limited by one of the following means:
(i) The subdivision of lots so as to back onto the
primary arterial and front onto a parallel local street;
no access shall be provided from the primary arterial,
and screening shall be provided in a strip of land
along the rear property line of such lots.
(ii) A marginal access or service road (separated from
the primary arterial by a planting or grass strip and
having access at suitable points.)
(h) Road Regulatory Signs: The applicant shall
install all traffic signs per Manual of Uniform Traffic
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 5
Page 5 - 4
Control Devices (MUTCD) and before issuance of
certificates of occupancy for any residence within the
subdivision. Street number signs are to be placed at
all intersections within or abutting the subdivision,
the type and location of which to be approved by the
Community Development Department. Speed limit
signs are to be placed at the entrance to all
subdivisions from arterial, minor arterial, and
collector streets. Traffic regulatory signs,
information signs and safety signs shall be placed as
required by the Community Development
Department.
(i) Construction of Roads: The arrangement of
streets shall provide for the continuation of principal
streets between adjacent properties when the
continuation is necessary for convenient movement
of traffic, effective fire protection, for efficient
provision of utilities, and where the continuation is in
accordance with Clinton City Transportation Master
Plan. A development with homes numbering greater
than 30 must have a second roadway access. If the
adjacent property is undeveloped and the street must
temporarily be a dead-end street, the right-of-way
including all city utilities shall be extended to the
property line. A temporary turnabout shall be
provided on all temporary dead-end streets, greater
than one lot in depth with the notation on the
subdivision plat that land outside the normal street
right-of-way shall revert to abuttors whenever the
street is continued. The Planning Commission may
limit the length of temporary dead-end streets in
accordance with the design standards of these
regulations.
(2) Design Standards:
(a) General: In order to provide for roads of suitable
location, width, and improvement to accommodate
prospective traffic and afford satisfactory access to
police, firefighting, snow removal, sanitation, and
road-maintenance equipment, and to coordinate roads
so as to compose a convenient system and avoid
undue hardships to adjoining properties, the
following design standards for roads are hereby
required. Road classification may be indicated in the
Comprehensive Plan, Transportation Master Plan or
Official Map; otherwise, it shall be determined by the
Planning Commission.
Local
Road
Collector
Road
Secondary
Arterial
Primary
Arterial
Min
Width
ROW
60
66
84
100
Min
Width
Traveled
40
46
60
80
Maximum
Grade %
10
8
6
6
Minimum
Curve
Radius
100
100
300
500
Design
Speed
25
30
40
50
(b) Road Surfacing and Improvements: After sewer,
water, secondary water, storm drain, land drain and
utilities with associated conduits have been installed
by the developer or appropriate utility company, the
developer shall construct curbs and gutters and shall
surface or cause to be surfaced road-ways to the
widths prescribed in these regulations. All surfacing
shall be of a character established in the Engineering
and Standard Specifications and Standard Drawings
of Clinton City. Types of pavement shall be as
outlined in the Engineering and Standard
Specifications and Standard Drawings of Clinton
City or as established by a soils engineer after a
complete soils analysis and with the concurrence of
the City Engineer. Adequate provision shall be made
for culverts, drains, and bridges. All road pavement,
shoulders, drainage improvements and structures,
curbs, turnarounds, and sidewalks shall conform to
the Engineering and Standard Specifications and
Standard Drawings of Clinton City and shall be
incorporated into the construction plans required to
be submitted by the developer for plat approval. The
developer is responsible to have a maintenance coat
applied to the surface of all new pavement as outlined
in the Engineering and Standard Specifications and
Standard Drawings of Clinton City.
(c) Railroads and Limited Access Highways:
Railroad rights-of-way and limited access highways
where so located as to affect the subdivision of
adjoining lands shall be treated as follows.
(i) In residential districts a buffer strip at least 25 feet
in depth in addition to the normal depth of the lot
required in the district shall be provided adjacent to a
limited access highway. This buffer strip shall be the
full width of the lot and shall not be counted as part
of the lot when averaging is figured as allowed in the
Zoning Ordinance. This strip shall be part of the
platted lots and shall be designated on the plat: “This
strip is reserved for screening. The placement of
structure on this land is prohibited”
(ii) In districts zoned for business, commercial or
industrial uses the nearest street extending parallel or
approximately parallel to the railroad shall, wherever
practicable, be at a sufficient distance therefrom to
ensure suitable depth for commercial or industrial
sites.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 5
Page 5 - 5
(iii) Streets parallel to the railroad when intersecting
a street which crosses the railroad at grade shall, to
the extent practicable, be at a distance of at least 150
from the railroad right-of-way.
(d) Intersections:
(i) Streets shall be laid out so as to intersect as nearly
as possible at right angles. A proposed intersection
of two (2) new streets at an angle of less than
seventy-five (75) degrees shall not be acceptable. An
oblique street should be curved approaching an
intersection and should be approximately at right
angles for at least one hundred (100) feet there from.
Not more than two (2) streets shall intersect at any
one point unless specifically approved by the
Planning Commission.
(ii) Proposed new intersections along one side of an
existing street shall, wherever practicable, coincide
with any existing intersections on the opposite side of
such street. Street jogs with center-line offsets of less
than 150 feet shall not be permitted, except where the
intersected street has separated dual drives without
median breaks at either intersection. Where streets
intersect major streets, their alignment shall be
continuous. Intersection of major streets shall be at
least eight hundred (800) feet apart.
(iii) Where any street intersection will involve earth
banks or existing vegetation inside any lot corner that
would create a traffic hazard by limiting visibility,
the developer shall cut such ground and/or vegetation
(including trees) in connection with the grading of
the public right-of-way to the extent deemed
necessary to provide an adequate sight distance.
(3) Road Dedications and Reservations:
(a) New Perimeter Streets: Street systems in new
subdivisions shall be laid out so as to eliminate or
avoid new perimeter half-streets. Where an existing
half-street is adjacent to a new subdivision, the other
half of the street shall be improved and dedicated by
the developer.
(b) The City Council, upon recommendation by the
Planning Commission, may authorize a new
perimeter street where the subdivider improves and
dedicates the entire required street right-of-way width
within its own subdivision boundaries. At the
discretion of the City Council, after recommendation
of the Planning Commission, and in accordance with
all City ordinances, the developer may retain a
protection strip of not less than one foot in width
between the street and adjacent property. An
agreement with the City, approved by the City
Attorney, Shall be made by the developer,
contracting to dedicate the one foot or larger
protection strip free of charge to the City for street
purposes upon payment by the present owners of the
contiguous property to the developer of a
consideration named in the agreement. Such
consideration is to be equal to the cost, at the time of
the agreement, of the street improvements, including
utility lines properly chargeable to the contiguous
property, plus the value of the land from the right-ofway
line to the centerline of the street at the time of
the agreement, together with interest at a fair rate
from the time of agreement until the time of
subdivision of such contiguous property. All charges
to be associated with the protection strip, as well as
the interest rate, shall be recorded as part of the
aforementioned agreement. All property owned by
the developer shall be included on both the
preliminary and final plat.
(i) Where the developer is required to improve the
full width of an existing City owned right-of-way on
the perimeter of his subdivisions, the City Council
may enter into a similar agreement as outlined in (i)
above. In this agreement, the developer will not own
a one-foot protection strip and the consideration
named in this agreement will not include the value of
the land or and utilities installed in the right-of-way
prior to the agreement. However, the agreement will
stipulate that before approval is given to development
on the adjacent property abutting the street, the
adjacent property owners will reimburse the
aforementioned developer as outlined in the
agreement.
(c) Widening and Realignment of Existing Roads:
Where a subdivision borders an existing narrow road
or when the Master Plan, Official Map, or zoning
setback regulations indicate plans for realignment or
widening a road that would require use of some of
the land in the subdivision, the applicant shall be
required to improve and dedicate at its expense those
areas for widening or realignment of those roads.
Frontage roads and streets as described above shall
be improved and dedicated by the applicant at its own
expense to the full width as required by these
subdivision regulations. Land reserved for any road
purposes may not be counted in satisfying yard or
area requirements of the Zoning Ordinance whether
the land is to be dedicated to the municipality in fee
simple or an easement granted to the City.
26-5-6 Drainage and Storm Sewers:
(1) General Requirements: The Planning
Commission shall not recommend for approval any
plat of subdivision that does not make adequate
provision for storm and flood water runoff channels
or basins. The City Engineer shall make the
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 5
Page 5 - 6
determination of adequate provision. The storm
water drainage system shall be separate and
independent of any sanitary sewer system. Storm
drainage point of discharge from channel or conduit
shall be protected from erosion by suitable structure
or lining. Storm sewers, where required, shall be
designed by a method approved by the City Engineer,
and a copy of design computations shall be submitted
along with the construction plans. All locations and
sizes of storm sewer lines shall be in conformance
with the Clinton City Storm Sewer Master Plan.
(2) Nature of Storm Water Facilities:
(a) Location: The applicant may be required by the
Planning Commission to carry away by pipe or open
ditch any spring or surface water that may exist either
previously to, or as a result of the subdivisions. Such
drainage facilities shall be located in the road rightof-
way where feasible, or in perpetual unobstructed
easements of appropriate width, and shall be
constructed in accordance with the construction
standards and specifications.
(b) Accessibility to Public Storm Sewers: Where a
public storm sewer is accessible, the applicant shall
install storm sewer facilities, or if no outlets are
within a reasonable distance, adequate provision shall
be made for the disposal of storm waters, subject to
the specifications of Clinton City Engineer.
However, in business and industrial districts,
underground storm sewer systems shall be
constructed throughout the subdivisions and be
conducted to an approved out-fall. Inspection of
facilities shall be scheduled with and conducted by
the City Engineer and/or Public Works Director.
(c) Accommodation of Upstream Drainage Areas: A
storm sewer line or other drainage facility shall in
each case be large enough to accommodate potential
runoff from its entire upstream drainage area,
whether inside or outside the subdivision. Clinton
City Engineer shall determine the necessary size of
the facility, based on the provisions of the Clinton
City Development standards and the Storm Sewer
Master Plan assuming conditions of maximum
potential watershed development permitted by the
Clinton City Comprehensive Plan.
(d) Effect on Downstream Drainage Area: Clinton
City Engineer shall also study the effect of each
subdivision on existing downstream drainage
facilities outside the area of the subdivision. Local
government drainage studies together with such other
studies as shall be appropriate, shall serve as a guide
to needed improvements. Where it is anticipated that
the additional runoff incident to the development of
the subdivision will overload an existing downstream
drainage facility, the Planning Commission may
withhold approval of the subdivision until provision
has been made for the expansion of the existing
downstream drainage facility. No subdivision shall
be approved unless adequate drainage will be
provided to an adequate drainage watercourse or
facility.
(f) Detention Basins: Large multiple use detention
basins serving multiple neighborhoods will be
located in Clinton City as designated on the Clinton
City Storm Sewer Master Plan Map. Single lot
detention basins located in individual subdivisions
shall not be encouraged. Should on-site water
detention be desired or necessary for the feasibility of
the subdivision, the detention basin must:
Serve as a multiple use area such as an open area for
park activities.
Be adequately landscaped with grass and shrubs.
Such landscaping shall also include a means to keep
it irrigated
Be designed to hold water only during a storm and
shortly thereafter. At all other times, it must remain
dry
Temporary detention basins may be authorized by the
City Council in which the above requirements may
be relaxed. Under no circumstances shall a
temporary detention basin be utilized for more than
two years.
Floodplain Area: The Planning Commission may,
when it deems it necessary for the health, safety, or
welfare of the present and future population of the
area and necessary to the conservation of water,
drainage, and sanitary facilities, prohibit the
subdivision of any portion of the property that lies
within the floodplain of any stream or drainage
course. These floodplain areas shall be preserved
from any and all destruction or damage resulting
from clearing, grading, or dumping of earth, waste
material, or stumps, except at the discretion of the
Planning Commission.
(3) Dedication of Drainage Easements:
(a) General Requirements: When a subdivision is
traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel, or
stream, there shall be provided a storm water
easement or drainage right-of-way conforming
substantially to the lines of such watercourse, and of
such width and construction as will be adequate for
the purpose. Drainage Easements:
(i) Where topography or other conditions are such as
to make impractical the inclusion of drainage
facilities within road rights-of-way, perpetual,
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 5
Page 5 - 7
unobstructed easements at least fifteen (15) feet in
width for drainage facilities shall be provided across
property outside the road lines and with satisfactory
access to the road. Easements shall be indicated on
the plat. Drainage easement shall extend from the
road to a natural watercourse or to other drainage
facilities.
(ii) When a proposed drainage system will carry
water across private land outside the subdivision,
appropriate drainage rights must be secured, assigned
to the City and indicated on the plat or recorded with
other appropriate instrument as approved by the
Clinton City Attorney.
(iii) The applicant shall dedicate, either in fee or by a
drainage or conservation easement, land on both
sides of existing watercourses to a distance to be
determined by the Planning Commission.
(iv) Low-lying lands along watercourses subject to
flooding or over flowing during storm periods,
whether or not included in areas for dedication, shall
be preserved and retained in their natural state as
drainage ways. Such land or lands subject to periodic
flooding shall not be computed in determining the
number of lots to be utilized for average density
procedures nor for computing the area requirement of
any lot.
26-5-7 Subsurface Drainage
26-5-8 Water Facilities:
(1) General Requirements:
(a) Necessary action shall be taken by the applicant
to provide water for the purposes of providing a
water-supply system capable of providing domestic
water use and fire protection.
(b) When a public water main is accessible, the
developer shall install adequate water facilities
(including fire hydrants) subject to the specifications
of state or local authorities. All water mains shall be
at least six (6) inches in diameter. All water lines
must be extended across the entire frontage of all
existing streets and to the boundary of the
subdivision on all existing or proposed streets.
Sectionalizing valves shall be provided at point of
connection to existing water distribution system and
at every 800 feet of water main for line maintenance
and repair. All legs and intersections shall also have
valves.
(c) Water main extensions shall be approved by the
Clinton City Public Works Department.
(d) To facilitate the above, the proposed location of
all fire hydrants, all waterlines with size indicated,
and water valves shall be shown on the preliminary
plat, and the cost of installing same shall be included
in the performance bond to be furnished by the
developer.
(e) A development with water connections
numbering greater than 30 must have two main line
connections interconnected from separated feeds.
Developments with multiple phases may have up to
30 connections with a single feed prior to the second
connection being installed with the approval of staff.
(f) Developments overlapping water system pressure
zones must be designed and installed such that they
are consistent with the City’s Water Master Plan and
to maintain the functionality of the pressure zones.
(2) Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be required for
all subdivisions. Fire hydrants shall be located no
more than 500 feet apart and within 250 feet of any
structure and shall be approved by the Clinton City
Fire Department. To eliminate future street openings,
all underground utilities for fire hydrants, together
with the fire hydrants themselves and all other supply
improvements shall be installed before any final
paving of a street shown on the subdivision plat.
26-5-9 Secondary Water System. The applicant is
not required to provide secondary water as a
condition of approval. However, Clinton City will
allow a developer to establish a secondary water
system within his subdivision provided the design of
the system meets the approval of the City Engineer.
26-5-10 Sewerage Facilities:
(1) General Requirements:
(a) The applicant shall install sanitary sewer facilities
in a manner prescribed by the Clinton City
Development Standards. Sanitary sewerage facilities
shall connect with public sanitary sewerage systems.
Sewers shall be installed to serve each lot and to
grades and sizes required by the Clinton City
Development Standards. No individual disposal
system or treatment plants (private or group disposal
systems) shall be permitted.
(2) Design Criteria for Sanitary Sewers:
(a) General Guidelines: These design criteria are not
intended to cover extraordinary situations.
Deviations will be allowed and may be required in
those instances when considered justified by City
Engineer.
(b) Design Factors: Sanitary sewer systems should
be designed for the ultimate tributary population.
Due consideration should be given to the City’s
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 5
Page 5 - 8
Comprehensive Plan and Sewer Master Plan. Sewer
capacities should be adequate to handle the
anticipated maximum hourly quantity of sewage and
industrial waste together with an adequate allowance
for infiltration and other extraneous flow. The unit
design flows presented below should be adequate in
each case for the particular type of development
indicated. Sewers shall be designed for the total
tributary area using the following criteria:
(c) Table 1:
One and Two-Family Dwellings .02 c.f.s./acre
Apartments
One and Two Story .02 c.f.s./acre
Three through Six Story .03 c.f.s./acre
Commercial
Small Stores and Miscellaneous
Business .02 c.f.s./acre
Shopping Centers .02 c.f.s./acre
High Rise As directed by City Engineer
Industrial As directed by City Engineer
(d) These design factors shall apply to watersheds of
300 acres or less. Design factors for watersheds
larger than 300 acres and smaller than 1,000 acres
shall be computed on the basis of a linear decrease
from the applicable design factor for and area of 300
acres to a design factor of .01 c.f.s/acre for and area
of 1,000 acres unless otherwise directed by the City
Engineer. Design factors for watersheds larger than
1,000 shall be .01 c.f.s./acre unless otherwise directed
by the city Engineer.
(e) Maximum Size: The diameter of sewers
proposed shall not exceed the diameter of the existing
or proposed outlet, whichever is applicable, unless
otherwise approved by Clinton City Engineer.
(f) Minimum Size: No public sewer shall be less
than eight (8) inches in diameter.
(g) Minimum Slope: All sewers shall be designed to
give mean velocities when flowing full of not less
than 2.7 feet per second. All velocity and flow
calculations shall be based on the Manning Formula
using an N value of 0.013. The design slopes shall be
evenly divisible by four (4). The slopes shall be a
minimum for the size indicated. Exceptions to these
minimum slopes shall be made at the upper end of
lateral sewers serving under thirty (30) houses. Said
sewers shall have a minimum slope of 0.76 percent.
When lateral sewers serve less than ten (10) houses,
the minimum slope shall be not less than one (1)
percent. (See table 2)
(h) Table 2:
Sewer Size (in inches) Minimum Slope in Feet
per 100 feet
8 0.60
10 0.44
12 0.36
15 0.28
18 0.24
21 0.20
24 0.16
(i) Alignment: All sewers shall be laid with straight
alignment between manholes, unless otherwise
directed or approved by Clinton City Engineer.
(j) Manhole Location: Manholes shall be installed at
the end of each line; at all changes in grade, size, or
alignment; at all intersections; and at distances not
greater than 400 feet for sewers 15 inches and
smaller, and 500 feet for sewers 18 inches in
diameter and larger.
(k) Manholes: The difference in elevation between
any incoming sewer and the manhole invert shall not
exceed 12 inches except where required to match
crowns. The use of drop manholes will require
approval by Clinton City Engineer. The minimum
inside diameter of the manholes shall conform to
those specified by Clinton City Engineer. Inside drop
manholes will require special considerations;
however, in no case shall the minimum clear distance
be less than that indicated above. When a smaller
sewer joins a larger one, the crown of the smaller
sewer shall not be lower than that of the larger one.
The minimum drop through manholes shall be 0.2
feet.
(l) Sewerage Locations: Sanitary sewers shall be
located within street or alley rights-of-way unless
topography dictates otherwise. When located in
easements on private property, access shall be to all
manholes. A manhole shall be provided at each
street or alley crossing. End lines shall be extended
to provide access from street or alley right-of-ways
when possible. Imposed loading shall be considered
in all locations. Not less than six (6) feet of cover
shall be provided over the top of pipe in street an
alley rights-of-way or three (3) feet in all other areas.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 5
Page 5 - 9
All sewer lines must be extended across the entire
frontage of all existing streets and to the boundary of
the subdivision on all existing or proposed city
streets.
(n) Water Supply Interconnections: There shall be no
physical connection between a public or private
potable water supply system and a sewer which will
permit the passage of any sewage or polluted water
into the potable supply. Sewers shall be kept
removed from water supply wells or other water
supply sources and structures.
(o) Relation of Sewers to Water Mains: A
minimum horizontal distance of ten (10) feet shall be
maintained between parallel water and sewer line. At
points where sewers cross water mains, the sewer
shall be constructed of cast iron pipe or encased in
concrete for a distance of ten (10) feet in each
direction from the crossing, measured perpendicular
to the water line. This will not be required when the
water main is at least two (2) feet above the sewer.
26-5-7 Sidewalks:
(1) Required Improvements:
(a) Sidewalks shall be included within the dedicated
nonpavement right-of-way of all roads shown in
Table 3.
(b) Concrete high-curbs are required for all roads
when sidewalks are required by these regulations or
when required in the discretion of the City Council.
Roll-up type curbs are not acceptable.
(i) Pedestrian Accesses: The Planning Commission
may require, in order to facilitate pedestrian access
from the roads to schools, parks, playgrounds, or
other nearby roads, perpetual unobstructed easements
at least twenty (20) feet in width. Easements shall be
indicated on the plat.
Table 3:
Nature of Road Residential
Nonresidential
Business
industrial
Local Road Both Sides
4 Feet Wide
Both Sides
6 Feet Wide
Collector Road Both Sides
5 Feet Wide
Both Sides
6 Feet Wide
Secondary
Arterial
Both Sides
5 Feet Wide
Both Sides
6 Feet Wide
Primary
Arterial
Both Sides
5 Feet Wide
Both Sides
6 Feet Wide
26-5-8 UTILITIES:
(1) Location:
(a) All utility facilities, including but not limited to
gas, electric power, telephone, and CATV cables,
shall be located underground throughout the
subdivisions. Whenever existing utility facilities are
located above ground, except when existing on public
roads and rights-of-way, they shall be removed and
placed underground. All utility facilities existing and
proposed throughout the subdivision shall be shown
on the preliminary plat. Underground service
connections to the street property line of each platted
lot shall be installed at the subdivider’s expense. At
the discretion of the Planning Commission, the
requirement for service connections to each lot may
be waived in the case of adjoining lots to be retained
in single ownership and intended to be developed for
the same primary use.
(2) Easements:
(a) Easements centered on rear lot lines shall be
provided for utilities (private and municipal) and
such easements shall be at least ten (10) feet wide.
Proper coordination shall be established between the
subdivider and the applicable utility companies for
the establishment of utility easements established in
adjoining properties.
(b) When topographical or other conditions are such
as to make impractical the inclusions of utilities
within the rear lot lines, perpetual unobstructed
easements at least seven (7) feet in width shall be
provided along side lot lines with satisfactory access
to the road or rear lot lines. Easements shall be
indicated on the plat.
26-5-9 Public Uses:
(1) Recreation.
(a) Recreation Sites: Land reserved for
recreation purposes shall be of a character and
location suitable for use as a playground, playfield, or
for other recreation purposes, and shall be relatively
level and dry; and shall be improved by the developer
to the standards required by the Planning
Commission, which improvements shall be included
in the subdivision improvement agreement and
security. A recreation site shall have a total frontage
on one (1) or more streets of at least two hundred
(200) feet, and no other dimension of the site shall be
less than two hundred (200) feet, and no other
dimension of the site shall be less than two hundred
(200) feet in depth. The Planning Commission may
refer any subdivision proposed to contain a dedicated
park to Clinton City or department in charge of parks
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 5
Page 5 - 10
and recreation for a recommendation. All land to be
reserved for dedication to Clinton City for park
purposes shall have prior approval of Clinton City
and shall be shown marked on the plat, “Reserved or
Park and/or Recreation Purposes.”
(c) Other Recreation Reservations: The provisions of
this section are minimum standards. None of the
paragraphs above shall be construed as prohibiting a
developer from reserving other land for recreation
purposed in addition to the requirements of this
section.
(2) Other Public Uses:
(a) Plat to Provide for Public Uses: Except when a
applicant utilizes planned unit development or
density zoning in which land is set aside by the
developer as required by the provision of the Zoning
Ordinance, whenever a tract to be subdivided
includes a school, recreation use or other public use
as indicated on the Master Plan or any portion
thereof, the space shall be suitably incorporated by
the applicant into his sketch plat. After proper
determination of its necessity by the Planning
Commission and the appropriate local government
official or other public agency involved in the
acquisition and use of each such site and a
determination has been made to acquire the site by
the public agency, the site shall be suitably
incorporated by the applicant into the preliminary and
final plats.
(b) Referral to Public Body: The Planning
Commission shall refer the sketch plat to the public
body concerned with acquisition for its consideration
and report. The Planning Commission may propose
alternate areas for such acquisition and shall allow
the public body or agency 30 days for reply. The
agency’s recommendation, if affirmative, shall
include a map showing the boundaries and area of the
parcel to be acquired and an estimate of the time
required to complete the acquisition.
(c) Notice to Property Owner: Upon a receipt of
an affirmative report, the Planning Commission shall
notify the property owner and shall designate on the
preliminary and final plats that area proposed to be
acquired by the public body.
(d) Duration of Land Reservation: The acquisition
of land reserved by a public agency on the final plat
shall be initiated within twelve (12) months of
notification, in writing, from the owner that he
intends to develop the land. Such letter of intent shall
be accompanied by a sketch plat of the proposed
development and a tentative schedule of construction.
Failure on the part of the public agency to initiate
acquisition within the prescribed 12 months shall
result in the removal of the “reserved” designation
from the property involved and the freeing of the
property for development in accordance with these
regulations.
26-5-10 Irrigation Water. No irrigation ditches
shall be permitted within the boundary of a
subdivision or minor subdivision. All necessary
irrigation ditches, whether used fro the purpose of
transporting irrigation or waste flow water, must be
maintained within a subdivision or minor
subdivision, and must be replaced with a pipe culvert.
This pipe culvert shall be at least fifteen (15) inch
diameter concrete pipe and be satisfactory to the
irrigation company. The developer of a subdivision
or minor subdivision must provide for the rights of all
irrigation users, both upstream and downstream of
the proposed development.
26-5-11 Preservation of Natural Features and
Amenities:
(1) General: Existing features that would add value
to residential development or to Clinton City as a
whole, such as trees, as herein defined, watercourses
and falls, beaches, historic spots, and similar
irreplaceable assets, shall be preserved in the design
of the subdivision. No trees shall be removed from
any subdivision nor any change of grade of the land
effected until approval of the preliminary plat has
been granted.
26-5-12 Nonresidential Subdivisions:
(1) General: If a proposed subdivision includes land
that is zoned for commercial or industrial purposes,
the layout of the subdivision with respect to the land
shall make provision as the Planning Commission
may require. A nonresidential subdivision shall also
be subject to all the requirements of site plan
approval set forth in the Zoning Ordinance. Site plan
approval and nonresidential subdivision plat approval
may proceed simultaneously at the discretion of the
Planning Commission. A nonresidential subdivision
shall be subject to all the requirements of these
regulations, as well as such additional standards
required by the Planning Commission, and shall
conform to the proposed land use and standards
established in the Master Plan, Official Map, and
Zoning Ordinance.
(2) Standard: In addition to the principles and
standards in these regulations, which are appropriate
to the planning of all subdivisions, the applicant shall
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Commission
that the street, parcel, and block pattern proposed is
specifically adapted to the uses anticipated and takes
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Chapter 5
Page 5 - 11
into account other uses in the vicinity. The following
principles and standards shall be observed:
(a) Proposed industrial parcels shall be suitable in
area and dimensions to the types of industrial
development anticipated.
(b) Street rights-of-way and pavement shall be
adequate to accommodate the type and volume of
traffic anticipated to be generated thereupon.
(c) Special requirements may be imposed by Clinton
City with respect to street, curb, gutter, and sidewalk
design and construction.
(d) Special requirements may be imposed by Clinton
City with respect to the installation of public utilities,
including water, sewer, and storm water drainage.
(e) Every effort shall be made to protect adjacent
residential areas from potential nuisance from a
proposed commercial or industrial subdivision,
including the provision of extra depth in parcels
backing up on existing or potential residential
development and provisions for a permanently
landscaped buffer strip when necessary.
(f) Streets carrying nonresidential traffic, especially
truck traffic, shall not normally be extended to the
boundaries of adjacent existing or potential areas.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Section 6
Page 6 - 1
Section 6. Impact Fees Related to
Development
26-6-1 General
26-6-2 Definitions
26-6-3 Findings and Purpose
26-6-4 Service Areas Established
26-6-5 Impact Fees Levied
26-6-6 Time of Collection
26-6-7 Use of Fees
26-6-8 Adjustments
26-6-9 Accounting, Expenditure and Refund
26-6-10 Impact Fee Challenges and Appeals
26-6-1 General. In order to recover the cost to
the City of the provision, extension, enlargement
or development of capital facilities to service the
proposed development, the City shall require
exaction from the developer. The exaction may
be in the actual installation of the capital facility
by the developer or may be a payment in lieu of
the actual installation. The form of the exaction
will be at the discretion of the City Council as
outlined herein.
26-6-2 Definitions.
"Capital Facilities Plan" means the Capital
Facilities Plan adopted by Resolution of the City
Council dated June 19, 1997, as the same shall
be amended from time to time.
"City" means Clinton City, a Utah municipal
corporation.
"Development Activity" means any
construction or expansion of a building, structure
or use; any change in use of a building or
structure; or any changes in the use of land that
creates additional demand and need for public
facilities.
"Development Approval" means any written
authorization from the City that authorizes the
commencement of development activity.
"Impact fee" means a payment of money
imposed upon development activity as a
condition of development approval.
"Service Area" means geographic area
designated by the City which a defined set of
public facilities provides service within the area.
26-6-3 Findings and Purpose. The City
Council hereby finds and determines:
(1) There is need for public facilities for new
developments which have not been constructed
and are required to be consistent with the City’s
General Plan and to protect the Public’s health,
safety and welfare.
(2) The rapid and continuing growth of Clinton
City necessitates the imposition and collection of
impact fees pursuant to law and requires
development to pay its fair share of the cost of
providing public facilities occasioned by the
demands and needs of the development project at
service levels necessary to promote and preserve
the public health, safety and welfare.
(3) The City Council hereby adopts the report
from Tischler & Associates, Inc. dated June 5,
1997, entitled “Impact Fees” which establishes
the costs for providing public facilities
occasioned by development projects within the
City and certain credits allowable against impact
fees in the City.
(4) The impact fees established by this
Ordinance area based upon the costs which are
generated through the need for new facilities and
other capital acquisition costs required,
incrementally, by new development within the
City.
(5) The impact fees established by this
Ordinance do not exceed the reasonable cost of
providing public facilities occasioned by
development projects within the City.
26-6-4 Service Areas Established. The City
shall constitute a single service area and all real
property located with the corporate boundaries of
the City shall be included within such service
area.
26-6-5 Impact Fees Levied. The impact fees
for the City service area are hereby established
and/or levied and are contained in Figure 1
attached hereto and by this reference made a part
hereof. The impact fees may also be set forth in
the Consolidated Fee Schedule of the City.
26-6-6 Time of Collection. Unless otherwise
provided by The City Council, impact fees shall
be payable prior to the issuance of a building
permit by the City.
26-6-7 Use of Fees. The fees shall be used
solely to:
(1) Pay for the described public facilities to be
constructed by the City:
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Section 6
Page 6 - 2
(2) For reimbursing the City for the
development’s share of those capital
improvements already constructed by the City:
or
(3) To reimburse developers who have
constructed public facilities where those facilities
were beyond that needed to mitigate the impacts
of the developer’s project(s).
26-6-8 Adjustments.
(1) The City may, upon proper showing, adjust
the standard impact fee at the time the fee is
charged to:
(2) Respond to unusual circumstances in
specific cases; and
(3) Insure that the impact fees are imposed
fairly; and
(4) Allow credits as specified in the Impact Fee
report for Clinton City, Utah.
(5) Adjust the amount of the fee based upon
studies and data submitted by the developer
which are approved by the City after review of
the same; and
(6) Allow credits as approved by the City for
dedication of land for, improvements to, or new
construction of, public facilities providing
services to the community at large, provided
such facilities are identified in the capital
facilities plan and are required by the City as
condition of approving the development activity.
No credits shall be given for project
improvements as defined in the Act.
26-6-9 Accounting, Expenditure and
Refund. The City shall account for, expend and
refund impact fees in accordance with the
provisions of the Act.
26-6-10 Impact Fee Challenges and Appeals.
(1) Any person or entity residing in or owning
property within a service area, and any
organization, association, or corporation
representing the interest of persons or entities
owning property within a service area, may file a
declaratory judgment action challenging the
validity of the fee.
(2) Any person or entity required to pay an
impact fee imposed by the City who believes the
fee does not meet the requirements of law may
file a written request for information with the
City as provided by law.
(3) Within two weeks of the receipt of the
request for information, the City shall provide
the person or entity with the written analysis
required by the Act and with any other relevant
information relating to the impact fee.
(4) Within 30 days after paying the impact fee,
any person or entity who has paid the fee and
wished to challenge the fee shall:
(a) File a written appeal with the Clinton City
Council by delivering a copy of such appeal to
the Clinton City Administrator setting forth in
detail all grounds for the appeal and all facts
relied upon by the appealing party with respect
to the fees appealed. Upon receipt of the appeal
the City council shall thereafter schedule a public
hearing on the appeal at which time all interested
persons will be given an opportunity to be heard.
The City Council shall schedule the appeal
hearing and thereafter render its decision on the
appeal no later than thirty (30) days after the
challenge to the impact fee is filed. Any person
or entity who has failed to comply with the
administrative appeal remedies established by
this section may not file or join an action
challenging the validity of any impact fee.
(b) Within ninety (90) days of a decision
upholding an impact fee by the City or within
120 days after the date the challenge to the
impact fee was filed, whichever is earlier, any
party to the appeal that is adversely affected by
the City Council’s decision may petition the
Second Judicial District Court in and for Davis
County for review of the decision.
(c) In the event of a petition to the Second
District Court, the City shall transmit to the
reviewing Court the record of its proceedings
including its minutes, findings, orders and if
available, a true and correct transcript of its
proceedings.
(d) If the proceedings was tape recorded, a
transcript of that tape recording in a true and
correct transcript for the purpose of Subsection
3. above.
(e) If there is a record;
(i) the District Court’s review is limited to the
record provided by the City; and
(ii) The District Court may not accept or
consider any evidence outside the City’s record
unless the evidence was offered to the City and
the Court determines that it was improperly
excluded by the City.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Section 6
Page 6 - 3
(f) If there is adequate record, the District Court
may call witnesses and take evidence.
(g) The District Court shall affirm the decision
of the City if the decision is supported by
substantial evidence in the record.
(h) The judge may award reasonable attorney’s
fees and costs to the prevailing party in any
action brought under this section.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Section 7
Page 8 - 1
Section 7. Specifications for Documents
to be Submitted
26-7-1 SKETCH PLAT
26-7-2 PRELIMINARY PLAT
26-7-3 CONSTRUCTION PLANS
26-7-4 FINAL SUBDIVISION PLAT
26-7-1 Sketch Plat: Sketch plats submitted to the
Planning Commission, prepared in pen or pencil,
shall be drawn to a convenient scale of not more than
one hundred (100) feet to an inch and shall show the
following information:
(1) Name:
(a) Name of subdivision if property is within an
existing subdivision;
(b) Proposed name if not within a previously platted
subdivision. The proposed name shall not duplicate
the name of any plat previously recorded; and
(2) Ownership:
(a) Name and address, including telephone number,
of legal owner or agent of property, and citation of
last instrument conveying title to each parcel of
property involved in the proposed subdivision, giving
grantor, grantee, date, and land records reference;
(b) Citation of any existing legal rights-of-way or
easements affecting the property;
(c) Existing covenants on the property, if any
(d) Name and address, including telephone number,
of the professional person(s) responsible for
subdivision design, for the design of public
improvements, and for surveys
(3) Description: Location of property by legal
description, section, township, range, graphic scale,
north arrow and date.
(4) Features:
(a) Location of property lines, existing easements,
irrigation ditches, railroad rights-of-way,
watercourses, and existing and proposed fences;
location, width, and names of all existing or platted
streets or other public ways within or immediately
adjacent to the tract; names of adjoining property
owners from the latest assessments rolls within five
hundred (500) feet of any perimeter boundary of the
subdivision.
(b) Location, sizes, elevations, and slopes of
existing sewers, water mains, culverts, and other
underground structures within the tract and
immediately adjacent thereto; existing permanent
building and utility poles on or immediately adjacent
to the site and utility rights-of-way.
(c) Approximate topography, at the same scale as
the sketch plat
(d) The approximate location and widths of
proposed streets
(e) Preliminary proposals for connection with
existing water supply and sanitary sewage systems;
preliminary provisions for collecting and discharging
surface water drainage.
(f) The approximate location, dimensions, and areas
of all proposed or existing lots
(g) The approximate location, dimensions, and area
of all parcels of land proposed to be set aside for
park or playground use or other public use, or for the
use of property owners in the proposed subdivision
(h) The location of temporary stakes to enable the
Planning Commission to find and appraise features of
the sketch plat in the field
(i) Whenever the sketch plat covers only part of an
applicant’s contiguous holdings, the applicant shall
submit, at the scale of no more than two hundred
(200) feet to the inch, a sketch in pen or pencil of the
proposed subdivision area, together with its proposed
street system, and an indication of the probable future
street and drainage system of the remaining portion
of the tract.
(j) A vicinity map showing streets and other general
development of the surrounding area. The sketch plat
shall show all school and improvement district lines
with the zones properly designated.
26-7-2 Preliminary Plat.
(1) General: The preliminary plat shall be prepared
by a licensed land surveyor at a convenient scale not
more than one (1) inch equals one hundred (100) feet,
may be prepared in pen or pencil, and the sheets shall
be numbered in sequence if more than one (1) sheet
is used and shall be of such size as is acceptable for
filing in the office of the Recorder of Deeds, but shall
not be thirty-four by forty-four (34 x 44) inches or
larger. It should be noted that the map prepared for
the preliminary plat may also be used for the final
subdivision plat and, therefore, should be drawn on
tracing cloth or reproducible mylar.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Section 7
Page 8 - 2
(2) Features: The preliminary plat shall show the
following:
(a) The location of property with respect to
surrounding property and streets, the names of all
adjoining property owners of record, or the names of
adjoining developments; the names of adjoining
streets.
(b) The location and dimensions of all boundary
lines of the property to be expressed in feet decimals
of a foot.
(c) The location of existing streets, easements, water
bodies, streams, and other pertinent features such as
swamps, railroads, fences, irrigations structures,
buildings, parks, cemeteries, drainage ditches,
irrigation ditches and bridges, as determined by the
Planning Commission.
(d) The location and width of all existing and
proposed streets and easements, alleys, and other
public ways, and easement and proposed street
rights-of-way and building setback lines.
(e) The locations, dimensions, and areas of all
proposed or existing lots.
(f) The location and dimensions of all property
proposed to be set aside for park or playground use,
or other public or private reservation, with
designation of the purpose of those set asides, and
conditions, if any, of the dedication or reservation.
(g) The name and address of the owner or owners of
land to be subdivided, the name and address of the
subdivider if other than the owner, and the name of
the land surveyor.
(h) The date of the map, approximate true north
point, scale, and title of the subdivision.
(i) Sufficient data acceptable to the City Engineer to
determine readily the location, bearing, and length of
all lines, and to reproduce such lines upon the
ground; the location of all proposed monuments.
(j) Names of the subdivision and all new streets.
(k) Indication of the use of any lot (single-family,
two-family, multi-family, townhouse) and all uses
other than residential proposed by the developer.
(l) Blocks shall be consecutively numbered or
lettered in alphabetical order. The blocks in
numbered additions to subdivisions bearing the same
name shall be numbered or lettered consecutively
throughout the several phases.
(m) All lots in each block shall be consecutively
numbered.
(n) Proposals for connection with existing water
supply and sanitary sewage systems. Location and
size of all proposed water and sewer lines, indicating
placement of manholes, water valves, and fire
hydrants.
(o) Provisions for collecting and discharging surface
water drainage.
(p) All information required on sketch plat should
also be shown on the preliminary plat, and the
following notations shall also be shown:
(i) Explanation of drainage easements, if any
(ii) Explanation of irrigation easements, if any
(iii) Explanation of site easements, if any
(iv) Explanation of reservations, if any
(v) Endorsement of owner, as follows:
Owner Date
(q) Form for endorsements by Planning Commission
Chairman as follows:
Approved by Resolution of the Clinton City
Planning Commission.
Chairman Date
(r) The lack of information under any item specified
herein, or improper information supplied by the
applicant, shall be cause for disapproval of a
preliminary plat.
26-7-3 Construction Plans:
(1) General: Construction plans shall be prepared for
all required improvements. Plans shall be drawn at a
scale of no more than one (1) inch equals fifty (50)
feet, and map sheets shall be of the same size as the
preliminary plat. The following shall be shown:
(a) Profiles showing existing and proposed
elevations along centerlines of all roads. Where a
proposed road intersects an existing road or roads, the
elevation along the centerline of the existing road or
roads within one hundred (100) feet of the
intersection, shall be shown. Approximate radii of all
curves, lengths of tangents, and central angles on all
streets.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Section 7
Page 8 - 3
(b) The Planning Commission may require, where
steep slopes exist, that cross-sections of all proposed
streets at one-hundred-foot (100 foot) stations be
shown at five (5) points as follows: On a line at right
angles to the center line of the street, and said
elevation points shall be at the center line of the
street, each property line, and points twenty-five (25)
feet inside each property line.
(c) Plans and profiles showing the locations and
typical cross-section of street pavements including
curbs and gutters, sidewalks, drainage easements,
rights-of-way, irrigation ditches, manholes, and catch
basins; the locations of street signs; the location, size
and invert elevations of existing and proposed
sanitary sewers, storm water drains, and fire
hydrants, showing connection to any existing or
proposed utility systems; and exact location and size
of all water, gas, or other underground utilities or
structures.
(d) Location, size, elevation, and other appropriate
descriptions of any existing facilities or utilities,
including, but not limited to, existing streets, sewers,
drains, water mains, easements, water bodies,
streams, and other pertinent features such as swamps,
railroads, buildings, features noted on the Official
Map or Master Plan, at the point of connection to
proposed facilities and utilities within the subdivision
(e) All specifications and references required by the
City’s construction standards and specifications,
including a site-grading plan for the entire
subdivision.
(f) Notation of approval as follows:
(g) Title, name, address, and signature of professional
engineer and surveyor, and revision dates.
26-7-4 Final Subdivision Plat:
(1) General: The final subdivision plat shall consist
of a sheet of approved Mylar, size of drawings shall
be twenty two (22) by thirty four (34) inches with
one-half (½) inch border on tom, bottom and right
sides, the left side shall have a border of one and onehalf
(1 ½) inches. The plat shall be so drawn that the
top of the drawing faces either North or West,
whichever accommodates the drawing best. All
lines, dimensions and makings shall be made on the
Mylar with approved waterproof black “India
Drawing Ink”. The plat shall be made to a scale large
enough to clearly show all details, in any case not
smaller than one hundred (100) feet to the inch, and
workmanship on the finished drawing shall be neat,
clean cut and readable. The plat shall contain the
following information.
(a) A subdivision name approved by the City
Planning Commission, and the general location of the
subdivision, in bold letters at the top of the sheet.
(b) A North point and scale of the drawing, and the
date.
(c) Accurately drawn boundaries, showing the proper
bearings and dimensions of all boundary lines of the
subdivision, properly tied to the public survey
monuments. These lines should be slightly heavier
than street lot lines.
(d) The names, widths, lengths, bearings and curve
data on center lines of proposed streets, alleys and
easements; also the boundaries, bearings and
dimensions of all portions within the subdivision, as
intended to be dedicated to the use of the public; the
lines, dimensions, bearings and numbers of all lots,
blocks, and parts reserved for any reason within the
subdivision. All proposed streets shall be named or
numbered in accordance with and in conformity with
the adopted street-naming and numbering system of
Clinton City.
(e) The standard forms approved by the Planning
Commission lettered for the following:
(i) Description of land to be included in subdivision.
(ii) Registered Professional Engineer and/or Land
Surveyor’s “Certificate of Survey”.
(iii) Owner’s Dedication.
(iv) Notary Public’s Acknowledgement.
(v) Certificate of Approval by the City Planning
Commission.
(vi) Certificate of Approval by the City’s Engineer.
(vii) Certificate of Acceptance by the City Council
attested by the City Recorder.
Owner Date
City Engineer Date
Mayor Date
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Section 7
Page 8 - 4
(f) A three (3) inch by three (3) inch space in the
lower right-hand corner of the drawing for recording
information.
(g) Preparation: The final subdivision plat shall be
prepared by a land surveyor licensed by the state.
Clinton City Code of Ordinances Title 26
Subdivisions Section 8
Page 8 - 1
Section 8. Validity and Effective Date
8-1. Validity
8-2. Effective Date
8-1. Validity. If any section, sub-section, sentence,
clause or phrase of this Ordinance is for any reason
held to be invalid, such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portion of this Ordinance.
8-2. Effective Date. This Ordinance Shall take effect
upon its adoption and posting.

Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
1
CLINTON CITY
CONSOLIDATED FEE SCHEDULE
FY 2020-21
BUILDING FEES:
Building Valuation
Building Valuation is derived utilizing current building valuation data from the International Code Council (ICC) published on the ICC web site (www.iccsafe.org). The Permit Fee Multiplier for Clinton City is 0.85.
Building Permit Fees
Building Permit Fees are determined by utilizing the procedures outlined in Chapter 3 of the 1997 ICBO Uniform Administrative Code (UAC) and Table 1-A as modified and attached hereto, based upon the Building Valuation, plus the following fees:
Plan Review Fee
Residential Dwelling
Single Family est. 2002
30% of the Bldg. Fee
Multi-Family
est. 2001
65% of the Bldg. Fee
Accessory Buildings and Detached Garages
est. 2002
20% of the Bldg. Fee
Commercial
Primary Building Structures est. 2001
65% of the Bldg. Fee
Accessory Building
est. 2001
65% of the Bldg. Fee
Investigation Fee
est. 2001
100% of the Bldg. Fee
State Fee
1% of the Bldg. Fee
Technology Fee
Est. 2019
Other Permits up to $100
$1
Other Permits from $101 to $160
$3
Other Permits from $161 to $999
$5
Other Permits greater than $1000
$15
Single Family Residential
$30
Commercial Permits
$45
Building Permit Fees est. 2001
Additions or Modifications to Existing Structures; Structural, Plumbing, Mechanical, and/or Electrical Systems. Fees shall be assessed in accordance with the provisions of Section 304 of the 1997 Uniform Administrative Code (UAC), Section 109 of the IBC and Section R108 of the IRC.
Building Bond est. 2009
The Building Bond is a refundable bond designed to insure compliance with the requirements of the Utah Uniform Building Standards Act Rules and for protection of the public right-of-way, only one bond is required per permit. Necessity of Bond is determined by the Building Official.
Residential Dwelling
Single Family Dwellings and modifications
$ 1,500.00
est. 2017
Single Family Dwellings in a PH Zone – Trees, Landscaping & Automatic Sprinkling System
$ 8,500.00
Multi Family Dwellings and modifications
$ 75.00/l.f. of curb, gutter, sidewalk
Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
2
Commercial
Existing Structure
$ 75.00/l.f. of curb, gutter, sidewalk
New Construction
$ 75.00/l.f. of curb, gutter, sidewalk
Building Demolition or Relocation est. 2012
$ 75.00/l.f. of curb, gutter, sidewalk
Commercial Signage est. 2012
$ 500.00
SERVICE FEES
FEE
FEE AMOUNT**
Subdivision Preliminary Plat* est. 2019
$ 655.00 plus $ 55.00 per lot or dwelling
Subdivision Final or Amended Plat* est. 2019
$955.00 plus 90.00 per lot or dwelling
Subdivision Inspection Fee
$ 75.00 per lot
Subdivision Inspection Fee Re-inspection
$ 58.80 per occurrence
Subdivision Street Light Connection
$ 140.00 per streetlight
Minor Subdivision Fee est. 2019
$ 455.00 plus $35.00 per lot
Minor Subdivision Inspection Fee w/infrastructure
$ 250.00 plus $10.00 per lot
Subdivision Preliminary Plat Re-Certification est. 2019
$ 955.00 plus 45.00 per lot or dwelling
Subdivision Final Plat Re-Certification without Changes est.2019
$ 955.00
Minor Subdivision Fee Re-Certification without Changes est.2019
$ 230.00
Re-advertisement Fee
Cost of previous ad + $ 58.80
Subdivision Administrative Fee (eg. Subdivision Name Change) est. 2018
$250
Telecommunications Right-of-Way Application est.2019
$ 505.00
SITE PLAN REVIEW, COMMERCIAL AND OR NON-RESIDENTIAL SUBDIVISION
GROSS SITE AREA
FEE AMOUNT
0 to 5 acres est. 2019
$ 655.00 plus $ 210.00 per acre
5.1 to 10 acres est. 2019
$1,705.00 plus $ 175.00 per acre over 5
10.1 to 15 acres est. 2019
$2,580.00 plus $ 150.00 per acre over 10
15.1 to 20 acres est. 2019
$3,330.00 plus $ 125.00 per acre over 15
20 acres or more est. 2019
$3,955.00 plus $ 110.00 per acre over 20
Engineering and design costs specific to a proposed development.
Actual engineering costs plus a 15% administrative cost
CODE ENFORCEMENT
FEE AMOUNT
Property Clean-up
Actual cost of work or contract
Administrative Cost
$ 175.00
Inspector Costs
$ 58.80
Removal of Lien
$ $75.00
Removal of Non-Compliance
$ $75.00
Zoning Compliance Inspection/Letter
Upon Request est. 2014
$ 150.00
ADDITIONAL FEES DEPENDENT UPON MATERIAL PROVIDED
FEE AMOUNT
Subdivisions Submitted without Electronic Data
$ 115.00 plus 29.00 per lot
Storm Drain Analysis with Preliminary Plat or Site Plan Review
$ 115.00 plus 29.00 per lot
**Planning & Zoning Fees include a $5 technology fee
Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
3
CLINTON CITY SWPPP REVIEW AND INSPECTION FEES ^
Plan Review Fees *
FEE
AMOUNT
Single Lot est. 2011
$ 50.00 per lot
Commercial Development est. 2011
$ 50.00 per acre or portion thereof up to 5 acres
Subdivision Development est. 2011
$ 50.00 per acre or portion thereof up to 5 acres
Light Manufacturing est. 2011
$ 50.00 per acre or portion thereof up to 5 acres
Yearly Inspection
Single Lot
$ 150.00 per year
Commercial Development
$ 300.00 per year
Subdivision Development
$ 300.00 per year
Light Manufacturing
$ 300.00 per year
Other SWPPP Fees
Reports of Inappropriate Action
$ 0.00 per report
Re-inspection est. 2017
$ 58.80 per inspection
Inspections Performed Outside of Clinton City
Mileage
A mileage charge will be assessed for each plan review inspection and regular inspection based on the distance from Clinton City Public Works to the site of the development or lot. Charge will be based upon the rate found at: http://www.gsa.gov/portal/content/100715
Administrative Charge
A $10.00 administrative charge will be assessed for each plan review and inspection to cover the cost of office supplies, maintaining additional files and transferring information to the City where the project is located.
^ All fees shall be assessed starting when a permit is issued and continue until a Notice of Termination is filed with the State, approved, and a copy supplied to Clinton City.
* Plans not complying with requirements established by city staff after a second review are subject to re-assessment of fees.
Note: Service fees are a user fee designed to cover the cost of services and time provided by the City staff and where applicable the City Engineer reviews. City Engineer fees are tracked and considered to be equal to a minimum of one-half of the service fee. Once the engineer review constitutes greater than one-half of these fees a developer will be required to pay an additional fee equal to one-half of the original service fee. This additional fee will occur every time the engineering review fee exceeds one-half of the original service fees.
Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
4
STORMWATER FEE WORKSHEET
Equivalent Service Unit (ESU) est. 2013
$ 4.50
RESIDENTIAL USE FEES
Single Family Dwelling, Attached or Detached
1 ESU
Apartments
1 ESU per unit
or actual calculation of impervious surface
NON-RESIDENTIAL USE FEES
One ESU per 2,700 square feet of impervious surface area adjusted within the following parameters: Overall maximum adjustment shall be no greater than 55%.
WATER QUALITY (Maximum 45% Credit)
WATER QUANTITY (Maximum 55%)
% CREDIT
% CREDIT
Oil Water Separator
1% to 15%
Full on-site retention
55%
Good Housekeeping
1% to 8%
Area of Detention
1% to 15%
Employee Training
2%
Detention greater than 0.2 cfs
1% to 30%
Treatment Control
1% to 20%
DETERMINATION OF BENEFITS: Benefits are determined as outlined here and as established in the Clinton City Code of Revised Ordinances, Title 23, Chapter 11, Stormwater System.
DEFINITIONS:
Good Housekeeping: Bonus is evaluated upon a plan presented by the applicant outlining activities that reduce the amount of debris and pollutants allowed into the stormwater system. Means of reduction may include but not be limited to:
Scheduled vacuuming and/or sweeping of parking area
Scheduled litter pick-up
Gas and oil spill clean-up kits, practices and policies (not washing into stormwater system)
Bagging landscape clippings
Installing and routine cleaning of inlet box sumps, snorkels and bay savers designed in a system
Employee Training: Annual training program for employees conducted by Clinton City Public Works outlining stormwater best management practices.
Treatment Control: Bonus is evaluated based upon a plan presented by the applicant outlining stormwater management practices that clean debris, solids, and pollutants from stormwater prior to entering the Clinton City Stormwater System. Examples of this could be:
Catch basin sumps
Snorkels in catch basins
Bay savers
Landscaped detention area
Re-use of captured stormwater for irrigation purposes
Full On-Site Retention: On-site retention of all stormwater run-off from the applicant’s property where the water is allowed to evaporate or percolate into the earth.
Area of Detention: Proportional area of applicant’s property that is detained and then released into the Clinton City Stormwater System at a rate no greater than 0.2 cfs.
Detention: Proportional area of applicant’s property that is detained and then released into the Clinton City Stormwater System at a rate less than 0.2 cfs.
Detention is based upon a design storm with a total rainfall of one-inch in one-hour. Calculation of the storm intensity is to be distributed using the Farmer and Fletcher Storm Distribution Model.
Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
5
IMPACT FEES- Revised FY 2019^
Parks & Trails
Police
Fire
Storm Water
Sewer*
Culinary Water**
Transportation
Residential
Per Housing Unit
Single Family Detached
$2,552
$110
$200
$0.10/SF of lot
$113
$1,964
$682
All Others
$2,351
$110
$200
$0.10/SF of parcel
Refer to Non-Res
Refer to Non-Res
Multi-Family (2 stories
or less/ townhomes)
$529
Multi-Family (3-9 stories)
$393
Mobile Home Park
$469
Non-Residential
Per Square Foot
---
$0.48/SF of bldg
$0.71/SF of bldg
$0.10/SF of parcel
Per Water Meter Size
3/4"
$113
$1,964
1"
$178
$5,238
1.5"
$518
$6,548
2"
$647
$12,688
3”
$647
$23,790
4"
$647
$39,650
6"
$647
$183,349
8"
$647
$314,313
Assisted Living Center
$187/Bed
Hotel
$604/Room
Warehousing/
Mini-Warehouse
$109/1000 SF
General Manufacturing/
Industrial Park
$240/1000 SF
General Commercial
---
^Rates based on IFAs and IFFPs prepared by Zion’s Public Finance and JUB Engineering, dated May 2019 and adopted by City Council on June 11, 2019
*This rate does not include the North Davis Sewer District Impact Fee.
**Adjusted fees may be considered for a development based upon studies and data submitted by the developer that would otherwise indicate a more realistic and accurate impact upon the City’s infrastructure than calculations indicated in the IFA.
Non-Standard Users Impact Fee Formula:
Step 1: Identify Estimated ERC Equivalency Ratio of Proposed Development
Step 2: Multiply ERC Equivalency Ratio by Impact Fee per ERC of $1,964.46
Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
6
OTHER IMPACT PASS THRU FEES *
North Davis Sewer District
FEE
AMOUNT
Single Family Residential within Clinton est. 2013
$3,256.00/ERU
Non-Resident of District est. 2008
Refer to NDSD User Charge System Handbook
Other Connections est. 2008
Refer to NDSD User Charge System Handbook
Davis/Weber County Canal Company
Assessment for secondary water required for new developments, either residential or otherwise, shall be as developed by the Davis and Weber County Canal Company.
OTHER CONNECTION PASS THRU FEES *
North Davis Sewer District
FEE
AMOUNT
Connection Request Review Individual est. 2008
$ 125.00
Connection Request Review Subdivision est. 2008
$ 250.00
Connection Inspection Fee Individual est. 2008
$ 240.00
Connection Inspection Fee Subdivision est. 2008
$ 375.00
Other District Fees
Refer to NDCSD User Charge System Handbook. All District fees are subject to change.
DAVIS COUNTY PASS THRU FEES*
FEE
AMOUNT
Animal Control Per ESU est. 2019-20
$ 1.25 per month
Emergency Dispatch Per ESU est. 2012
$ 1.05 per month
ESU: Equivalent Service Unit, an apartment, separate residence, or separate business within or adjacent to a single building.
ERU: Equivalent Residential Unit
* These fees are pass through fees assessed by other entities than Clinton City and subject to change without prior notice from the City.
USER FEES
User fees are assessed against an individual or corporation wishing to have action taken on a specific case.
FEE
AMOUNT**
Rezone Request est. 2019
$ 405.00 plus $ 35.00 / acre
Agriculture Protection Area Request est. 2019
$ 285.00 plus $ 23.00 / acre
Conditional Use Permit/CUP Appeal/Administrative Requests (e.g. Zoning Verifications, Minor Variances, etc.) est. 2019
$ 255.00
Request to Appear Before Board of Adjustments est. 2019
$ 255.00
Request for Change General Plan
Text est. 2019
$ 755.00
Map est. 2019
$ 955.00
Request for Annexation
Up to 2 Acres est. 2019
$ 285.00 plus $ 173.00 / Acre
2+ up to 5 Acres est. 2019
$ 631.00 plus $ 144.00 / Acre over 2
5+ up to 10 Acres est. 2019
$1,064.00 plus $ 115.00 / Acre over 5
10+ Acres and Over est. 2019
$1,638.00 plus $ 87.00 / Acre over 10
Engineering and design costs specific to a proposed annexation. est. 2001
Actual engineering costs plus a 15% administrative cost
**Planning & Zoning Fees include a $5 technology fee.
Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
7
DAVIS AND WEBER COUNTIES CANAL COMPANY PASS THRU FEES*
Secondary Water Rates est. 2013
FEE
AMOUNT
0 – 1/3 acre
$ 21.56 / month
>1/3 – 1/2 acre
$ 23.55 / month
>1/2 – 3/4 acre
$ 27.53 / month
>3/4 – 1 acre
$ 30.51 / month
> acre-Canal Co. bills direct
NOTE: For secondary water calculations, 1/3 acre = 14,520 sq. ft. 1/2 acre = 21,780 sq. ft. 3/4 acre =32,670 sq. ft. 1 acre = 43,560.
* These fees are pass- thru fees assessed by other entities other than Clinton City and subject to change without prior notice from the City.
DIRECT SERVICE FEES
Temporary Water Service (Collected With Each Building Permit)
FEE
AMOUNT
Residential Construction est. 2015-16
$ 21.00 onetime fee with permit
Commercial Construction est. 2015-16
$ 21.00 with permit then per month schedule
Water Meter (Collected With Each Building Permit)
Inches
Type
¾ est. 2014
Displacement
$ 225.00
1 est. 2014
Displacement
$ 300.00
1 ½ est. 2014
Displacement
$ 620.00
2 est. 2014
Displacement/Compound
$ 840.00
Larger than 2 est. 2014
Compound
Actual cost + $ 150.00
Road Cut Fee (Collected With Each Road Cut Permit)
Administration Fee est. 2005
$ 58.80
Oil Mulch Paving, 4” thick est. 2007
Square Yard $ 18.00
Road Base for Patch, 12” thick est. 2007
Square Yard $ 16.00
Winter Mix, 2” thick est. 2011
Square Yard $ 15.00
Crack Seal est. 2011
Linear Foot $ 0.40
Seal Coat est. 2015
Square Yard $ 1.30
Curb and Gutter est. 2010
Linear Feet $ 35.00
Sidewalk est. 2010
Linear Feet $ 35.00
Removal of Recorded Declaration of Needed Improvements est. 2012
$ 50.00
Road Cut Maintenance Fee est. 2015
1.5 * length of cut * crack seal rate * # years road life remaining / 5
Street Signs
Post est. 2015-16
$ 40.00 /
Street Sign (Stop, Yield, Speed, Information, Street Number) est. 2015-16
$ 45.00 /
Installation est. 2015-16
$ 25.00 /
CustomSigns (HOA, etc.) est. 2015-16
Actual Cost + $ 10.00 / sign
Snow Removal and Landscape Fees
Includes mobilization, equipment and office work
$ 85.00 flat rate
Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
8
UTILITY FEES ASSESSED BY THE CITY
Water Residential / Commercial
FEE
AMOUNT
Customer Initialization Fee est. 2012
$ 20.00
Residential Deposit est. 2003
$ 70.00 per connection
Commercial Deposit est. 2001
$ 100.00 per connection
Connection within Clinton Limits
Up to 10,000 gallons est. 2019
$ 21.50 per ERU per Month
Use over 10,000 gallons est. 2019
$ 2.15 per 1,000 gallons per ERU/Mo
Connection outside of Clinton Limits
Up to 10,000 gallons est. 2019
$ 22.50 per ERU per Month
Use over 10,000 gallons est. 2019
$ 2.25 per 1,000 gallons per ERU/Mo
Water Special Service
Shut-Off Fee est. 2010
$ 35.00 ($ 10.00 suspended if paid in full)
After Hours Turn On est. 2010
$ 35.00
On/Off fee for inspections est. 2015
$ 35.00
Lien Origination Cost est. 2010
$ 175.00
Removal of Lien est. 2010
$ 50.00
Removal of Non-Compliance est. 2010
$ 50.00
Water Construction/Dust Control
Residential Subdivision est. 2009
$ 65.00 / acre or portion thereof / month
Commercial Development
Hydrant Meter Deposit est. 2009
See Temporary Connection
Up to 10,000 gallons est. 2019
$ 22.50 per month
Use over 10,000 gallons est. 2019
$ 3.38 per 1,000 gallons (15%)
Water Temporary Connections (to a hydrant)
Deposit est. 2009
$ 500.00
Set Meter est. 2009
$ 50.00
Up to 10,000 gallons est. 2019
$ 22.50 per month
Use over 10,000 gallons est. 2019
$ 3.23 per 1,000 gallons (15%)
Water Sample Investigative
Requested Repeat Sample
$ 25.00 each
Sanitary Sewer
Residential
Connection Within Clinton Limits est. 2015-16
$ 5.20 per ERU per Month
Connection Outside Clinton Limits est. 2015-16
$ 7.20 per ERU per Month
NDSD Fee est. 2017-18
$ 21.50 per ERU per Month
Sanitary SewerWest Fairfield Subdivision (Footnote 1) Interlocal Agreement with West Point September 18, 2012
West Point Fee est. 2015
$ 7.70 per ERU perMonth
Clinton City Fee est. 2015
$ 5.20 per ERU perMonth
NDSD Fee est. 2017-18
$ 21.50 per ERU perMonth
Sanitary Sewer Commercial & Non-Residential
Connection Within Clinton
Limits PerMonth
Clinton City Fee est. 2015-16
$ 5.20 for the first 10,000 gallons of water used
NDSD Fee est. 2017-18
$ 21.50 for the first 5,500 gallons of water used
NDSD Fee est. 2017-18
$ 2.15 / 1,000 gallons of water over 5,500
Clinton City Fee est. 2015-16
$ 0.52 / 1,000 gallons of water over 10,000 gallons
Connection Outside Clinton
Limits (Winco)
Clinton City Fee est. 2015-16
$ 7.20 for the first 10,000 gallons of water used
NDSD Fee est. 2017-18
$ 21.50 for the first 5,500 gallons of water used
NDSD Fee est. 2017-18
$ 2.15 / 1,000 gallons of water over 5,500
Clinton City Fee est. 2015-16
$ 0.72 / 1,000 gallons of water over 10,000 gallons
Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
9
UTILITYFEES ASSESSEDBY THE CITY (Continued)
Sanitary Sewer West Point Service Area 800 N and 3000 West (Footnote 2) Interlocal Agreement with West Point September 18, 2012
Interlocal Agreement est. 2015
Clinton City Fee est. 2015
$ 7.70 for the first ten thousand gallons of water used
NDSD Fee est. 2016
West Point City Collects
Clinton City Fee est. 2015
$ 0.77 / 1,000 gallons of water over 10,000 gallons
NDSD Fee est. 2016
West Point City Collects
1 – Equal to West Point City Fee plus NDSD Fee plus Clinton City Fee
2 - Equal to Outside Clinton Sewer Fee less NDSD fee, West point collects and pays the NDSD Fee.
UTILITYFEES ASSESSEDBY THE CITY
July 28, 2015 Interlocal Agreement for Sanitary Sewer with West Point
for Service Area - forty-acre (40 acre) area in Clinton that is north of 1800 North and south of the 2050 North Davis County Storm Channel and west approximately 3250 West and extending west to the Clinton / West Point boundary
Interlocal Agreement est. 2015
Clinton City Fee est. 2015
$ 5.20 for the first ten thousand gallons of water used,
West Point Wheeling Fee
$ 7.70 per month
NDSD Fee est. 2017
$ 21.50 Clinton City Collects
Sanitary Sewer Special Service District (Cranefield Subdivision)
FEE
AMOUNT
Residential Connection
SSSSD Fee est. 2015
$ 21.70 perMonth
NDSD Fee est. 2017-18
$ 21.50 for the first 5,500 gallons of water used
Non-Residential
Connection
(Commercial) (Golf Course)
NDSD Fee est. 2017-18
$ 21.50 for the first 5,500 gallons of water used
SSSSD Fee est. 2015
$ 21.70 for the first 10,000 gallons of water used
NDSD Fee est. 2017-18
$ 2.15 / 1,000 gallons of water over 5,500 gallons
SSSSD Fee est. 2015
$ 2.17 / 1,000 gallons of water over 10,000 gallons
Residential Connection
Outside SSSSD
And Outside NDSD
SSSSD Fee est. 2015
$ 28.70 perMonth (2 homes in Hooper)
NDSD Fee est. 2017-18
$ 37.00 for the first 5,500 gallons of water used
NDSD Fee est. 2017-18
$ 3.70 / 1000 gallons of water over 5,500 gallons
Non-Residential Connection Outside SSSSD
Fees will be calculated based upon established fee schedule when the need arises.
Trash Disposal (Residential)
90 Gallon Can est. 2019
$ 16.10 month
Additional Can est. 2019
$ 12.50 month
Replacement Can est. 2015-16
$ 95.00 each
StormWater Utility
Residential est. 2013
$ 4.50 per
ResidentialMulti-Family or Planned
Development est. 2013
$ 4.50 per month when billed individually or based upon calculations fromthe Stormwater FeesWorksheet
Commercial est. 2013
Based upon calculations from the Stormwater FeesWorksheet
West Fairfield Subdivision Serviced byWest
Point est. 2013
$ 4.50 per month
Utility Connections Outside of Clinton Limits (Fees in addition to impact fees)
Residential
CulinaryWater est. 2010
$1,586.00
Sewer est. 2010
$1,246.00
Commercial
CulinaryWater est. 2001
Approved by Council. Minimum fee based upon water meter size.
Sewer est. 2001
Approved by Council. Minimum fee based upon water meter size and anticipated water consumption.
Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
10
OTHER FEES ASSESSED BY THE CITY
Administrative
FEE
AMOUNT
Notary Service est. 2001
$ 5.00 per Signature
Copies (small quantities) est. 2010
$ 0.15 per page
Copies (large quantities) est. 2001
Established by job and man hours
Returned Check Fee est. 2001
$ 20.00
Delinquent Utility Payment Penalty est. 2015
$ 10.00
Illegal sign recovery (first time) est. 2015
$ 5.00 per sign
Illegal sign recovery (subsequent offence) est. 2015
$ 20.00 per sign
GRAMA Request Processing est. 2015
For action taking more than fifteen (15) minutes an hourly charge may not exceed the salary of the lowest paid employee who, in the discretion of the custodian of records, has the necessary skill and training to perform the request. Hourly rate is determined to be salary and does not include benefits.
RECREATION FEES ASSESSED BY THE CITY
City Facilities
FEE
AMOUNT
Bowery/Park Rental est. 2006 (2018)
$ 30.00 per 5 hours plus $50 refundable cleaning deposit
Bowery/Park Light and/or Water est. 2014
$ 10.00
Keycard Replacement / Lost Keycard est. 2014
$ 5.00
Park Light Key Replacement/ Lost Key est. 2020
$ 150.00
Community Center Rental Deposit est. 2010
$ 250.00
Community Center w/Kitchen est. 2009 M-TH
$ 40.00 per hour
Community Center & Training Room w/Kitchen est. 2010 F-Sun
$ 60.00 per hour
Special Event Fees
Application (2018)
$ 95.00
Police Services Special Event 25-20-4(3)(e)
To be established by Council action based upon services needed
Fire Services Special Event 25-20-4(4)(b)
To be calculated and based upon application
POLICE DEPARTMENT FEES ASSESSED BY THE CITY
Restrictive Violations est. 2010
School Zone Restriction
$ 35.00 if paid within 30 days
$ 50.00 plus collection fees if sent to collections after 30 days
Restricted Vehicles
Restricted Recreational Vehicles
Expired Registration
Vehicles For Sale or Displaying for Advertising
Using Streets for Storage
Dumping onto Streets
Other as Indicated on Citation
Handicap Zone est. 2008
Parked in a Handicap Zone
$ 150.00 if paid within 30 days
$ 225.00 plus collection fees if sent to collections after 30 days
Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
11
Police Administration
FEE
AMOUNT
Copy of Police Report est. 2010
$ 15.00
Finger Printing est. 2010
$ 15.00
$ 3.00 additional cards
Sex Offender Registry
$ 25.00
Restorable Vehicle Permit
$ 25.00
$ 25.00 one time extension
Original (6 month) est. 2010
$ 25.00
Extension (6 month) est. 2010
$ 25.00
Service of Civil Papers
$ 20.00 local / $ 40.00 within Davis/Weber Counties $ 100.00 within 75 mile radius one way / $ 1.60/mile outside 75 mile radius
Local (Clinton) est. 2007
$ 20.00
Davis and Weber Counties est. 2007
$ 40.00
Other locations in Utah est. 2010
$ 100.00 up to 75 miles one way then
$ 0.60 per mile additional
Reports est. 2010
$ 15.00 per report.
DI-9 reports that include photos will be charged separately.
Photos est. 2016-17
$ 25.00 for each disk/USB
$ 5.00 per photo if fewer than 5 total photos
Audio/Video Tapes est. 2005
$ 25.00 for each disk/USB and 1 hour of processing. $20 per hour for additional processing
Seized Property Sale Administrative Fee 20-2-5(3) est. 2011
10% of money received from the
sale of seized property
Fines for Code Violations (Minor Violations) est. 2010
Winter Parking
$ 20.00 if paid within 14 days
$ 30.00 if paid after 14 days
$ 50.00 plus collection fees
if sent to collections after 30 days
Blocking a Public or Private Driveway
Restricted Lane
Unmoved Vehicle over 72 Hours
Blocking a Mail Receptacle
Parking too Close to a Regulatory Sign or Flashing Signal
Double Parking, Standing or Stopping
Restricted parking at parks, Playgrounds, Grounds of Public Buildings
Prohibited Parking in Front Yards of Residential Property
Failure to Clear Sidewalk Other as Indicated on Citation Parked on a Park Strip
Parking too Close to an Intersection Parking to Close to a Fire Hydrant Parked on a Crosswalk
Parked on or Blocking a Sidewalk
Fire Lane
Not having a means of removing or not removing animal excreta est. 2012
First Offence
$ 25.00 in a calendar year
Second Offence
$ 50.00 in a calendar year
Third Offence
$ 100.00 in a calendar year
Fourth Offence
$ 200.00 in a calendar year
Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
12
FIRE DEPARTMENT FEES ASSESSED BY THE CITY
Ambulance Transport est. 2015
Advanced Emergency Medical Technician (AEMT) Transport
Maximum allowed by the Utah State Health Department, Bureau of Emergency Medical Services plus appropriate surcharges and consumable supplies.
Interfacility Transfers
Maximum allowed by the Utah State Health Department, Bureau of Emergency Medical Services or as per written agreement or contract
Paramedic Aboard
Maximum allowed by the Utah State Health Department, Bureau of Emergency Medical Services or as per written agreement or contract
Fire Department Administrative Fees est. 2017
For each re-inspection after the second inspection. est. 2015
$ 59.00
Copy of Fire or EMS Incident Report With Photos est. 2019
$ 20
Copy of EMS reports is available from our third party ambulance billing company.
IRIS Medical 801-295-9880 or 800-442-1294, fees may apply.
Automatic Fire Extinguishing System Fee and Plan Review Fee:* est. 2017
All Automatic Extinguishing and Alarm Systems are third party reviewed and must be reviewed by a Utah licensed Fire Protection Engineer or State recognized equivalent. If the occupancy is Educational “E” or Institutional “I” it must be reviewed by the Utah State Fire Marshal’s Office.
Original/initial submittal for new installations
0 – 3,000 square feet
$ 300.00 per plan
3,001 – 10,000 square feet
$ 400.00 per plan
10,001 square feet and greater
$ 400.00 + $0.07 per square foot over 10,000
Single family, two family and manufactured homes
0 – 3,000 square feet
$ 200.00 per plan
3,001 – 7,000 square feet
$ 250.00 per plan
7,001 square feet and greater
$ 250.00 + $ 0.07 per square foot over 7,000
Original/initial submittal for existing system remodels:
All buildings except single family, two family and manufactured homes
0 – 3,000 square feet
$ 150.00 per plan
3,001 – 10,000 square feet
$ 200.00 per plan
10,001 square feet and greater
$ 200.00+ $0.07 per square foot over 10,000
Single family, two family and manufactured homes
0 – 3,000 square feet
$ 125.00 per plan
3,001 – 7,000 square feet
$ 175.00 per plan
7,001 square feet and greater
$ 175.00 + $0.07 per square foot over 7,000
Re-review of corrected or rejected plans: * est. 2010
All buildings except single family, two family and manufactured homes
0 – 3,000 square feet
$ 150.00 per plan
3,001 – 10,000 square feet
$ 200.00 per plan
10,001 square feet and greater
$ 200.00 + $0.07 per square foot over 10,000
Single family, two family and manufactured homes
0 – 3,000 square feet
$ 125.00 per plan
3,001 – 7,000 square feet
$ 175.00 per plan
7,001 square feet and greater
$ 175.00 + $0.07 per square foot over 7,000
Fire Department Reviews and Permits est. 2015-16
Plan Review & Acceptance Testing Commercial Hood System
$ 59.00
Plan Review & Permit Hazardous Material Commercial
$ 118.00
Plan Review & Permit Hazardous Material Home Occupation
$ 40.00
Community Education est. 2015
CPR / AED Certification Minimum of 6 Students per class
$ 50.00 + cost of card per Student
C.E.R.T. (Actual cost of supplies)
$ 35.00 per Student
Uniform Cost Recovery / Standby Services est. 2015
Fire Department Personnel: All
Actual employee man hour rate, overtime rate (if applicable), plus benefits and overhead cost. Minimum two hours.
Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
13
Apparatus: All
Ambulance, Fire Engine, Ladder fire Truck, Grass Truck, Command / Chief Truck
Maximum allowed by FEMA Schedule of Equipment Rates Plus appropriate surcharges (personnel, equipment, and / or consumables) or as per written agreement or contract.
Automatic Fire Sprinklers/Alarm System/Fire/Smoke/Heat/CO Detection System Plan Review: * est. 2008
Original/initial review fee
$ 350.00 per plan
Re-review of corrected/rejected plans
$ 225.00 per plan
Alarms: Responsible party non-response fee
$ 25.00
False alarm fees: 3rd false alarm per quarter
$ 50.00
False alarm fees: 4th false alarm per quarter
$ 75.00
False alarm fees: 5th false alarm per quarter
$ 100.00
* Fees are to cover reviews that are accomplished by outside services. Fees may be adjusted by staff to insure that outside assessments are covered.
COURT FEES ASSESSED BY THE CITY
Small Claims Filing Fee (under $2,000) est. 2011
$ 60.00
Small Claims Filing Fee (over $2,000) est. 2011
$ 100.00
Counter Affidavit (under $2,000) est. 2011
$ 50.00
Counter Affidavit (over $2,000) est. 2011
$ 70.00
Garnishment est. 2015
$ 50.00
Writ of Continuing Garnishment est. 2015
$ 50.00
Writ of Execution est. 2011
$ 50.00
Criminal Expungement Fee est. 2011
$ 135.00
Docket Copy Fee est. 2011
$ 4.00 for the certificate and $0.50 per page
Photo Copy Fee est. 2010
$ 0.15 per page
NOTE: Many court fees are set by the State and subject to change without prior notice from the City.
CLINTON CITY CEMETERY FEES est. 2006
Full Size
Resident
Non-Resident
Burial Plot
$250.00
$ 600.00
Perpetual Care Fund
$400.00
$ 800.00
*Interment (M-F before 3pm)
$300.00
$ 400.00
*Interment (after 3pm, weekends and holidays)
$450.00
$ 600.00
Dis-interment (M-F before 3pm only)
$1000.00
$1200.00
Administrative Fee
$50.00
$ 100.00
Infant & Urn (1/2 size)
Resident
Non-Resident
Burial Plot
$125.00
$ 300.00
Perpetual Care Fund
$200.00
$ 400.00
*Interment (M-F before 3pm)
$150.00
$ 200.00
*Interment (after 3pm, weekends and holidays)
$225.00
$ 300.00
Dis-interment (M-F before 3pm only)
$800.00
$1000.00
Administrative Fee
$50.00
$ 100.00
Baby Plot Area (1/4 size)
Resident
Non-Resident
Burial Plot
$65.00
$ 150.00
Perpetual Care Fund
$100.00
$ 200.00
*Interment (M-F before 3pm)
$75.00
$ 100.00
*Interment (after 3pm, weekends and holidays)
$115.00
$ 150.00
Dis-interment (M-F before 3pm only)
$400.00
$ 500.00
Administrative Fee
$50.00
$ 100.00
The buyback rate for multiple adjacent cemetery plots purchased prior to December 12, 2006 shall be $ 150.00, and $ 75.00 for a single plot. est. 2009
The buyback rate for multiple adjacent cemetery plots purchased on or after December 12, 2006 shall be $ 250.00 per plot, and $ 125.00 for a single plot. est. 2009
Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
14
BUILDING PERMIT FEES
Modified FY 2005
TOTAL VALUATION FEE
$1.00 to $58.80
$1,000
$1,000.00 $58.80 for the first $1,000.00 plus $2.70 for each
to additional $100.00 or fraction thereof, to and
$2,000.00 including $2,000.00.
$2,001.00 $83.40 for the first $2,000.00 plus $16.80 for each
to additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and
$25,000.00 including $25,000.00
$25,001.00 $469.80 for the first $25,000.00 plus $12.11 for each
to additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and
$50,000.00 including $50,000.00
$50,001.00 $772.55 for the first $50,000.00 plus $8.40 for
to each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to and
$100,000.00 including $100,000.00
$100.001.00 $1,192.55 for the first $100,000.00 plus $6.72 for
to each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to
$500,000.00 and including $500,000.00.
$500,001.00 $3,880.55 for the first $500,000.00 plus $5.70 for
to each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof, to
$1,000,000.00 and including $1,000,000.00.
$1,000,001.00 $6,730.55 for the first $1,000,001.00 plus $4.65 for
and up each additional $1,000.00 or fraction thereof.
Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
15
OTHER INSPECTION FEES
1. Inspections outside of normal business $ 58.80 per hour
hours (minimum charge - two hours)
2. Re-inspection fees assessed under $ 58.80 per hour
provisions of adopted Construction Codes
3. Inspections for which no fee is $ 58.80 per hour
specifically indicated (minimum charge-one hour)
4. Additional plan review required by changes, $ 58.80 per hour
additions or revisions to approved plans
(minimum charge-one hour).
5. For use of outside consultants for plan checking Actual costs including
and inspections or both reasonable administrative and overhead costs
6. Specific Permit Fees
• Pools (in ground) $ 250.00 + Bond
• Pools (above ground), Hot Tubs, & Spas: $ 58.80
• Re-Siding, Fireplaces & Woodstoves: $ 80.00
• Re-Roof Residential $ 80.00
• Re-Roof Commercial $ 58.80 per inspection
• Patio Covers, Awnings & Decks: $ 125.00
• Utility related modifications, i.e. air conditioner, heater, $ 58.80
conventional water heater, exchanges, and other
appliances/replacements as determined by the building
official or his representative.
• Lateral repair or replacement $ 58.80
• Solar Hot Water System (Residential) est. 2019 $ 176.40
• Solar Electric System (Residential) est. 2019 $ 176.40
• Solar Electric System (Ground Mount – Residential) $ 176.40
• Solar Electric System (Commercial) $ 58.80 per inspection
• Temporary Sign Fee est. 2013 $ 35.00
7. Building Relocations or Demolition
• Relocation Residential or Commercial Per Inspection + Bond
• Demolition – Residential $ 117.60 + Bond
• Demolition – Commercial Per Inspection + Bond
* See page 1 for Bond amounts
Staff Review Date: June 2020
Effective Date: July 2020
16
BUSINESS LICENSE FEES
Alcohol Licenses
Off-Premise Beer Retailer
$ 250.00
On-Premise Beer Retailer
$ 500.00
Restaurant Alcohol License
$ 500.00
Club Alcohol License
$ 500.00
Single Event License
$ 175.00
Police ID Card
Commercial Licenses
Regulatory License Fee
$ 152.00
Temporary License
$ 76.00
Solicitor/Peddler Permit Fee est. 2013
$ 50.00
Solicitor/Peddler Work Card est. 2013
$ 30.00
Vendor/License Fee
$ 152.00
Vendor/License Work Card
$ 10.00
Fireworks Inspection Fee
$ 300.00
Fire Services est. 2015
Fire Inspection Fee
$ 34.00
$ 59.00
Police Services
$ 27.00
Hazardous Material Review
$ 20.00
Sprinkler System Fee
$ 20.00
Enhanced Service-Door Check
$ 20.00
Building Inspection Fee a
$ 59.00
Mobile Store Inspection est. 2012
$ 59.00
Commercial Safety Inspection
$ 55.00
Home Occupations
Regulatory License Fee
$ 47.00
Annual Building Inspection Fee a est. 2013
$ 20.00
Annual Fire Inspection Fee a
$ 20.00
Hazardous Material Review
$ 20.00
License Administration Fees
Appeal License Hearing Board
$ 75.00
Late Filing Fee
C
Transfer Fee
$ 15.00
Multiple Dwelling Units
Regulatory License Fee
$ 207.00
Disproportionate Cost Apartment Fire
$ 10.00
Disproportionate Cost Assisted Fire
$ 34.00
Sexually Oriented Business est. 2013
SOB Adult Non-Performer Employee
$ 193.00
SOB Adult Business
$ 317.00
SOB Semi-Nude Dance Agency
$ 319.00
SOB Semi-Nude Dance - Performer
$ 220.00
SOB Relocate
$ 100.00
SOB Work Permit est. 2012
$ 50.00
Other Licensing Fees
Private Fire Hydrant Inspection est. 2013
$ 82.00
Christmas Tree Clean-Up Deposit
$ 300.00
Temporary Business Clean-Up Deposit
$ 150.00
Business License Duplicate
Copy Fee est. 2013
$ 10.00
a. May be required with initial issue of permit or annually, based upon assessment of business.
b. Fire inspections are only required where business is located.
c. Late fees are calculated separately as established by ordinance.