CITY CODE
of
CEDAR HILLS, UTAH
2004
Code current through:
Ord. 07-21-2020A, passed 7-21-2020
 
Published by:
STERLING CODIFIERS
an
American Legal Publishing Company
One West Fourth Street  *  3rd Floor  *  Cincinnati, Ohio 45202
1-833-226-3439 * www.amlegal.com
PREFACE
This City Code of the City of Cedar Hills, as supplemented, contains ordinances
up to and including Ordinance 07-21-2020A, passed July 21, 2020. Ordinances of
the City adopted after said ordinance supersede the provisions of this City
Code to the extent that they are in conflict or inconsistent therewith. Consult
the City office in order to ascertain whether any particular provision of the
Code has been amended, superseded or repealed.
Sterling Codifiers
Cincinnati, Ohio
PENDING ORDINANCES
 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE
ORDINANCE NO. 12-7-2004A
AN ORDINANCE REVISING, CODIFYING, COMPILING AND ADOPTING THE GENERAL ORDINANCES
OF THE CITY OF CEDAR HILLS, UTAH, INTO A CITY CODE.
BE IT ORDAINED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CEDAR HILLS, UTAH.
   Section 1: From and after the date of passage of this ordinance, the city
code of the City of Cedar Hills, Utah, containing the compilation of all
ordinances of a general nature together with the changes made to said
ordinances, under the direction of the city staff, shall be accepted in all
courts without question as the official code and law of the city.
   Section 2: There is hereby adopted, as a method of perpetual codification,
the loose-leaf type of binding together with the continuous supplement service,
whereby each newly adopted ordinance of a general and permanent nature
amending, altering, adding or deleting provisions of this city code is
identified by the proper catchline and is inserted in the proper place in each
of the official copies, one copy of which shall be maintained in the office of
the city recorder, certified as to correctness and available for inspection at
any and all times that said office is regularly open.
   Section 3: All ordinances of a general nature included in this city code
shall be considered as a continuation of said ordinance provision and the fact
that some provisions have been deliberately eliminated shall not serve to cause
any interruption in the continuous effectiveness of ordinances included in said
city code. All ordinances of a special nature, such as tax levy ordinances,
bond ordinances, franchises, vacating ordinances and annexation ordinances
shall continue in full force and effect unless specifically repealed or amended
by a provision of this city code. Such ordinances are not intended to be
included in this city code.
   Section 4: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to
change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this city
code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper
with said code in any manner whatsoever that will cause the law of the city to
be misrepresented thereby.
   Section 5: This ordinance and the various sections, clauses and paragraphs
are hereby declared to be severable. If any part, sentence, clause or phrase is
adjudged to be unconstitutional or invalid it is hereby declared that the
remainder of the ordinance shall not be affected thereby.
   Section 6: This ordinance and the city code adopted by the same shall take
effect upon its passage and publication as required by law.
PASSED AND ORDERED POSTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF CEDAR HILLS, UTAH,
THIS 7TH DAY OF DECEMBER, 2004.
            Michael C. McGee, Mayor
ATTEST:
Kim E. Holindrake, City Recorder
TITLE 1
ADMINISTRATION
CHAPTER 1
OFFICIAL CITY CODE
SECTION:
1-1-1: Title
1-1-2: Acceptance
1-1-3: Amendments
1-1-4: Alterations
1-1-1: TITLE:
Upon the adoption by the city council, this city code is hereby declared to be
and shall hereafter constitute the official city code of the City of Cedar
Hills. This city code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the CITY OF
CEDAR HILLS CITY CODE and is hereby published by authority of the city council
and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the
city as provided in section
1-1-3 of this chapter. Any reference to the number of any section contained
herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its
appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause
relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to
this city code by title in any legal documents. The stylization of this code is
not intended to alter or amend the meaning of any words or phrases and may not
reflect proper capitalization, grammar or punctuation. (2004 Code)
1-1-2: ACCEPTANCE:
This city code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be
received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of
this state as the ordinances of the city of general and permanent effect,
except the excluded ordinances enumerated in section
1-2-1 of this title. (2004 Code)
1-1-3: AMENDMENTS:
Any ordinance amending this city code shall set forth the title, chapter and
section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall
constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to
the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this city code. All such
amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the
codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in
its proper place in each copy of this city code. Each such replacement page
shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of
the city code. (2004 Code)
1-1-4: ALTERATIONS:
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface
in any way any section or any page of this city code in such a manner that the
meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may
be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the
city council. The city recorder shall see that the replacement pages are
properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the city
recorder. Any person having custody of a copy of the city code shall make every
effort to maintain said code current as to the most recent ordinances passed.
Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages
when such are delivered or made available to such person through the office of
the city recorder. Said code books, while in actual possession of officials and
other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the city and
shall be returned to the office of the city recorder when directed so to do by
order of the city council. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 2
SAVING CLAUSE
SECTION:
1-2-1: Repeal Of General Ordinances
1-2-2: Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1-2-3: Court Proceedings
1-2-4: Severability Clause
1-2-1: REPEAL OF GENERAL ORDINANCES:
   A.   Repealer; Exceptions: All general ordinances of the city passed prior
to the adoption of this city code are hereby repealed, except such as are
included in this city code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from
repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and
excluding the following ordinances that are not hereby repealed: tax levy
ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and
annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights
to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the
execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee
ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or
other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances
relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of
real estate by or from the city; and all special ordinances.
   B.   Effect Of Repealing Ordinances: The repeal of the ordinances provided
in subsection A of this section shall not affect any debt or fee that is
accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding
commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office
of any person holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor
shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving any ordinance
heretofore repealed or superseded. (2004 Code)
1-2-2: PUBLIC WAYS AND PUBLIC UTILITY ORDINANCES:
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways,
or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall
be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this city code or by virtue of the
preceding section, excepting as this city code may contain provisions for such
matters, in which case, this city code shall be considered as amending such
ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (2004 Code)
1-2-3: COURT PROCEEDINGS:
   A.   Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a
former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as
to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done,
any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or
claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any
such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or
punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new
ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform
to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as
practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any
provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party
affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes
effect.
   B.   Scope Of Section: This section shall extend to all repeals, either by
express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any
new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
   C.   Actions Now Pending: Nothing contained in this chapter shall be
construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general
ordinance of the city herein repealed, and the provisions of all general
ordinances contained in this city code shall be deemed to be continuing
provisions and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this
chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty
accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or
corporation, or as waiving any right of the city under any ordinance or
provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this city code. (2004
Code)
1-2-4: SEVERABILITY CLAUSE:
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase
of this city code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be
unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent
jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of
the remaining portions of this city code, or any part thereof. The city council
hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection,
subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the
fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs,
sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or
ineffective. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 3
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
1-3-1: Construction Of Words
1-3-2: General Definitions
1-3-3: Catchlines
1-3-1: CONSTRUCTION OF WORDS:
   A.   Liberal Construction: All general provisions, terms, phrases and
expressions contained in this code shall be liberally construed in order that
the true intent and meaning of the mayor and city council may be fully carried
out.
   B.   Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of any provision
of this code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the
promotion of the public health, safety and general welfare. Where any provision
of a code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the general
provision imposed by this code, the provision imposing the greater restriction
or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling.
   C.   Additional Interpretations:
      1.   Computation Of Time: Whenever a notice is required to be given or an
act to be done in a certain length of time before any proceeding shall be had,
the day on which such notice is given or such act is done shall not be counted
in computing the time but the day on which such proceeding is to be held shall
be counted.
      2.   Delegation Of Authority: Whenever a provision appears requiring the
head of a department or some other city officer to do some act or perform some
duty, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or other
officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the
required act or perform the duty unless the terms of the provision or section
specify otherwise.
      3.   Gender: A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and
be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to
males.
      4.   Joint Authority: All words giving a joint authority to three (3) or
more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a
majority of such persons or officers.
      5.   May/Shall: The word "may" is permissive; the word "shall" is
mandatory.
      6.   Nontechnical And Technical Words: Words and phrases shall be
construed according to the common and approved usage of the language, but
technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and
appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such
meaning.
      7.   Number: A word importing the singular number only may extend and be
applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing.
      8.   Officers Generally: Whenever any officer is referred by title, such
as "recorder", "treasurer", "chief of police", etc., such reference shall be
construed as if followed by the words "of the City of Cedar Hills".
      9.   Tense: Words used in the past or present tense include the future as
well as the past and present. (2004 Code)
1-3-2: GENERAL DEFINITIONS:
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this code, they shall have
such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning
repugnant thereto:
AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either
expressly or by implication.
CITY: The City of Cedar Hills, Utah.
CITY COUNCIL: The city council of the City of Cedar Hills, Utah.
CODE: The city code of the City of Cedar Hills, Utah.
COUNTY: Utah County, state of Utah.
FEE: A sum of money charged by the city for the carrying on of a business,
profession or occupation or other activity subject to city regulation,
authorization or limitation.
LICENSE: The permission granted for the carrying on of a business, profession
or occupation.
NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any
act or activity creating a hazard that threatens the health and welfare of
inhabitants of the city, or any activity that by its perpetuation can
reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or
persons within the community.
OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with
others.
OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this code or the omission of any
act required by the provisions of this code.
OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.
OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint
owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of
such building or land.
PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association,
organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a
natural person.
PERSONAL PROPERTY: Includes every description of money, goods, chattels,
effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any
pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged,
transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or
interest therein.
RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate
to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.
RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other
property.
STATE: The state of Utah.
STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public
squares, public places and sidewalks.
TENANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies
the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.
WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this code,
unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the
sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the
purpose of resale.
WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing
words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by
law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper
handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such
person's proper mark. (2004 Code)
1-3-3: CATCHLINES:
The catchlines of the several sections of this city code are intended as mere
catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or
taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or
in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any
section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when
any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. (2004
Code)
CHAPTER 4
GENERAL PENALTY
SECTION:
1-4-1: Sentencing
1-4-2: Offenses Designated; Classified
1-4-1: SENTENCING:
   A.   Penalty For Violation Of Ordinance 1 :
      1.   Criminal: The city council may impose a minimum criminal penalty for
the violation of any municipal ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum
class B misdemeanor fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301 or by a
term of imprisonment up to six (6) months, or by both the fine and term of
imprisonment.
      2.   Civil:
         a.   Except as provided in subsection A2b of this section, the city
council may prescribe a minimum civil penalty for the violation of any
municipal ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum class B misdemeanor
fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301.
         b.   A municipality may not impose a civil penalty and adjudication
for the violation of a municipal moving traffic ordinance.
   B.   Term Of Imprisonment For Misdemeanors 2 : A person who has been
convicted of a misdemeanor may be sentenced to imprisonment as follows:
      1.   In the case of a class B misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding six
(6) months;
      2.   In the case of a class C misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding
ninety (90) days.
   C.   Infractions 3 :
      1.   A person convicted of an infraction may not be imprisoned but may be
subject to a fine, forfeiture and disqualification, or any combination.
      2.   Whenever a person is convicted of an infraction and no punishment is
specified, the person may be fined as for a class C misdemeanor.
   D.   Fines Of Persons 4 : A person convicted of an offense may, in addition
to any term of imprisonment imposed, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed:
      1.   Class B Misdemeanor: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the
conviction is of a class B misdemeanor conviction; and
      2.   Class C Misdemeanor; Infraction: Seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00) when the conviction is of a class C misdemeanor conviction or
infraction conviction.
   E.   Fines Of Corporations 5 : The sentence to pay a fine, when imposed upon
a corporation, association, partnership or governmental instrumentality for an
offense defined in this code, or the ordinances of the city, or for an offense
defined outside of this code over which this city has jurisdiction, for which
no special corporate fine is specified, shall be to pay an amount fixed by the
court, not exceeding:
      1.   Class B Misdemeanor: Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) when the
conviction is for a class B misdemeanor conviction; and
      2.   Class C Misdemeanor; Infraction: One thousand dollars ($1,000.00)
when the conviction is for a class C misdemeanor conviction or for an
infraction conviction. (2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 10-3-703.
2 2. UCA § 76-3-204.
3 3. UCA § 76-3-205.
4 1. UCA § 76-3-301.
5 2. UCA § 76-3-302.
1-4-2: OFFENSES DESIGNATED; CLASSIFIED:
   A.   Sentencing In Accordance With Chapter:
      1.   A person adjudged guilty of an offense under this code or the
ordinances of this city shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of
this chapter.
      2.   Ordinances enacted after the effective date of this code that
involve an offense should be classified for sentencing purposes in accordance
with this chapter, unless otherwise expressly provided.
   B.   Designation Of Offenses: Offenses are designated as misdemeanors or
infractions.
   C.   Misdemeanors Classified 1 :
      1.   Misdemeanors are classified into two (2) categories:
         a.   Class B misdemeanors;
         b.   Class C misdemeanors.
      2.   An offense designated as a misdemeanor or any act prohibited or
declared to be unlawful in this code or any ordinance of this city when no
other specification as to punishment or category is made, is a class B
misdemeanor.
   D.   Infractions:
      1.   Infractions are not classified.
      2.   Any offense that is made an infraction in this code or other
ordinances of this city, or that is expressly designated an infraction and any
offense designated by this code or other ordinances of this city that is not
designated as a misdemeanor and for which no penalty is specified is an
infraction.
   E.   Continuing Violation: In all instances where the violation of this code
or any ordinance hereinafter enacted is a continuing violation, a separate
offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation
occurs or continues to occur. (2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 3. UCA § 76-3-104.
CHAPTER 5
MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
1-5-1: Eligibility And Residency Requirements
1-5-2: Membership; Terms
1-5-3: Mayor As Member Of City Council
1-5-4: Municipal Administration
1-5-5: Meetings
1-5-6: Ordinances And Resolutions; Procedure
1-5-7: Photography And Recording At Public Meetings
1-5-1: ELIGIBILITY AND RESIDENCY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Declaration Of Candidacy: A person filing a declaration of candidacy
for a City office shall:
      1.   Have been a resident of the City in which the person seeks office
for at least three hundred sixty five (365) consecutive days immediately before
the date of the election; and
      2.   Meet the other requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 20A-9-
203.
   B.   Annexed Areas: A person living in an area annexed to the City meets the
residency requirement of this section if that person resided within the area
annexed to the City for at least three hundred sixty five (365) consecutive
days before the date of the election.
   C.   Registered Voter: Any person elected to City office shall be a
registered voter in the City.
   D.   Residency Maintained: Each elected officer of the City shall maintain
residency within the boundaries of the City during the officer's term of
office.
   E.   Residence Outside City: If an elected officer of the City establishes a
principal place of residence as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-2-
105 outside of the City during the officer's term of office, the office is
automatically vacant.
   F.   Continuous Absence From City: If an elected City officer is absent from
the City any time during the officer's term of office for a continuous period
of more than sixty (60) days without the consent of the City Council, the City
office is automatically vacant. (2004 Code)
1-5-2: MEMBERSHIP; TERMS:
   A.   Composition: The Governing Body shall be a council composed of six (6)
members, one of whom shall be the Mayor and the remaining five (5) shall be
Council members.
   B.   Election; Terms: The election and terms of office of the officers shall
be as follows:
      1.   The offices of Mayor and two (2) Council members shall be filled in
Municipal elections held in 1977. The terms shall be for four (4) years. These
offices shall be filled every four (4) years in Municipal elections.
      2.   The offices of the other three (3) Council members shall be filled
in a Municipal election held in 1979. The terms shall be for four (4) years.
These offices shall be filled every four (4) years in Municipal elections.
   C.   Vacancy In Office: Mayor or City Council vacancies shall be filled as
provided in Utah Code Annotated section 20A-1-510. (2004 Code)
1-5-3: MAYOR AS MEMBER OF CITY COUNCIL:
   A.   Presiding Officer; Mayor Pro Tempore: The Mayor shall be the
Chairperson and preside at the meetings of the City Council. In the absence of
the Mayor or because of his/her inability or refusal to act, the City Council
may elect a member of the City Council to preside over the meeting as Mayor Pro
Tempore, who shall have all the powers and duties of the Mayor during his/her
absence or disability. The election of a Mayor Pro Tempore shall be entered in
the minutes of the meeting. (Ord. 05-21-2019A, 5-21-2019)
   B.   Voting; No Vote Except In Tie: The mayor shall not vote, except in the
case of a tie vote of the city council.
   C.   Powers And Duties:
      1.   The mayor shall:
         a.   Keep the peace and enforce the laws of the city;
         b.   Remit fines and forfeitures;
         c.   Report remittances under subsection C2b of this section to the
city council at its next regular session;
         d.   Perform all duties prescribed by law, resolution or ordinance;
         e.   Ensure that all the laws and ordinances and resolutions are
faithfully executed and observed;
         f.   Report to the city council the condition of the city and
recommend for city council consideration any measures that the mayor considers
to be in the best interests of the city;
         g.   When necessary, call on the residents of the city over the age of
twenty one (21) years to assist in enforcing the laws of the state and
ordinances of the city;
         h.   Report to the city council any release granted under subsection
C2b of this section.
      2.   The mayor may:
         a.   At any reasonable time, examine and inspect the official books,
papers, records or documents of the city or of any officer, employee or agent
of the city; and
         b.   Release any person imprisoned for violation of any city
ordinance.
   D.   No Veto: The mayor shall have no power to veto any act of the city
council, unless otherwise specifically authorized by statute. (2004 Code)
1-5-4: MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION:
   A.   Prescribe Additional Powers And Duties: The city council may, by
resolution, prescribe additional duties, powers and responsibilities for any
elected or appointed official which are not prohibited by any specific statute,
except that the mayor may not serve as city recorder and neither the mayor nor
the city recorder may serve as city treasurer. A justice court judge may not
hold any other city office or position of employment with the city.
   B.   Members Of Council May Be Appointed To Administration: The mayor may,
with the advice and consent of the majority of the city council, assign or
appoint any member or members of the city council to administer one or more
departments of the city and shall by ordinance provide the salary of the
administrator.
   C.   Change Of Duties: The mayor may, with the concurrence of a majority of
the city council, change the administrative assignment of any member of the
city council who is serving in any administrative position in the city
government.
   D.   General Administrative Powers: The city council shall, from time to
time, prescribe the powers and duties to be performed by the superintendents,
supervisors, department directors and all of its officers and employees.
   E.   Personnel Assigned To One Or More Departments: The city council may
assign any individual to one or more positions in one or more departments.
   F.   Rules And Regulations For Administration: The city council shall
prescribe rules and regulations that are not inconsistent with the laws of this
state, as it deems best for the efficient administration, organization, conduct
and business of the city.
   G.   Appointed Officers; Residency Requirements: The city council may
require by ordinance that any or all appointed officers reside in the city.
(2004 Code)
1-5-5: MEETINGS:
   A.   Specified: The city council shall hold regular meetings according to
the schedule attached to ordinance 01-07-2014A, commencing at seven o'clock (7:
00) P.M. The location of said council meetings shall be the Cedar Hills
Community Recreation Center, 10640 N. Clubhouse Drive, Cedar Hills, Utah. All
regular and special meetings of the City Council shall be called, advertised
and held in conformance with the Open and Public Meetings Act 1 , as may from
time to time be amended. (Ord. 2-1-90A, 2-1-1990; amd. Ord. 12-3-2002A, 12-3-
2002; Ord. 12-6-2011A, 12-6-2011; Ord. 2-7-2012A, 2-7-2012; Ord. 5-1-2012A, 5-
1-2012; Ord. 12-4-2012A, 12-4-2012; Ord. 01-07-2014A, 1-7-2014)
   B.   Quorum:
      1.   Defined: The number of members of the City Council necessary to
constitute a quorum is three (3) or more.
      2.   Necessary: No action of the City Council shall be official or of any
effect, except when a quorum of the members are present. Fewer than a quorum
may adjourn from time to time.
   C.   Voting:
      1.   How Vote Taken: A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded for all
ordinances, resolutions and any action that would create a liability against
the City and in any other case at the request of any member of the City Council
by a "yes" or a "no" vote and shall be recorded. Every resolution or ordinance
shall be in writing before the vote is taken.
      2.   Minimum Vote Required: The minimum number of yes votes required to
pass any ordinance, resolution or to take any action by the City Council,
unless otherwise prescribed by law, shall be a majority of the members of the
quorum, but shall never be less than three (3).
         a.   Any ordinance, resolution or motion of the City Council having
fewer favorable votes than required herein shall be deemed defeated and
invalid, except a meeting may be adjourned to a specific time by a majority
vote of the City Council even though such majority vote is less than that
required herein.
         b.   A majority of the members of the City Council, regardless of
number, may fill any vacancy in the City Council.
      3.   Reconsideration: Any action taken by the City Council shall not be
reconsidered or rescinded at any special meeting unless the number of members
of the City Council present at the special meeting is equal to or greater than
the number of members present at the meeting when the action was approved.
(2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 52-4-1 et seq.
1-5-6: ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS; PROCEDURE:
   A.   Power Exercised By Ordinance: The City Council may pass any ordinance
to regulate, require, prohibit, govern, control or supervise any activity,
business, conduct or condition authorized by statute or any other provision of
law. An officer of the City shall not be convicted of a criminal offense where
he/she relied on or enforced an ordinance he/she reasonably believed to be a
valid ordinance. It shall be a defense to any action for punitive damages that
the official acted in good faith in enforcing an ordinance or that he/she
enforced an ordinance on advice of legal counsel. (Ord. 05-21-2019A, 5-21-2019)
   B.   Form Of Ordinance: Any ordinance passed by the City Council shall
contain and be in substantially the following order and form:
      1.   A number;
      2.   A title that indicates the nature of the subject matter of the
ordinance;
      3.   A preamble that states the need or reason for the ordinance;
      4.   An ordaining clause that states "Be it ordained by the City of Cedar
Hills:";
      5.   The body or subject of the ordinance;
      6.   When applicable, a statement indicating the penalty for violation of
the ordinance or a reference that the punishment is covered by an ordinance
that prescribes the fines and terms of imprisonment for the violation of the
City ordinance; or, the penalty may establish a classification of penalties and
refer to such ordinance in which the penalty for such violation is established;
      7.   A statement indicating the effective date of the ordinance or the
date when the ordinance shall become effective after publication or posting as
required by this section;
      8.   A line for the signature of the Mayor or acting Mayor to sign the
ordinance;
      9.   A place for the City Recorder to attest the ordinance and affix the
Seal of the City; (2004 Code)
   C.   Requirements As To Form; Effective Date:
      1.   Ordinances passed or enacted by the City Council shall be signed by
the Mayor, or if he/she is absent, by the Mayor Pro Tempore, or by a quorum of
the City Council, and shall be recorded before taking effect. No ordinance
shall be void or unlawful by reason of its failure to conform to the provisions
of Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-704(1), (2), (3) or (4). (Ord. 05-21-2019A,
5-21-2019)
      2.   Ordinances that do not have an effective date shall become effective
twenty (20) days after publication or posting, or thirty (30) days after final
passage by the City Council, whichever is sooner.
      3.   Ordinances shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication
or posting or thirty (30) days after final passage by the City Council,
whichever is closer to the date of final passage, but ordinances may become
effective at an earlier or later date after publication or posting if so
provided in the ordinance.
   D.   Publication And Posting Of Ordinances:
      1.   Before an ordinance may take effect, except an ordinance enacted
under Utah Code Annotated sections 10-3-706 through 10-3-710, the City Council
shall:
         a.   Deposit a copy of the ordinance in the Office of the City
Recorder; and
         b.   (1) Publish a short summary of the ordinance at least once:
               (A)   In a newspaper published within the City; or
               (B)   If there is no newspaper published within the City, in a
newspaper of general circulation within the City; or
            (2)   Post a complete copy of the ordinance in three (3) public
places within the Municipality.
      2.   a. Any ordinance, code or book, other than the State Code, relating
to building or safety standards, Municipal functions, administration, control
or regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further
publication or posting, if reference is made to the code or book and at least
three (3) copies have been filed for use and examination by the public in the
Office of the City Recorder prior to the adoption of the ordinance by the City
Council.
         b.   Any State law relating to building or safety standards, Municipal
functions, administration, control or regulations, may be adopted and shall
take effect without further publication or posting if reference is made to the
State Code.
         c.   The ordinance adopting the code or book shall be published in the
manner provided in this subsection.
   E.   Recording, Numbering And Certification Of Passage: The City Recorder
shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose, all ordinances
passed by the City Council. The City Recorder shall give each ordinance a
number, if the City Council has not already so done. Immediately following each
ordinance, or codification of ordinances, the City Recorder shall make or cause
to be made a certificate stating the date of passage and of the date of
publication or posting, as required. The record and memorandum, or a certified
copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage and
publication or posting of the ordinance or codification.
   F.   Resolutions:
      1.   Purpose: Unless otherwise required by law, the City Council may
exercise all administrative powers by resolution, including, but not limited
to: a) establishing water and sewer rates; b) charges for garbage collection
and fees charged for City services; c) establishing personnel policies and
guidelines; and d) regulating the use and operation of the City property.
Punishment, fines or forfeitures may not be imposed by resolution.
      2.   Form: Any resolution passed by the City Council shall be in a form
and contain sections substantially similar to that prescribed for ordinances.
      3.   Publication; Effective Date: Resolutions may become effective
without publication or posting and may take effect on passage or at a later
date as the City Council may determine, but resolutions may not become
effective more than three (3) months from the date of passage. (2004 Code)
1-5-7: PHOTOGRAPHY AND RECORDING AT PUBLIC MEETINGS:
   A.   Definitions:
AUDIO RECORDER: Any device that makes a recording of sound.
AUDIO RECORDING: Use of any device to make a recording of sound.
FLASH PHOTOGRAPHY: Use of a camera or other photographic device, whether film,
digital, or otherwise, no matter how small, which requires for successful
operation, a flash, strobe, or accessory lighting beyond the ambient light
level normally present in a meeting room.
MEETING ROOM: A room used by a public body to conduct a public meeting.
NONFLASH STILL PHOTOGRAPHY: Use of a camera or other photographic device,
whether film, digital, or otherwise, no matter how small, which does not
require for successful operation, a flash, strobe, or accessory lighting beyond
the ambient light level normally present in a meeting room.
PUBLIC BODY: Any administrative, advisory, executive, or legislative body of
the city that: 1) is created by the Utah constitution, statute, rule,
ordinance, or resolution; 2) consists of two (2) or more persons; 3) expends,
disburses, or is supported in whole or in part by tax revenue; and 4) is vested
with the authority to make decisions regarding the public's business.
PUBLIC MEETING: The convening of a public body, with a quorum present, whether
in person or by means of electronic equipment, for the purpose of discussing or
acting upon a matter over which the public body has jurisdiction or advisory
power.
RECORDING MEDIUM: A storage medium such as, without limitation, an
audiocassette, videocassette, microcassette, compact disc (CD), digital video
disc (DVD), electronic recording, etc.
VIDEO RECORDING: Use of a camera, video camera, video recorder, motion picture
camera, electronic recording, or other device, whether film, digital, or
otherwise, no matter how small, to record moving images.
   B.   Audio Recording Permitted: The right of the public to make audio
recordings of public meetings, pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 52-4-7
(4) or successor section, shall not be curtailed, provided that the recordings
are conducted in a discrete and orderly manner and the device does not create
excessive noise that disturbs members of the public body or other persons
attending the public meeting.
      1.   No Recording Of Private Conversations: No person may record private
conversations between persons in attendance of a public meeting.
      2.   Audio Recorders; No Additional Microphones: All audio recording
shall be made by using a small handheld audio recorder or other nondisruptive
audio recorder.
      3.   Placement Of Audio Recorders: Persons using audio recorders shall
remain in the recording area (as defined in subsection 1-5-7D1 of this
section), unless invited by the speaker or the public body to be elsewhere. At
no time during a public meeting may a person stand in the aisle, exits, or near
the dais to record the proceedings, if by so doing, the public meeting is
disrupted. Audio recorders may not be left unattended if they are disruptive to
the speaker.
      4.   Recording Medium Of Sufficient Length: To minimize disruptions
during public meetings, recording media shall be of sufficient length to record
the entire meeting.
      5.   Quiet Operation Of Audio Recorders Required: A person may not
operate an audio recorder during a public meeting that creates an excessive
noise that disturbs members of the public body or other persons attending the
public meeting.
      6.   Recordings Labeled "Unofficial Record": The person making an audio
recording of a public meeting shall label the recording medium, e.g., cassette,
compact disc, etc., "Unofficial Record". Only the official minutes or an
official transcript shall be the official record of the public meeting.
   C.   Flash Photography Prohibited: Flash photography shall not be allowed
during public meetings unless permitted by the public body upon request.
   D.   Nonflash Still Photography And Video Recording Permitted; Restrictions:
Nonflash still photography and video recording shall be permitted provided that
the public health, safety and welfare is preserved according to the provisions
of this section.
      1.   Location Of Nonflash Still Cameras And Video Recorders During Public
Meetings: All nonflash still cameras and video recorders shall be located at
the rear of the room or the sides of the room. Camera placement shall ensure
that no member of the public is blocked from viewing the meeting. To protect
public safety, no cameras, tripods, or crews may be permitted in any exit path,
pathway, or aisle, and cords may not be run across any pathway, aisles, or
exits unless permitted by the public body.
      2.   No Photography Or Video Recording Of Materials: Photographing or
video recording of materials that are not public under GRAMA is not allowed.
      3.   No Additional Lighting: Additional lighting to facilitate
photography or video recording shall not be allowed unless permitted by the
public body.
      4.   Quiet Operation Of Cameras And Video Recorders Required: A person
may not operate nonflash still cameras or video recorders during a public
meeting that creates an excessive noise that disturbs members of the public
body or other persons attending the public meeting.
   E.   Waiver: A public body, upon request and by a majority vote, may waive
any provision of this section if it finds that the public meeting over which it
presides will be conducted in an orderly manner despite the waiver. (Ord. 02-
16-2016A, 2-16-2016)
   F.   Disruptive Conduct; Wilful Disruption Of Public Meeting; Removal:
      1.   Disruptive Conduct: A person attending a public meeting may not
engage in any conduct, including visual demonstrations such as the waving of
placards, signs, or banners, or filming or photographing a person who has
stated a desire to not be filmed or photographed, or any other conduct that
disrupts the public meeting or that interferes with the right of members of the
public to attend, observe, and participate in the public meeting.
      2.   Wilful Disruption Of Public Meeting; Removal: Pursuant to Utah Code
Annotated sections 52-4-5(3) and 10-3-608, or successor sections, a person who
wilfully disrupts a public meeting to the extent that orderly conduct is
seriously compromised may be removed from the public meeting by order of the
presiding officer, or in the case of city council meetings, by a two-thirds (2/
3) vote of the city council. The presiding officer may request police
assistance to restore order.
      3.   Recess: The presiding officer may recess the public meeting while
order is restored.
   G.   Electronic Meetings Authorized: This section shall not act to prohibit
or otherwise restrict the city's right to conduct electronic meetings as
authorized by Utah Code Annotated section 52-4-7.8, or a successor provision.
   H.   Law Enforcement And Emergency Services Agencies Unaffected: The
prohibitions and restrictions of this section shall not apply to law
enforcement agencies or emergency service providers. (Ord. 8-2-2005A, 8-2-2005)
CHAPTER 6
OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
SECTION:
1-6-1: Offices Created
1-6-1: OFFICES CREATED:
   A.   Created: The offices of city recorder, city attorney, finance director,
community services director, public works director/chief building official,
assistant city manager/city planner/zoning administrator and city manager/city
engineer/city treasurer are created, having the powers and functions conferred
by the state code and city ordinances, and these officers shall serve until
removed by the city council.
   B.   Appointment: On or before the first Monday in February following a
municipal election, the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council,
shall appoint a qualified person to each of the offices of city recorder and
treasurer.
   C.   Finance Director: The city finance director is ex officio the city
auditor and shall perform the duties of that office. (Ord. 01-07-2014C, 1-7-
2014)
ARTICLE A.  CITY MANAGER
SECTION:
1-6A-1: Appointment Of Manager
1-6A-2: Acting Manager
1-6A-3: Bond Required
1-6A-4: Removal
1-6A-5: Chief Administrative Officer; Administration Of City
1-6A-6: Powers And Duties
1-6A-7: Legislative Powers And Official Position Of Council And Mayor Not
Delegated
1-6A-1: APPOINTMENT OF MANAGER:
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall appoint a
City Manager within a reasonable time whenever a vacancy exists in such
position. Such appointment shall be without definite term and shall be at a
salary to be fixed by the City Council by contract, resolution or ordinance.
The City Manager shall be appointed without regard to any consideration other
than his/her abilities, integrity, competency, training and experience as a
City Manager. At the time of his/her appointment, he/she need not be a resident
of the City or State, but during tenure of office he/she shall reside within
the City, except at the discretion of the City Council. No member of the City
Council nor the Mayor shall be appointed City Manager during the term for which
he/she shall have been elected, nor within one year after the expiration of
his/her term. (Ord. 11-20-2001A, 11-20-2001)
1-6A-2: ACTING MANAGER:
The City Manager, with the advice and consent of the Mayor, may appoint an
acting City Manager during the absence or disability of the City Manager. Such
acting Manager shall, while he/she is in such office, have all the
responsibilities, duties, functions and authority of the City Manager. (Ord.
05-21-2019A, 5-21-2019)
1-6A-3: BOND REQUIRED:
Before taking office, the City Manager shall file with the City Recorder a
general fidelity bond, or to acquire theft or crime insurance, conditioned upon
honest and faithful performance of his/her duties in the sum as set by the
City. The premium of the bond shall be paid by the City. (Ord. 07-16-2019D, 7-
16-2019)
1-6A-4: REMOVAL:
The Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may remove the City
Manager from office without cause. Upon such termination, the Mayor and City
Council may, in their discretion, provide termination pay. (Ord. 11-20-2001A,
11-20-2001)
1-6A-5: CHIEF ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER; ADMINISTRATION OF CITY:
The City Manager shall be the Chief Administrative Officer of the City to whom
all employees of the City report. The City Manager is responsible for the
administration of all City affairs placed in his/her charge. (Ord. 05-21-2019A,
5-21-2019)
1-6A-6: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The City Manager shall be responsible, under the supervision of the Mayor and
in accordance with policies established by the City Council, for the proper
administration of all affairs of the City placed in his/her charge. To that
end, he/she shall have the following powers, duties and obligations: (Ord. 05-
21-2019A, 5-21-2019)
   A.   Faithfully execute and enforce all applicable laws, ordinances, rules
and regulations, and see that all franchises, leases, permits, contracts,
licenses and privileges granted by the City are observed;
   B.   Carry out the policies and programs established by the City Council;
   C.   Organize and direct the management of the executive affairs of the City
in a manner consistent with this Code and with all other City ordinances;
   D.   Submit to the City Council plans and programs relating to the
development and needs of the City, and any special reports concerning the
financial, administrative and operational activities of City offices,
departments, agencies, boards and commissions, together with evaluations and
recommendations relating to them;
   E.   Authorize the issuance of administrative rules and outline general
administrative procedures; (Ord. 11-20-2001A, 11-20-2001)
   F.   Appoint, remove, promote and/or demote, with the advice and consent of
the City Council, a qualified person to each of the Offices of City Engineer/
Public Works Director, City Recorder, Chief Building Official/Zoning
Administrator, City Accountant and Community Services Director; (Ord. 11-20-
2001A, 11-20-2001; amd. 2004 Code)
   G.   Appoint, remove, promote and demote, or cause to be appointed, removed,
promoted, and/or demoted any and all officers and employees of the City, and
regulate and prescribe the powers and duties of all such officers and employees
subject to all applicable Personnel Ordinances, rules and regulations, as well
as State law;
   H.   Establish and administer standards, rules and procedures for the City
personnel system; (Ord. 11-20-2001A, 11-20-2001)
   I.   Prescribe such rules and regulations as he/she shall deem necessary or
expedient for the conduct of all departments, divisions and offices, and
revoke, suspend or amend any rule or regulation by whomever prescribed;
   J.   Either by himself/herself or by any officer or person designated for
the purpose by him/her, to investigate and to examine or inquire into the
affairs or operation of any department, division, office or employee; and when
so authorized by the City Council, he/she shall have power to employ
consultants and professional counsel to aid in such investigations,
examinations or inquiries; (Ord. 05-21-2019A, 5-21-2019)
   K.   Approve merit pay increases and bonuses for City employees when
appropriate and in conformance with personnel policies approved by the City
Council; (Ord. 11-20-2001A, 11-20-2001)
   L.   If necessary, set aside any action taken by a department head and may
supersede him/her in the functions of his/her office; (Ord. 05-21-2019A, 5-21-
2019)
   M.   Direct any department, division, office or employee to perform the work
for any other department, division, office or employee, except where legally
prohibited;
   N.   Make appointments on the basis of executive and administrative ability
and the training and experience of such appointees in the work that they are to
perform; (Ord. 11-20-2001A, 11-20-2001)
   O.   Designate such committees and the officers thereof as he/she shall find
necessary for the proper consideration of administrative problems. Such
committees shall meet at the request of the City Manager and shall make such
recommendation on matters referred to them as they shall find necessary for the
best interests of the City;
   P.   To notify the Mayor and the City Council of any emergency existing in
any department under his/her supervision; (Ord. 05-21-2019A, 5-21-2019)
   Q.   Serve as Budget Officer for the City;
   R.   Cause a proposed budget and capital improvements plan to be prepared
annually and submitted to the Mayor and City Council and be responsible for the
administration of the budget and capital improvements plan after their adoption
(said budget to be construed as financial estimate only); (Ord. 11-20-2001A,
11-20-2001)
   S.   Prepare and submit to the City Council reports on finances and
administrative activities of the City for the preceding year, and upon request
of the Mayor or City Council make written or verbal reports at any time
concerning the affairs of the City under his/her supervision; (Ord. 05-21-
2019A, 5-21-2019)
   T.   Examine and inspect the books, records and official papers of any
office, department, agency, board or commission of the City, and make
investigations and require reports from personnel; (Ord. 11-20-2001A, 11-20-
2001)
   U.   Keep the Mayor and the City Council advised of the financial condition
and future needs of the City and make such recommendations to the Mayor or City
Council for adoption as he/she may deem necessary or expedient;
   V.   Exercise supervision and control over all executive and administrative
departments, and recommend to the Mayor and City Council any proposal he/she
thinks advisable to establish, consolidate or abolish administrative
departments; (Ord. 05-21-2019A, 5-21-2019)
   W.   Enforcement of all terms and conditions imposed in favor of the City in
any contract or public utility franchise, and upon knowledge of any violation
thereof, report the same to the Mayor and City Council for such action and
proceedings as may be necessary to enforce the same;
   X.   Establish a system of accounting and auditing for the City that shall
reflect, in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles, the
financial condition and financial operation of the City;
   Y.   Attend City Council meetings and participate in discussions with the
Mayor and City Council in an advisory capacity;
   Z.   Provide for engineering, architectural, planning, maintenance and
construction services required by the City;
   AA.   Oversee the construction, improvements, repairs and maintenance of
streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes, bridges and other public highways; of
sewers, drains, ditches, culverts, streams and watercourses of gutters and
curbs; of all public buildings, boulevards, parks, playgrounds, squares and
other grounds belonging to the City, and to collect and dispose of waste
material;
   BB.   Act as the City Risk Manager and implement policies and procedures
related to risk elimination, reduction and transfer;
   CC.   Establish effective positive relationships with both appointed and
elected officials of surrounding communities and seek to develop cooperative
programs to benefit the citizens of the City and neighboring communities;
   DD.   Promote good public relations; (Ord. 11-20-2001A, 11-20-2001)
   EE.   Perform such other duties as may be prescribed by ordinance or
required of him/her by the Mayor and City Council that are not inconsistent
with the laws of the State or the City. (Ord. 05-21-2019A, 5-21-2019)
1-6A-7: LEGISLATIVE POWERS AND OFFICIAL POSITION OF COUNCIL AND MAYOR NOT
DELEGATED:
Nothing contained in this section is intended to diminish or impair the
legislative and judicial powers of the City Council or Mayor and any ex officio
positions they may hold, and said powers and positions shall not be delegated
to the City Manager. (Ord. 11-20-2001A, 11-20-2001)
CHAPTER 7
ELECTIONS
SECTION:
1-7-1: Conduct
1-7-2: Primary Election; When Required
1-7-1: CONDUCT:
Election for mayor and council members shall be conducted according to the
municipal election section of Utah Code Annotated section 20A-9-404(1) and (2).
(Ord. 4-12-95A, 4-12-1995)
1-7-2: PRIMARY ELECTION; WHEN REQUIRED:
This section provides for the candidates for mayor and city council to be
nominated at a primary election if required. A primary election will be held
only when the number of candidates filing for an office exceeds twice the
number to be elected. The candidates nominated at the primary election, plus
candidates that were not required to run in the primary, are to be placed on
the November ballot. (Ord. 4-12-95A, 4-12-1995)
ARTICLE A.  CAMPAIGN FINANCE DISCLOSURE
SECTION:
1-7A-1: State Code Applicable
1-7A-2: Financial Report
1-7A-3: Filing For Elective Office And Filing Fees
1-7A-1: STATE CODE APPLICABLE:
Campaign finance disclosure and reporting requirements shall be as required in
Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-208. (2004 Code)
1-7A-2: FINANCIAL REPORT:
   A.   Candidates for Municipal office shall report all of the candidate's
itemized and total: 1) contributions, including in-kind and other nonmonetary
contributions, received up to and including five (5) days before the campaign
finance statement is due, excluding a contribution previously reported; and 2)
expenditures made up to and including five (5) days before the campaign finance
statement is due, excluding an expenditure previously reported; and 3) identify
for each contribution, the amount of the contribution and the name of the
donor, if known; and 4) identify for each expenditure, the amount of the
expenditure and the name of the recipient of the expenditure; or report the
total amount of all contributions and expenditures if the candidate receives
five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less in contributions and spends five hundred
dollars ($500.00) or less on the candidate's campaign. Within thirty (30) days
after receiving a contribution that is cash or a negotiable instrument, exceeds
the anonymous contribution limit, and is from a donor whose name is unknown, a
candidate shall disburse the amount of the contribution to: the Treasurer of
the State or a political subdivision for deposit into the State's or political
subdivision's General Fund; or an organization that is exempt from Federal
income taxation under section 501(c)(3), Internal Revenue Code.
   B.   The definition of "anonymous contribution limit" means for each
calendar year: Fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 05-02-2017B, 5-2-2017)
   C.   The definition of contribution and expenditure includes reporting all
in-kind and other nonmonetary contributions received.
   D.   The financial report shall be signed by the candidate and filed with
the City Recorder in accordance with the filing dates set forth in Utah State
Code section 10-3-208. (Ord. 04-23-2013B, 4-23-2013)
1-7A-3: FILING FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE AND FILING FEES:
   A.   Each person seeking to become a candidate for a Municipal office shall
file a declaration of candidacy form in person with the City Recorder and pay a
thirty five dollar ($35.00) filing fee during office hours, and during the
filing period set forth in Utah State Code section 20A-9-203. (Ord. 04-23-
2013B, 4-23-2013)
CHAPTER 8
RESERVED
(Ord. 07-19-2016D, 7-19-2016)
CHAPTER 8A
RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT
SECTION:
1-8A-1: Government Records
1-8A-2: Records Officer
1-8A-3: Retention Schedule
1-8A-4: Records Requests
1-8A-5: Fees
1-8A-6: Fee Waiver
1-8A-7: Appeals To City Manager
1-8A-8: Appeal To State Records Committee
1-8A-9: Forwarding To State Archives
1-8A-1: GOVERNMENT RECORDS:
All government records of the city shall be maintained, classified and accessed
in accordance with the government records access and management act set forth
at Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-101 et seq., as amended. (Ord. 07-19-
2016D, 7-19-2016)
1-8A-2: RECORDS OFFICER:
The city recorder is the records officer of the city appointed to work with the
Utah division of archives and records service in the care, maintenance,
scheduling, designation, classification, disposal, and preservation of city
records. Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-108, as amended, the
records officer shall, on an annual basis, successfully complete online
training and certification from the state archives regarding government records
access and management. (Ord. 07-19-2016D, 7-19-2016)
1-8A-3: RETENTION SCHEDULE:
All government records of the city shall be retained in accordance with the
retention schedule attached as appendix A to the ordinance codified herein,
which is hereby adopted as the Cedar Hills City records retention schedule. The
city may classify or reclassify a particular record, record series, or
information in a record at any time, in accordance with applicable provisions
of Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-307, as amended. (Ord. 07-19-2016D, 7-19-
2016)
1-8A-4: RECORDS REQUESTS:
Any person requesting a record shall file a written government records access
and management request form as provided by the city. Such request shall be
submitted and processed in accordance with the government records access and
management act. All government records requests shall contain the requestor's
name, mailing address, and daytime phone number, if available, and shall
provide a description of the record requested that identifies the record with
reasonable specificity. (Ord. 07-19-2016D, 7-19-2016)
1-8A-5: FEES:
The city may charge reasonable fees to cover the city's actual cost of
providing a record. Fees for providing a record shall be adopted and set forth
in the city's fee schedule, which fees may be amended from time to time. When
the city compiles a record in a form other than that normally maintained by the
city in response to a records request, the actual costs for compiling the
record may include those costs set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-
203, as amended; provided, no charge may be made for the first quarter hour of
staff time. The city may require payment of past fees and future estimated fees
before beginning to process a request if: a) fees are expected to exceed fifty
dollars ($50.00); or b) the requester has not paid fees from previous requests.
Any prepaid amount in excess of fees due shall be returned to the requester.
(Ord. 07-19-2016D, 7-19-2016)
1-8A-6: FEE WAIVER:
In accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-203, as amended, the city
may fulfill a record request without charge when it determines that:
   A.   Releasing the record primarily benefits the public rather than a
person;
   B.   The individual requesting the record is the subject of the record, or
an individual specified in subsections 63G-2-202(1) or (2) of the act; or
   C.   The requester's legal rights are directly implicated by the information
in the record and the requester is impecunious. (Ord. 07-19-2016D, 7-19-2016)
1-8A-7: APPEALS TO CITY MANAGER:
Any person aggrieved by the City's access determination made or fees imposed
under this chapter may appeal the determination within thirty (30) days to the
City Manager by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Manager in
accordance with the provisions set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-
401, as amended. The notice of appeal shall contain the petitioner's name,
mailing address, daytime phone number, and the relief sought. The notice of
appeal should also contain a brief statement of facts, reasons, and legal
authority in support of the appeal. The City Manager shall make a determination
on the appeal within the time periods set forth in Utah Code Annotated section
63G-2-401, as amended. The City Manager shall send written notice of his/her
determination to all participants, including notice of any right to appeal.
(Ord. 05-21-2019A, 5-21-2019)
1-8A-8: APPEAL TO STATE RECORDS COMMITTEE:
   A.   Any person aggrieved by the decision of the City Manager shall be
entitled to appeal such decision to the State Records Committee. Such an appeal
shall be filed as a notice of appeal with the executive Secretary of the State
Records Committee no later than thirty (30) days of the issuance of the City
Manager's decision as set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 63G-2-403.
   B.   The City or the records requestor may appeal a State Records Committee
decision by filing a petition for judicial review with the District Court.
(Ord. 07-19-2016D, 7-19-2016)
1-8A-9: FORWARDING TO STATE ARCHIVES:
Once this chapter is made effective, the City Recorder shall forward to State
Archives a copy and summary description of this chapter. (Ord. 07-19-2016D, 7-
19-2016)
CHAPTER 9
PRIVATE PROPERTY PROTECTION ACT
SECTION:
1-9-1: Constitutional Taking Review And Appeal
1-9-2: Annual Review
1-9-1: CONSTITUTIONAL TAKING REVIEW AND APPEAL:
In order to promote the protection of private property rights and to prevent
the physical taking or extraction of private property without just
compensation, the city council and all commissions and boards shall adhere to
the following before authorizing the seizure or extraction of property:
   A.   Taking Review Procedure: Prior to any proposed action to extract or
seize property by the city council or any commission or any board, the city
attorney shall review the proposed action to determine if a constitutional
taking requiring "just compensation" would occur. The city attorney shall
review all such matters pursuant to the guidelines established in subsection B
of this section. Upon identifying a possible constitutional taking, the city
attorney shall, in a confidential, protected writing, inform the city council,
commission or board of the possible consequences of its action. This opinion
shall be advisory only and no liability shall be attributed to the city for
failure to follow the recommendation of the city attorney.
   B.   Taking Guidelines: The city attorney shall review whether the action
constitutes a constitutional taking under the fifth or fourteenth amendments to
the constitution of the United States, or under article I, section 22 of the
Utah constitution. The city attorney shall determine whether the proposed
action bears an essential nexus to a legitimate governmental interest and
whether the action is roughly proportionate and reasonably related to the
legitimate governmental interest. The city attorney shall also determine
whether the action deprives the private property owner of all reasonable use of
the property. These guidelines are advisory only and shall not expand nor limit
the scope of the city's liability for a constitutional taking.
   C.   Appeal: Any owner of private property who believes that his/her
property is proposed to be "taken" by an otherwise final action of the city may
appeal the city's decision to the takings appeal board within thirty (30) days
after the decision is made. The appeal must be filed in writing with the city
recorder. The takings appeal board shall hear and approve and remand or reject
the appeal within fourteen (14) days after the appeal is filed. The takings
appeal board, with advise from the city attorney, shall review the appeal
pursuant to the guidelines in subsection B of this section. The decision of the
takings appeal board shall be in writing and a copy given to the appellant and
to the city council, commission or board that took the initial action. The
takings appeal board's rejection of an appeal shall constitute final city
action.
   D.   Takings Appeal Board: There is hereby created a three (3) member
takings appeal board. The mayor shall appoint three current members of the
board of adjustment to serve on the takings appeal board. If, at any time,
three (3) members of the board of adjustment cannot meet or satisfy the time
requirements stated in subsection C of this section, the mayor shall appoint a
member or sufficient members to fill the remaining vacancies. (Ord. 9-13-95A,
9-13-1995)
1-9-2: ANNUAL REVIEW:
The city attorney shall review these guidelines annually and recommend changes
as warranted by the current state law. Nothing herein shall prevent the city
attorney from considering subsequent legal standards established by the
legislature or case law after adoption of the ordinance codified herein. (Ord.
9-13-95A, 9-13-1995)
CHAPTER 10
ETHICS IN GOVERNMENT
SECTION:
1-10-1: Municipal Officers And Employees' Ethics Act Adopted By Reference
1-10-1: MUNICIPAL OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES' ETHICS ACT ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
Except as the application thereof is clearly impractical or inappropriate, in
view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all of the definitions,
requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and sections of the Utah
municipal officers and employees' ethics act, Utah Code Annotated section 10-3-
1301 et seq., are hereby adopted by the city. Any and all violations thereof
shall be considered violations of this chapter and each such violation shall be
subject to the penalties as provided in chapter 4 of this title. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 11
PROCUREMENT POLICY
SECTION:
1-11-1: Purposes
1-11-2: Compliance; Exemptions
1-11-3: Definitions
1-11-4: Administration
1-11-5: Source Selection And Contract Formation, Generally
1-11-6: Specifications
1-11-7: Payment Of Purchase Orders, Invoices, Accounts Payable
1-11-8: Ethics In Procurement
1-11-9: Appeals
1-11-10: Illegal Activities; Penalty
1-11-11: Disposal Of Parcels Of Real Property
1-11-1: PURPOSES:
The underlying purposes of this policy is to:
   A.   Ensure fair and equitable treatment of all persons who wish to, or do,
conduct business with the city.
   B.   Provide for the greatest possible economy in city procurement
activities.
   C.   Foster effective broad based competition within the free enterprise
system to ensure that the city will receive the best possible service or
product at the lowest possible price.
   D.   Simplify, clarify and modernize the procedure governing procurement by
the city. (Ord. 8-19-2003C, 8-19-2003)
1-11-2: COMPLIANCE; EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   General Policy: It shall be the general policy of the city council, and
the departments, agencies, committees, commissions, officials and employees of
the city, to abide by the terms and provisions of this policy.
   B.   Grant, Gift Or Bequest: This policy shall not prevent the city from
complying with the terms and conditions of any grant, gift or bequest that is
otherwise consistent with law.
   C.   Federal Assistance Funds: When a procurement involves the expenditure
of federal assistance funds, the city shall comply with applicable federal laws
and regulations.
   D.   Spirit Of Policy To Guide Determination: In any such case, the spirit
of this policy shall guide the determination and actions of such person or
entity. (Ord. 8-19-2003C, 8-19-2003)
   E.   One Thousand Dollars Or Less: Procurements with a dollar amount of one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or less, such determination may be made by the
individual department heads of the city.
   F.   Greater Than One Thousand Dollars: Procurements with a dollar amount
greater than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), shall be approved by the city
manager or mayor, or designee. (Ord. 9-7-2010A, 9-7-2010)
   G.   Other Procurements Not Budgeted: For all procurements not otherwise
budgeted, such determination may only be approved by the city council.
   H.   Exchanges: Exchanges of supplies, material or equipment between the
city and any other public agency that are not by sale or auction shall be by
mutual agreement of the respective public agencies.
   I.   City Employees: City employees may be used to complete city projects;
provided, that the city complies with state statutory requirements governing
contracts for municipal public improvements. (Ord. 8-19-2003C, 8-19-2003)
1-11-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
BIDDING: The procedure used to solicit quotations on price and delivery from
various prospective suppliers of supplies, equipment and contractual services.
BUDGET OFFICER: The city manager.
BUSINESS: Any corporation, partnership, individual, sole proprietorship, joint
stock company, joint venture, or any other private legal entity.
CHANGE ORDER: A written order directing the contractor to suspend work or make
changes, which the appropriate clauses of the contract authorize without
consent of the contractor, or any written alteration in specifications,
delivery point, rate of delivery, period of performance, price quantity, or
other provisions of any contract accomplished by mutual action of the parties
to the contract.
CITY: Means and includes all departments, commissions and divisions of the city
that use the supplies or procure the contract services covered by this chapter.
CONSTRUCTION: The process of building, renovating, altering, improving or
repairing a public building or public work; but does not include the routine
operation, repair or maintenance of existing structures, buildings or real
property.
CONTRACT: Any city agreement for the procurement or disposal of supplies,
services or construction.
CONTRACTUAL SERVICES: Public works projects and other professional services
such as auditing, architects, engineers or other consulting services.
COST REIMBURSEMENT CONTRACT: A contract under which a contractor is reimbursed
for costs that are allowed and allocated in accordance with the contract terms
and the provisions of this chapter, and a fee, if any.
DEPARTMENT HEAD: The individual who administers a department or his/her
designee as specified in writing to the purchasing agent or in the absence of a
department head, it shall be determined by the city manager/mayor.
DISPOSITION: To transfer control of city owned property to another by any means
including sale or other divestment of ownership of property.
INVITATION FOR BIDS: All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, used for soliciting bids.
PERSON: Any business, individual, union, committee, club, other organization or
group of individuals.
PROCUREMENT: Buying, purchasing, renting, leasing, leasing with an option to
purchase, or otherwise acquiring any supplies, services or construction.
PURCHASE DESCRIPTION: The words used in a solicitation to describe the
supplies, services or construction to be purchased, and includes specifications
attached to or made a part of the solicitation.
PURCHASE ORDER: A form provided by the city for the procurement of any goods
and/or services of a nonrecurring nature, describing the goods or services and
giving the pertinent vendor information.
PURCHASING AGENT: The person duly authorized by the city manager/mayor to enter
into and administer contracts and make written determinations with respect
thereto.
REASONABLE NOTICE: Posting notice of the proposed disposition in at least three
(3) public places within the city and publishing notice of the proposed
disposition in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
REQUEST FOR PROPOSALS: All documents, whether attached or incorporated by
reference, used for soliciting proposals.
RESPONSIBLE BID: An offer submitted by a responsible bidder to furnish
supplies, equipment or contractual services in conformity with the
specifications, delivery terms and conditions and other requirements included
in the invitation for bids.
RESPONSIBLE BIDDER: A bidder who submits a responsible bid; who has furnished,
when requested, information and data to prove that his/her financial resources,
production or service facilities, service reputation and experience are
adequate to make satisfactory delivery of the supplies, equipment or
contractual services on which he/she bids; and who has not violated or
attempted to violate any provisions of this chapter.
SERVICES: The furnishing of labor, time or effort by a contractor, not
involving the delivery of a specific end product other than reports that are
merely incidental to the required performance; but does not include employment
agreements.
SIGNIFICANT PARCEL OF REAL PROPERTY: A parcel of real property owned by the
city with a reasonable value equal to or greater than fifty thousand dollars
($50,000.00).
SINGLE SOURCE PROVIDER: A provider who is the only provider of a specific
material, supply, equipment or service. This may include providers of specific
brands set forth in the specifications or providers of a unique service.
SUPPLIES: All property, including equipment, materials and printing. (Ord. 8-
19-2003C, 8-19-2003; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 10-01-2013A, 10-1-2013)
1-11-4: ADMINISTRATION:
The city manager or designee shall administer the purchasing procedures
outlined in this chapter. The city manager or designee shall perform the
following duties and have the following powers concerning purchasing matters:
   A.   Administer and maintain the purchasing procedures and other rules and
regulations established by this chapter and its authority.
   B.   Recommend new or revised purchasing rules and regulations as are deemed
desirable and in conformance with other statutory requirements, and to
interpret the provisions of this chapter and applicable statutes.
   C.   Obtain as full and open competition as possible on all purchases.
   D.   Keep informed of current developments in the field of purchasing, i.e.,
prices, market conditions, new products, etc.
   E.   Supervise the inspection of all supplies and equipment to assure
conformance with specifications. (Ord. 8-19-2003C, 8-19-2003)
1-11-5: SOURCE SELECTION AND CONTRACT FORMATION, GENERALLY:
Any and all articles, services, materials or capital projects that shall be
furnished to, constructed for, or used by any city department shall be subject
to this provision of the policy: (Ord. 8-19-2003C, 8-19-2003)
   A.   Purchase Order Requirements:
      1.   Specified:
         a.   Any procurement over one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) in total
shall be accompanied by a purchase order signed by the department head and city
manager, or designee. For purposes of this requirement, no purchase shall be
divided in portions so as to make each purchase order less than or equal to one
thousand dollars ($1,000.00).
         b.   Each purchase order shall be attached to an invoice or other
documentation supporting the amount of the order.
         c.   In the case where a staff member or member of the city council is
being reimbursed, that person shall not be allowed to be signatory to the
purchase order.
      2.   Exceptions: If considered to be a periodically recurring expenditure
and the amount is reasonably predictable and consistent from one period to the
next, no purchase order will be required on subsequent expenditures.
   B.   Procurements Requiring No Bid: The following procurements shall not
require a bid:
      1.   Procurements with a dollar amount of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or less shall not require bids of any type. However, two (2)
telephone quotes are encouraged.
      2.   Procurements made through the cooperative purchasing contracts
administered by the state division of purchasing.
      3.   Procurements made from a single source provider. Documented
explanation of single source shall be provided.
      4.   Procurements required during an emergency, e.g., an imminent threat
to the public health, welfare or safety. However, as much competition as
practical should be obtained; and, such purchases should be limited to amounts
necessary to the resolution of the emergency.
      5.   Procurements shall not be artificially divided so as to constitute a
small procurement under this section. Written justification is required for any
provisions in this subsection for which compliance cannot be met. (Ord. 9-7-
2010A, 9-7-2010)
   C.   Procurements Requiring Bids: The following procurements shall require a
bid:
      1.   Procurements with a dollar amount over one thousand dollars
($1,000.00), but less than ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00) shall require a
minimum of three (3) documented telephone bids.
      2.   Procurements with a dollar amount over ten thousand dollars
($10,000.00), but less than fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) shall require a
minimum of three (3) written bids.
      3.   Any procurement in excess of fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00)
shall require a legal notice in a local newspaper of general publication at
least seven (7) days before the acquisition or procurement of an item. An
invitation for bids shall be issued when a contract is to be awarded by
competitive bidding. The invitation shall include a purchase description and
all contractual terms and conditions applicable to the procurement. (Ord. 09-
18-2018A, 9-18-2018)
   D.   Cancellation And Rejection Of Bids: An invitation for bids, a request
for proposals or other solicitation may be canceled, or any or all bids or
proposals may be rejected, in whole or in part, as may be specified in the
solicitation, when it is in the best interests of the City. The reasons shall
be made part of the contract file.
   E.   Use Of Competitive Sealed Proposals In Lieu Of Bids: When the City
Manager or Mayor, or designee, determines that the use of competitive sealed
bidding is either not practicable or not advantageous to the City, a contract
may be entered into by competitive sealed proposals. Competitive sealed
proposals are most appropriately used for professional service type contracts.
      1.   Proposals shall be solicited through a request for proposals (RFP).
Public notice of the request for proposals shall be given at least five (5)
days prior to the advertised date of the opening of the proposals.
      2.   The request for proposals shall state the relative importance of
price and other evaluating factors.
      3.   Offerors shall be accorded fair and equal treatment with respect to
any opportunity for discussion and revision of proposals, and revisions may be
permitted after submissions and prior to award, for the purpose of obtaining
best and final offers. In conducting discussions, there shall be no disclosure
of any information derived from proposals submitted by competing offerors.
      4.   Awards shall be made to the entity whose proposal is determined (in
writing), to be the most advantageous to the City, taking into consideration
price and the evaluation factors set forth in the request for proposals. No
other factors or criteria shall be used in the evaluation. The contract file
shall contain the basis on which the award is made.
   F.   Professional Consultants: Notwithstanding any term or provision to the
contrary herein, the services of professional consultants (including, but not
limited to, architects, engineers and attorneys) may be procured pursuant to
the provisions of subsections A, B or C of this section, or such other manner
as is deemed by the City Manager or Mayor, or designee, to be fair and
reasonable, efficient and in the best interest of the City. Such procurements
are qualification based. Where practicable, requests for such services should
be publicly announced. Contracts should be negotiated by the City based on
demonstrated competence, availability under any applicable time constraints,
and fair and reasonable prices. The services of architects and engineers may,
but need not, be procured in accordance with the provisions of Utah Code
Annotated sections 63-56-42 through 63-56-44, as amended, (regarding architect-
engineer services, which are not binding on the City).
   G.   Determination Of Nonresponsiveness Of Bidder: Determination of
nonresponsiveness of a bidder or offeror shall be made in writing. The
unreasonable failure of a bidder or offeror to promptly supply information in
connection with an inquiry with respect to responsibility may be grounds for a
determination of nonresponsiveness with respect to the bidder or offeror.
Information furnished by a bidder or offeror pursuant to this subsection shall
not be disclosed outside of the Purchasing Division without prior written
consent by the bidder or offeror.
   H.   Cost Plus A Percentage Of Cost Contracts Prohibited: Subject to the
limitations of this section, any type of contract that will promote the best
interests of the city may be used; provided, that the use of a cost plus a
percentage of cost contract is prohibited. A cost reimbursement contract may be
used only when a determination is made in writing that such contract is likely
to be less costly to the city than any other type or that it is impracticable
to obtain the supplies, services or construction required except under such a
contract.
   I.   Required Contract Clauses: Required contract clauses are as follows:
      1.   The unilateral right of the city to order, in writing, changes in
the work within the scope of the contract and changes in the time of
performance of the contract that do not alter the scope of the contract work.
      2.   Variations occurring between estimated quantities of work in a
contract and actual quantities.
      3.   Suspension of work ordered by the city.
   J.   Bid Awards:
      1.   Opening: Bids shall be opened publicly in the presence of one or
more witnesses at the time and place designated in the invitation for bids. The
amount for each bid and any other relevant information, together with the names
of each bidder, shall be recorded. The record and each bid shall be open to
public inspection.
      2.   Unconditional Acceptance: Bids shall be unconditionally accepted
without altercation or correction, except as authorized in this policy. Bids
shall be evaluated based on the requirements set forth in the invitation for
bids.
      3.   Prompt Award Of Contract: The contract shall be awarded with
reasonable promptness, by written notice, to the lowest responsive and
responsible bidder whose bid meets the requirements and criteria set forth in
the invitation of the bids.
      4.   Corrections Or Withdrawals; Changes: Correction or withdrawal of
inadvertently erroneous bids before or after award, or cancellation of awards
or contracts based on such bid mistakes, shall be permitted. After bid opening,
no changes in bid prices or other provisions of bids prejudicial to the
interest of the city or fair competition shall be permitted. All decisions to
permit the correction or withdrawal of bids or to cancel awards or contracts
based on bid mistakes shall be supported by a written determination made by the
purchasing agent.
      5.   Rejection Of Bids: The city manager/mayor may reject any and all
bids presented, and may readvertise for bids as set forth in this chapter.
      6.   Lowest Possible Bidder: Except as otherwise allowed or required, the
city manager/mayor shall award the contract or bid to the lowest possible
bidder.
      7.   Tie Bids: If two (2) or more of the bids are the same, the city
shall determine the method of selection based on the best interest of the city.
   K.   Agreements With Other Agencies: The city shall have the power to enter
into joint purchase agreements with any or all other public agencies within the
state for the purchase of any commodity, if the city manager or mayor, or
designee, finds the joint purchase agreement to be in the best interest of the
city.
   L.   Emergency Procurements:
      1.   In the case of a situation that, in the judgment of the city manager
or mayor, or designee, is an emergency, creates an immediate life/safety
concern, or creates an immediate liability risk for the city, and a timely fix
is of the essence, the standard procurement policies stated herein are waived
and the city manager or mayor, or designee, has the approval to immediately
authorize funds to be spent to correct the problem in as timely a manner as
possible.
      2.   Following correction of the problem, the city manager or mayor, or
designee shall immediately cause that each member of the city council is
informed of the situation and the cost incurred to correct it.
      3.   The city council shall review the emergency and associated
expenditure during a regular council meeting following the emergency. (Ord. 8-
19-2003C, 8-19-2003)
1-11-6: SPECIFICATIONS:
All specifications shall seek to promote overall economy and best use for the
purpose intended and encourage competition in satisfying the city's needs, and
shall not be restrictive. Where practical and reasonable and within the scope
of this chapter, local products shall be given preference. (Ord. 8-19-2003C, 8-
19-2003)
1-11-7: PAYMENT OF PURCHASE ORDERS, INVOICES, ACCOUNTS PAYABLE:
   A.   Biweekly: Payment shall be prepared biweekly for all purchase orders,
contract payments or invoices prepared in accordance with this chapter.
   B.   Payment To Payee: Payment shall be made directly to the payee shown on
the purchase order, contract payment or invoice.
   C.   Check Payments: Check payments may be issued only upon full conformity
of the requirements of this chapter and following appropriate signatures (2
required) on each check. (Ord. 8-19-2003C, 8-19-2003)
1-11-8: ETHICS IN PROCUREMENT:
No person involved in making procurement decisions may have personal
investments in any business entity that will create a substantial conflict
between their private interests and their public duties. (Ord. 8-19-2003C, 8-
19-2003)
1-11-9: APPEALS:
   A.   Filing; Time Limit: Any actual or prospective bidder, offeror or
contractor who is aggrieved in connection with the solicitation or award of a
contract may appeal to the City Manager or Mayor, or designee. An appeal shall
be submitted in writing within five (5) working days after the aggrieved person
knows or should have known of the facts.
   B.   Decision; Appeal To City Council: The City Manager or Mayor, or
designee shall promptly issue a written decision regarding any appeal if it is
not settled by a mutual agreement. The decision shall state the reasons for the
action taken and inform the protestor, contractor or prospective contractor of
the right to appeal to the City Council.
   C.   Final City Appeal: The City Council shall be the final appeal on the
City level.
   D.   Further Appeals: All further appeals shall be handled as provided in
Utah Code Annotated sections 63-56-58 through 63-56-64. (Ord. 8-19-2003C, 8-19-
2003)
1-11-10: ILLEGAL ACTIVITIES; PENALTY:
   A.   Conflicts Of Interest: No member of the City Council or City employee
may be interested directly or indirectly in any contract entered into by the
City. A violation of this provision shall be cause for removal or other
disciplinary action; provided, however, that no violation shall be deemed to
have occurred if the interested member of the City Council or employee
declares, prior to awarding of any contract, his/her interest and the potential
for conflict of interest. (Ord. 05-21-2019A, 5-21-2019)
   B.   Collusion Among Bidders: Any agreement or collusion among bidders or
prospective bidders or any restraint of freedom of competition by agreement to
bid a fixed price or otherwise, shall render the bids of such bidders void.
(Ord. 8-19-2003C, 8-19-2003)
   C.   Gifts: It is unlawful for any person to offer or to give to any elected
official, officer or employee of the City or any member of his/her immediate
family, any gift, whether in the form of money, services, loan, travel,
entertainment, hospitality, promise or other form, under circumstances in which
it could reasonably be intended to influence him/her in his/her duties
concerning the award of any contract or order of purchase, or for any elected
official, officer or employee to directly or indirectly solicit or directly or
indirectly accept any such gift for such purposes. (Ord. 05-21-2019A, 5-21-
2019)
   D.   Bid Disclosure: It is unlawful for any elected official, officer or
employee to disclose, in advance of the opening of the bids, the content of any
bid invited through the formal competitive bidding procedure. (Ord. 8-19-2003C,
8-19-2003)
   E.   Benefit From Active Participation: It is unlawful for any elected
official, officer or employee to actively participate in the awarding of the
contract from which he/she will directly benefit, without fully disclosing any
interest he/she has therein. (Ord. 05-21-2019A, 5-21-2019)
   F.   Purchases In Violation: Any employee or official of the City who shall
purchase any goods or services in violation of the procedures set forth in this
chapter may be subject to penalties up to and including possible termination.
   G.   Waiver: The City Council shall have the right to waive any or all
requirements of this chapter shall it deem it necessary or in the best
interests of the City. Waiver shall be deemed to have occurred either
implicitly or explicitly through action of the City Council in public meeting
whether taken before or after expenditure has occurred. (Ord. 8-19-2003C, 8-19-
2003)
1-11-11: DISPOSAL OF PARCELS OF REAL PROPERTY:
   A.   Notice Required: If real property is declared surplus as a "significant
parcel of real property" as defined in this chapter, then the City shall
provide "reasonable notice", as defined in this chapter, of the proposed
"disposition", as defined in this chapter, at least fourteen (14) days before
the proposed disposition, as shall provide the public an opportunity for
comment on the proposed disposition.
   B.   Public Hearing: The City will hold a public hearing regarding the
proposed disposition. If the City receives public comment on the proposed
disposition, the City Recorder shall forward copies of such public comment to
the City Council. Thereafter, the City Council may rescind its declaration of
surplus property, direct the Mayor to proceed with the sale, or impose such
additional terms and conditions as the City Council may adopt.
If the City does not receive public comment on the proposed disposition, the
Mayor may proceed with the sale after satisfying all of the other terms and
conditions applicable to the disposition. The City shall comply with the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-2(4).
   C.   Exception: Except as otherwise required by State law, boundary line
agreements and deeds conveying unneeded portions of rights-of-way or easements
may be executed without declaring the property surplus. (Ord. 10-01-2013A, 10-
1-2013)
CHAPTER 12
ANNEXATIONS
SECTION:
1-12-1: Title And Intent
1-12-2: Procedure For Annexation Of Territory
1-12-3: Conditions Of Annexation
1-12-1: TITLE AND INTENT:
   A.   Title: This chapter shall be entitled the ANNEXATION ORDINANCE OF THE
CITY OF CEDAR HILLS, UTAH, and may be so cited and pleaded.
   B.   Intent: The intent of this chapter is to set forth a procedure
consistent with Utah Code Annotated section 10-2-401 et seq., as amended, which
both property owners and municipal officials may use to facilitate desirable
annexations to the city and to outline the conditions that must be complied
with in accomplishing the same. Annexations are legislative in nature. The city
is not required to accept a petition for annexation or act to approve such a
petition even though the petitioners may comply with all provisions required
for annexation. (Ord. 2-3-98C, 2-3-1998)
1-12-2: PROCEDURE FOR ANNEXATION OF TERRITORY:
The procedure for annexation of land to the city shall be as set forth in Utah
Code Annotated section 10-2-401 et seq. (Ord. 2-3-98C, 2-3-1998; amd. 2004
Code)
1-12-3: CONDITIONS OF ANNEXATION:
   A.   Water Rights To Be Conveyed 1 :
      1.   Intent: It is intended that land annexed to the city be accompanied
by water rights, sufficient in the amount to satisfy the needs of the existing
and future occupants of the annexed territory. The water rights conveyance
requirements of this section shall be considered solely as a condition and
requirement of annexation.
      2.   Amount Of Water Right Required: Any person annexing land to the city
shall, as a condition of annexation, convey to the city title to water rights
having both a quantity and rate of flow that is sufficient in amount to meet
the water use requirements of future development, as follows: (Ord. 2-3-98C, 2-
3-1998)
         a.   Residential uses: To determine water rights for each potential
lot or dwelling unit the following formula shall be used: (2.58 x exact lot
size in acres) + (0.5 x number of dwelling units) = water rights in acre-feet
to be dedicated; or as determined by the terms of any concurrent annexation
concept plan submitted as a condition of annexation, the terms of the
annexation agreement (if addressed therein) or by the lot area requirements for
the zone classification proposed for the annexation area, whichever is
applicable. (Ord. 2-19-2008A, 2-19-2008)
         b.   Other uses: Sufficient water to satisfy the projected needs of
the development proposed by the development as set forth under the terms of the
annexation agreement.
      3.   Type Of Water Right Acceptable To City: The type of water rights
proposed for conveyance to the city shall be of a type that is capable of ready
conversion for municipal purposes from existing city supply sources, and may
include one or a combination of the following:
         a.   Irrigation water stock or water rights. Sufficient shares of
stock in the Pleasant Grove Irrigation Company or other natural flow right in
an amount sufficient to provide a reliable water supply during normal water
years in accordance with subsection B of this section; provided, that this
option shall be limited to historically irrigated lands.
         b.   Well rights. The conveyance of well or other water rights, for
which a change application or other appropriate action authorizing the use
thereof for municipal purposes within the city, shall have been approved by the
state engineer, in an amount sufficient to provide a reliable water supply
during normal water years in accordance with subsection B of this section.
         c.   In-lieu purchase of prior acquired water rights. An in-lieu cash
payment for the assignment of the right to utilize water rights that shall have
been previously approved for diversion for municipal purposes under the Harvey
water rights purchase agreement or from other city acquired water rights
previously acquired by the city for the purpose, if available.
      4.   Exceptions And Adjustments To Water Rights Conveyance Requirements:
         a.   Lands That Are Restricted Against Future Development: Where the
annexation contains lands that, as a result of topographic extremes or other
unique conditions will be permanently restricted from development or other
activity requiring the use of city provided water, the city may waive the water
rights conveyance requirements; provided, that the restriction against future
use of water is secured through the deeding of the development rights to the
public or other legal device acceptable to the city.
         b.   Lands Owned By Nonsignatory Owners: Whenever land is annexed
without the consent of the owner, the conveyance of water rights by the
nonsignatory owners will not be required at the time of annexation; provided,
however, that the ordinance annexing the territory shall note all parcels
annexed without the owner's consent and shall provide that future development
of these lands will require the conveyance of water rights prior to the
granting of any approval of development or the issuance of a building permit.
The city may also file a notice of interest to that effect for each parcel so
annexed, and may maintain a map showing all parcels that have been annexed
without satisfying the water rights requirements.
      5.   Time Of Conveyance; Deferral Of Conveyance Permitted; Conditions For
Deferral:
         a.   For all parcels signatory to the petition, and except as
hereinafter provided, the conveyance of title to water rights shall occur prior
to the time of final action on the annexation by the city council.
         b.   Notwithstanding the above, the city council may authorize the
conveyance of the water rights at the time after completion of annexation
proceedings in the instances and under the conditions hereinafter set forth:
            (1)   The city council, with the recommendation of the planning
commission, determines that there is good and sufficient reason to delay the
time of conveyance; and
            (2)   There is adequate assurance that the water rights proposed
for conveyance are irrevocably committed to the city through execution of a
water transfer agreement or placement in a conveyance escrow or similar third
party arrangement established prior to the action to annex; and
            (3)   There are no encumbrances on the rights that may prohibit
their subsequent conveyance without cost to the city.
   B.   Conveyance Of Land For Parks Or Other Public Purposes:
      1.   Intent: It is the intent of this subsection to provide a method
whereby the city may acquire such lands, or interest therein, as are considered
necessary to adequately accommodate the needs of existing and subsequent
occupants of the land proposed for annexation, and also the general public for
streets, parks, trails, flood control and/or other similar purposes. Any
conveyance of land, or interest therein, to the city pursuant to this
subsection shall be considered solely as a condition and requirement of
annexation, except as provided under subsection B4 of this section.
      2.   Conveyance Of Land May Be Required: All persons annexing territory
to the city shall, as a condition of annexation, convey to the city fee title
(or easement where applicable) to such lands as are determined essential for
streets, parks and open space, trails, flood control, fire control, and similar
purposes.
      3.   Time Of Conveyance: For all parcels signatory to the petition, the
conveyance of the title to lands shall occur prior to the time of recording the
annexation plat.
      4.   Conveyance To Be Consistent With Impact Fee Ordinance: Where the
land conveyed pursuant to the terms of this subsection is for a purpose
included within the terms of the city impact fee ordinance, the conveyance
shall be accounted for and credited to the owner as an offset against the
impact fee, pursuant to the terms of said impact fee ordinance.
   C.   Annexation Agreements Authorized; To Be Approved By City Council:
      1.   In order to more fully implement the terms, conditions and
understandings in connection with an annexation of land to the city, the city
council may, but under no circumstances is required to, enter into agreements
hereinafter to be known as "annexation agreements". Any such agreement shall
constitute a binding contract between the applicant (and any successor in
interest) and the city, and shall contain such terms and conditions as agreed
to as conditions of annexation. (Ord. 2-3-98C, 2-3-1998)
      2.   The mayor, city attorney, city manager, city engineer and/or any
member of the city council when authorized to do so by said body, may negotiate
the terms and conditions of annexation agreements on behalf of the city;
provided, that all annexation agreements shall be reviewed for legal
sufficiency by the city attorney and submitted to the planning commission for
its review and recommendation thereon prior to a final approval or disapproval
by the city council. (Ord. 2-3-98C, 2-3-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Other Conditions: The applicant shall be responsible for the costs of
processing annexation requests as set forth below:
      1.   Petition Review And Processing Fee: A petition review and processing
fee in an amount as may be fixed by resolution of the city council shall be
submitted to the city recorder with each annexation request.
      2.   Annexation Plat Preparation Fee: In the event that the annexation
plat for a specific annexation petition is prepared by the city, the city shall
be entitled to assess the costs incurred in the preparation thereof to the
petitioners.
      3.   Protest Study Fee: In the event that an annexation petition is
protested and requires the appointment of a feasibility consultant and
preparation of a feasibility study by the boundary commission, the city may
assess the costs incurred by the city in the conduct of the feasibility study
upon the petitioners. (Ord. 2-3-98C, 2-3-1998)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  10-5-6 of this code.
CHAPTER 13
BOND OBLIGATIONS
SECTION:
1-13-1: Voter Approval Required
1-13-2: City Council To Issue Nonvoted Bonds
1-13-1: VOTER APPROVAL REQUIRED:
No city official or representative of the city shall obligate the city with a
bond of any type without a majority vote approval of registered voters living
in the city. (Ord. 11-17-2003B, 11-17-2003, eff. 11-17-2003)
This section remains in full force and effect as it applies to bonds where real
property taxes are directly or indirectly pledged for repayment of the bonds or
where no revenue source of the city for repayment of the bonds is identified or
the bond is to provide "basic public services". (Ord. 124-2006A, 1-17-2006)
1-13-2: CITY COUNCIL TO ISSUE NONVOTED BONDS:
The city council of the City of Cedar Hills is hereby authorized to issue
nonvoted revenue bonds to the full extent authorized by the Utah local
government bonding act in title 11, chapter 14 of the Utah code and by the
constitution of the state of Utah and to issue all other forms of nonvoted
bonds as authorized pursuant to provision of the Utah law upon one or more of
the following conditions: a) that a revenue source is identified and pledged
that would satisfy the obligation and, which revenue source is controlled by
the city such that the revenue could be increased if necessary to satisfy the
obligation and real property taxes could not directly be pledged, such as a
general obligation bond, or indirectly pledged, such as an annual appropriate
lease payment bond, without an election or other mechanism for inviting the
approval or disapproval of the people, or b) the bond proceeds are to be used
to meet the city's responsibility to provide "basic public services" such as
water, sewer, irrigation, sanitation, parks, streets or transportation
infrastructure, public safety needs, utilities, or physical facilities or
equipment required for the safe and effective operation of the city government.
(Ord. 1-24-2006A, 1-17-2006)
CHAPTER 14
OPEN AND PUBLIC MEETINGS
SECTION:
1-14-1: Approval Of Minutes
1-14-1: APPROVAL OF MINUTES:
   A.   The city recorder is responsible to ensure that written minutes and
recordings are prepared and kept for all public meetings of any public body of
the city.
   B.   Draft minutes shall be prepared for each public meeting as soon as
practical and clearly identified as "DRAFT". A copy of the draft minutes shall
be given to each member of the public body for review and comments. Once given
to the members of the public body, the draft minutes are available as a public
record, but subject to change until formally approved.
   C.   The public body shall consider the draft minutes for approval within
ninety (90) days after the public meeting. If the public body does not take
action to approve the draft minutes within ninety (90) days, the draft minutes
shall be deemed to have been approved by the public body and will stand as
proposed.
   D.   Once the draft minutes have either been approved by the public body or
have been deemed to have been approved, they shall become the official minutes
of the proceedings of the public body, shall be signed by the city recorder,
and shall be retained as the official record of the public body. Minutes and
recordings shall be made available to the public as required by Utah law.
   E.   Exception: Any public body of the city that does not meet on a regular
basis each month, may have its draft minutes approved by the public body's
chair. It shall be the responsibility of the public body's chair to ensure that
its members have the opportunity for input. (Ord. 9-22-2009A, 9-22-2009)
CHAPTER 15
NO FAULT GOLF BALL CLAIMS
SECTION:
1-15-1: Title; Purpose
1-15-2: Definitions
1-15-3: Administration And Establishment Of Regulations
1-15-4: Reimbursement; Time Limitations
1-15-5: Application; Investigation And Recommendation
1-15-6: Criteria For Reimbursement
1-15-7: Maximum Payments
1-15-8: Payment Does Not Imply Liability
1-15-9: Annual Budget Expenditure
1-15-10: Claims From Other Governmental Agencies
1-15-1: TITLE; PURPOSE:
   A.   This chapter shall be known as the NO FAULT GOLF BALL CLAIMS ORDINANCE.
   B.   It is the purpose of this chapter to compensate persons for vehicle
damage loss and loss to private property sustained as the result of damages
from a golf ball hit from the Cedar Hills Golf Club onto a public highway or
road, or into an adjacent private property, regardless of fault, within the
restrictions, limitations and other provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 07-21-
2020A, 7-21-2020)
1-15-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and
phrases. as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings designated as
follows:
 
CITY:                   City of Cedar Hills.
CITY ATTORNEY:          The City of Cedar Hills City Attorney or designee.
GOLF COURSE:            The Cedar Hills Golf Club.
                        Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm,
                        company, corporation, association, joint stock company,
                        trust, estate, or any other legal entity (except the
PERSON OR APPLICANT:    United States government or its agencies. any state of
                        the Union, the State of Utah and any of its agencies or
                        political subdivisions) or their legal representatives,
                        agents or assigns.
                        Any political subdivision of the state, including, but
POLITICAL SUBDIVISION:  not limited to, state departments, divisions and
                        agencies, cities, towns, counties, and school
                        districts.
                        Any residential property within three hundred (300)
                        linear feet of the golf course area of play, including
PRIVATE PROPERTY:       homes, buildings, driveways, landscaped areas, parking
                        lots other than the golf course parking lot and
                        entryway, walkways.
                        A public highway or road, including an interstate
                        highway, entryway and parking lot of the golf course
                        and pedestrian and bicycle paths or walkways, within or
                        adjacent to the golf course. Public highway or road
PUBLIC HIGHWAY OR ROAD: does not include private property, including homes,
                        buildings, driveways, landscaped areas, parking lots
                        other than the golf course parking lot and entryway,
                        walkways or other privately owned structures adjoining
                        or adjacent to the golf course. (Ord. 07-21-2020A, 7-
                        21-2020)
 
1-15-3: ADMINISTRATION AND ESTABLISHMENT OF REGULATIONS:
The City Attorney's Office may establish regulations necessary to provide for
the handling of such claims and disbursement of those funds which are
appropriated for payment of claims under this chapter. (Ord. 07-21-2020A, 7-21-
2020)
1-15-4: REIMBURSEMENT; TIME LIMITATIONS:
All claims for reimbursement under this chapter must be submitted in writing to
the City Attorney's Office within thirty (30) calendar days after the incident
occurs. (Ord. 07-21-2020A, 7-21-2020)
1-15-5: APPLICATION; INVESTIGATION AND RECOMMENDATION:
Applications for reimbursement received will be investigated and a
recommendation for reimbursement will be made by the City Attorney's Office.
All payments authorized will be made solely from funds set aside under this
chapter. (Ord. 07-21-2020A, 7-21-2020)
1-15-6: CRITERIA FOR REIMBURSEMENT:
   A.   The determination as to whether to make payment for loss under this
chapter will be based upon the following criteria:
      1.   Whether an eligible applicant incurred an otherwise uninsured or
uncovered vehicle damage loss caused by a golf ball hit from the golf course
onto a public highway or road or into an area adjacent to the golf course
affecting private property under circumstances where the applicant acted
responsibly to avoid the loss; and
      2.   If so, whether the extent of the loss has been adequately
substantiated; and
      3.   If there is an unencumbered balance in the fund from which to pay.
      4.   Any payment shall not exceed the value of the damaged property.
   B.   The following will result in the denial of an application:
      1.   Application not timely submitted;
      2.   Loss fully covered by private insurance or the party responsible for
hitting the golf ball;
      3.   Applicant otherwise ineligible under the terms of this chapter;
      4.   Loss caused by an irresponsible act of the applicant, applicant's
agent, or member of applicant's business or household;
      5.   Loss or eligibility unsubstantiated;
      6.   Loss caused by intentional acts of vandalism or malicious intent; or
      7.   Loss caused by an individual who was not a paying patron of the golf
course.
   C.   The following will result in reduction of payment:
      1.   Loss partially covered by private insurance or the party responsible
for hitting the golf ball;
      2.   Loss exceeds funding limits of this chapter;
      3.   Verification of loss inadequate or incomplete; and/or
      4.   Applicant did not cause the problem but failed to act responsibly to
mitigate the loss. (Ord. 07-21-2020A, 7-21-2020)
1-15-7: MAXIMUM PAYMENTS:
No payment under this chapter may exceed any of the following:
   A.   Three hundred dollars ($300.00) per vehicle;
   B.   One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per incident; or
   C.   Annual appropriation of funds regardless of number of claims involved.
(Ord. 07-21-2020A, 7-21-2020)
1-15-8: PAYMENT DOES NOT IMPLY LIABILITY:
   A.   Any payment made under this chapter may not be construed as an
admission of nor does it imply any negligence or responsibility on the part of
the city for such damage. Any payment made under this chapter is strictly
voluntary on the part of the city.
   B.   This chapter may not in any way supersede, change or abrogate the state
Governmental Immunity Act and its application to the city, or establish in any
person a right to sue the city under this chapter.
   C.   Any payment made under this chapter and accepted will constitute a full
and complete release of any and all claims against the city, its officers,
employees, and agents arising from the incident. (Ord. 07-21-2020A, 7-21-2020)
1-15-9: ANNUAL BUDGET EXPENDITURE:
Annual appropriation of funds to make payments will be determined by the City
Council in the annual adoption of the city's final budget or any amendments
thereto. (Ord. 07-21-2020A, 7-21-2020)
1-15-10: CLAIMS FROM OTHER GOVERNMENTAL AGENCIES:
Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, no application may be
accepted from the United States or any of its departments or agencies, any
state of the union, the State of Utah or any of its political subdivisions.
(Ord. 07-21-2020A, 7-21-2020)
TITLE 2
BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES 1 , 2
CHAPTER 1
PARKS AND TRAILS ADVISORY COMMITTEE
(Rep. by Ord. 3-6-2012B, 3-20-2012)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 9, chapter 1 of this code.
2 2. See also subsection 1-9-1D of this code for provisions relative to the
  takings appeal board.
CHAPTER 2
GOLF COURSE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
(Rep. by Ord. 3-6-2012A, 3-20-2012)
CHAPTER 3
YOUTH CITY COUNCIL ADVISORY COMMITTEE
SECTION:
2-3-1: Established; Membership
2-3-2: Appointments
2-3-3: Term Of Office
2-3-4: Duties And Responsibilities
2-3-5: Attendance Requirements And Dismissals
2-3-6: Officers And Duties
2-3-7: Voting
2-3-8: Meetings
2-3-9: Amendments To Bylaws
2-3-10: Assistance Provided By Community Services Department
2-3-11: Fundraising Balance
2-3-1: ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP:
The youth city council (YCC) of the City of Cedar Hills is hereby established
on October 14, 2003. The YCC shall consist of one or two (2) YCC mayors, YCC
members, and other appointed officers. (Ord. 03-05-2013A, 3-5-2013)
2-3-2: APPOINTMENTS:
YCC appointments shall be made as follows:
   A.   Minimum Requirements: YCC members must be fourteen (14) to eighteen
(18) years old, residents of the city.
   B.   Application: Those candidates interested in the position of YCC mayor,
or YCC city council shall complete and submit all required applications to be
considered for a YCC position. YCC members can run for youth mayor if they have
served at least one full term as a YCC member. All applicants who meet the
requirements set forth herein, shall be accepted to be a member of the YCC.
   C.   Names Submitted To Mayor: The YCC advisor shall submit a name for YCC
appointment to the mayor.
   D.   Appointment: YCC mayor shall be appointed by the mayor. Any other YCC
positions shall be appointed by the YCC advisor. All YCC appointments shall
serve for one term, which shall last one fiscal year.
   E.   Ex Officio Member: The mayor may appoint a member of the city council
to serve as an ex officio member of the YCC, and report YCC activities to the
mayor and city council.
(Ord. 03-05-2013A, 3-5-2013; amd. Ord. 05-05-2020A, 5-5-2020)
2-3-3: TERM OF OFFICE:
The term of office for YCC members shall be one year beginning the first week
of July and ending the last week of June the following year, with the option of
applying for subsequent terms, except in the case of the member's resignation,
removal, or disqualification from holding office. (Ord. 03-05-2013A, 3-5-2013)
2-3-4: DUTIES AND RESPONSIBILITIES:
The YCC shall act in an advisory capacity to the city council and shall have
the following duties and responsibilities:
   A.   To advise the city council on issues that affect the youth in the city.
   B.   To act as liaisons between the youth community and the city council.
   C.   To identify and advocate for the needs of youth in the city.
   D.   To identify and carry out service projects, events, and activities that
are important to the youth of the city.
   E.   To represent the city and the youth of this city when visiting other
agencies or programs.
   F.   To train as future leaders and attend workshops, conferences, forums,
seminars and meetings that further leadership skills. (Ord. 03-05-2013A, 3-5-
2013)
2-3-5: ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS AND DISMISSALS:
Members of the YCC shall be required to maintain the required attendance record
to meetings, and represent the YCC in a positive manner.
   A.   Notice Of Nonattendance: If members are unable to attend a scheduled
meeting, they must contact the YCC staff advisor prior to the meeting, or if in
the case of an emergency, up to three (3) days following the meeting, to excuse
their absence.
   B.   Unexcused Number Permitted: A total of three (3) unexcused absences
shall constitute grounds for removal from the youth city council.
   C.   Excused Percentage Permitted: All excused absences should be limited to
an amount that allows a member to maintain at least a seventy five percent
(75%) attendance rate. If excused absences reach a total that prevent a member
from keeping an attendance rate of seventy five percent (75%), it shall
constitute grounds for dismissal from the youth city council.
   D.   Exceptions For Special Circumstances: In special circumstances,
exceptions can be made to this rule as determined by the YCC advisor or a leave
of absence may be given to facilitate absences that will be of significant
duration.
(Ord. 10-14-2003A, 10-14-2003; amd. Ord. 03-05-2013A, 3-5-2013; Ord. 05-05-
2020A, 5-5-2020)
2-3-6: OFFICERS AND DUTIES:
   A.   YCC Mayor: The YCC mayor shall preside as acting mayor for a term of
twelve (12) months of office fulfilling certain duties. The YCC mayor shall
call each meeting to order, preside over all meetings, create agendas along
with the YCC advisor and YCC recorder, work closely with the YCC advisor and
the YCC members, and oversee and direct specified YCC projects.
   B.   YCC Mayor Pro Tempore: When the need arises, a mayor pro tempore shall
be appointed by the YCC advisor. The YCC mayor pro tempore shall assume the
responsibilities and duties of the YCC mayor when the YCC mayor is absent,
resigns or is incapable. The YCC mayor pro tempore shall work closely with the
YCC mayor and YCC advisor to oversee all other elected officers.
   C.   YCC Members: YCC members are required to fulfill one term.
   D.   YCC Recorder: The YCC recorder shall be responsible for the posting and
distribution of agendas and minutes and the recording of meetings and other
archives. The YCC recorder shall inform the general membership of changes to
meeting and other events through phone calls, e-mails, and the like. The YCC
recorder shall be responsible for the maintaining of agendas, minutes, and
records for the YCC.
   E.   YCC Treasurer: The YCC treasurer shall maintain and keep current
records of the YCC expenditures and revenues. Biannually and when necessary,
the YCC treasurer shall prepare a YCC treasurer's report to the YCC and city
council. The YCC treasurer will also work with the YCC mayor(s) and YCC advisor
to develop an annual budget for the city council's approval.
   F.   YCC Publicity Chair: The YCC publicity chair shall work with the YCC
mayor(s) on the development, publishing and distribution of promotional
material such as flyers, posters, announcements, and the like. The YCC
publicity chair shall send announcements, invitations and other materials
pertaining to special events to the general membership and other agencies.
Prior to releasing materials, the YCC publicity chair shall present material to
the YCC for approval.
   G.   Other Officers As Needed: The YCC advisor shall select other officer
titles as the need arises.
(Ord. 5-6-2008A, 5-6-2008; amd. Ord. 03-05-2013A, 3-5-2013; Ord. 05-05-2020A,
5-5-2020)
2-3-7: VOTING:
   A.   Number Permitted: Each member of the YCC shall have one vote.
   B.   Quorum: Fifty one percent (51%) of the voting membership of the YCC
shall constitute a quorum.
   C.   Minimum Number Of Votes Required: The minimum number of votes required
to take any action shall be four (4).
   D.   Tie Vote: In the event of a tie, the acting YCC mayor will make the
deciding vote. (Ord. 5-6-2008A, 5-6-2008)
2-3-8: MEETINGS:
   A.   Schedule: The YCC will hold meetings each month, at a designated place
and time set by the YCC and publicized at least twenty four (24) hours prior to
the meeting. The YCC annual meeting schedule will be approved in July at the
beginning of the YCC term.
   B.   Agenda: The YCC shall work from an agenda prepared in advance by the
YCC recorder with the advice of the YCC mayor(s) and YCC advisor and sent to
the city recorder for publication.
   C.   Conduct: The YCC will conduct meetings in similar fashion to the city
council, following "Robert's Rules Of Order".
   D.   Special Meetings: Special meetings may be called on the request of any
three (3) YCC members and consent of the YCC advisor; provided any notice is
not less than twenty four (24) hours' notice of such special meeting.
   E.   Changes: The YCC may at any time, by majority vote of a quorum, change
the regular meeting days and time to better accommodate the needs of the
membership, as long as the facilities are available.
(Ord. 03-05-2013A, 3-5-2013; amd. Ord. 05-05-2020A, 5-5-2020)
2-3-9: AMENDMENTS TO BYLAWS:
   A.   Proposal: Amendments to the bylaws may be proposed by any individual
member of the YCC. Proposals to amend the bylaws must be submitted in writing
and be submitted to all members of the YCC.
   B.   Majority Vote Required: Amendments to the bylaws require a majority
vote to recommend to the city council. This recommendation shall be submitted
to the city council for approval.
   C.   Filing: All amendments to the bylaws shall be filed with the city
recorder and the YCC advisor. (Ord. 10-14-2003A, 10-14-2003)
2-3-10: ASSISTANCE PROVIDED BY COMMUNITY SERVICES DEPARTMENT:
The community services department shall render reasonable assistance to the
youth city council. The department may make available staff support to the YCC
in order to fulfill its functions and duties, provided such staff and clerical
support is available. (Ord. 10-14-2003A, 10-14-2003)
2-3-11: FUNDRAISING BALANCE:
   A.   All money received through fundraising activities shall be identified
and considered a restricted fund for the purpose of youth city council. The
unrestricted fund balance shall be utilized prior to any restricted funds being
allocated. All funds received by the youth city council shall be promptly
deposited in the proper city accounts.
(Ord. 06-18-2013A, 6-18-2013; amd. Ord. 05-05-2020A, 5-5-2020)
TITLE 3
BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
BUSINESS LICENSING
SECTION:
3-1-1: Title
3-1-2: Purpose
3-1-3: Definitions
3-1-4: License Required
3-1-5: Fees
3-1-6: Procedure For Application, Registration And Licensing
3-1-7: Requirements
3-1-8: TSSD Applicability
3-1-9: Form Of License
3-1-10: Acceptance Of Application
3-1-11: Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of A License Or Registration
3-1-12: Appeal
3-1-13: Display Of License
3-1-14: Administration And Enforcement
3-1-15: Classification Of Records
3-1-16: Maintenance Of Registry
3-1-17: Citations For Violations
3-1-18: Penalty
3-1-19: Expiration Of License; Continuing Obligation; Renewal
3-1-1: TITLE:
This chapter shall be entitled the BUSINESS LICENSE ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF
CEDAR HILLS, UTAH, and may be cited and pleaded. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006)
3-1-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the regulation of all
business activities within the City where authorized by statute.
   B.   Residents of the City have an inalienable interest in their personal
safety, well-being, and privacy in their residences and throughout the
community. Residents also have an inalienable interest in their ability to
provide or receive information regarding matters of personal belief, political
or charitable activities, and goods and services lawfully in commerce.
   C.   The City has a substantial interest in protecting the well-being,
tranquility, personal safety, and privacy of its citizens, which includes the
ability to protect citizens from unwanted intrusions upon residential property,
public health, safety, and welfare. The City also has a substantial interest in
protecting citizens from fraud or otherwise unfair consumer sales practices as
well as criminal activity.
   D.   The City finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in
this chapter are narrowly tailored to preserve and protect the City interests
referred to herein while at the same time balancing the rights of those
regulated.
   E.   The City has a substantial interest in creating a set of standards that
allows for business activities to be conducted in both commercial zones as well
as in home based businesses. The provision of this chapter establishes the
minimum standards for review and approval of business licenses as well as
establishes the basic standards for regulation. (Ord. 05-02-2017A, 5-2-2017)
3-1-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
ADVOCATING: Speech or conduct intended to inform, promote, or support religious
belief, political position, or charitable activities.
APPEALS BOARD: The City Council of the City.
APPELLANT: The person or entity appealing the denial or suspension of a
license, either personally as an applicant or registered solicitor, or on
behalf of the applicant or registered solicitor.
APPLICANT: A person who is at least eighteen (18) years of age who applies for
a license.
APPLICATION: A standardized form provided by the City to an applicant to be
completed and submitted as part of registration.
BUREAU OF CRIMINAL INVESTIGATION (BCI) BACKGROUND CHECK: An original dated no
older than one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the date of the application
of a Utah Department of Public Safety Bureau of Criminal Identification
verified criminal history report personal to the applicant or equivalent report
prepared by the corresponding public safety agency of the applicant's home
State if the applicant is not a Utah resident.
BUSINESS: All activities engaged within the incorporated limits of the City,
carried on for the purpose of gain or economic profit including nonprofit
entities. Business includes, but is not limited to, the sale of intellectual or
tangible personal property at retail or wholesale, the manufacturing of goods
or property, and the rendering of personal services for others for
consideration by persons engaged in any profession, trade, craft, business,
occupation, or other calling. Business includes those registered with the State
and/or those with a sales tax number. Business shall not mean the rendering of
personal services by an employee to his or her employer under any contract of
personal service.
CHARITABLE ACTIVITIES: Advocating by persons or entities that either are, or
support, a charitable organization.
CHARITABLE ORGANIZATION: Any person that is:
   A.   A benevolent, educational, voluntary health, philanthropic, humane,
patriotic, religious or eleemosynary, social welfare or advocacy, public
health, environmental or conservation, or civic organization;
   B.   For the benefit of a public safety, law enforcement, or firefighter
fraternal association;
   C.   Tax exempt under applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of
1986, as amended, and qualified to solicit and receive tax deductible
contributions from the public for charitable purposes;
   D.   A chapter, branch, area, or office, or similar affiliate or any person
soliciting contributions within the State for a charitable organization that
has its principal place of business outside the City or State of Utah 1 ;
   E.   A student soliciting contributions to finance extracurricular social,
athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural programs, provided that the
solicitation has been approved in writing by the school administration, and
that such student solicitors carry current picture student identification from
the educational institution for which they are soliciting.
CHECK CASHING: An organization involved in the providing of loans or
consideration to customers in exchange for personal property, such as property
titles or personal checks. Such services shall include check cashing businesses
licensed and/or defined by the State pursuant to the Check Cashing Registration
Act, car title loan businesses, deferred deposit loan businesses, and
businesses of a similar nature offering such services as a primary function.
The term financial service shall not include fully automated stand alone
services, such as automated teller machines, or those used defined as bank or
financial institution.
CITY: The City of Cedar Hills, Utah.
COMMERCIAL BUSINESS: A business conducted in the SC-1 Commercial Zone or a
residential zone allowing a commercial use as outlined and defined in this
chapter.
COMMERCIAL VEHICLE: Any vehicle, trailer or construction equipment that is
primarily used in a trade or business that bears any logo or other
advertisement of a trade or business, or that is actually being used in a trade
or business.
COMPETENT INDIVIDUAL: A person claiming or appearing to be at least eighteen
(18) years of age and of sufficiently sound mind and body to be able to engage
in rational thought, conversation, and conduct.
COMPLETED APPLICATION: A fully completed application, a BCI background check, a
copy of the original identification relied on by the applicant to establish
proof of identity, and the tendering of fees.
CRIMINALLY CONVICTED: The final entry of a conviction, whether by a plea of no
contest, guilty, entry of a judicial or jury finding of guilt, which has not
been set aside on appeal or pursuant to a writ of habeas corpus. The criminal
conviction is that offense of which the applicant was convicted, without regard
to the reduced status of the charge after completion of conditions of probation
or parole, and charges dismissed under a plea in abeyance or diversion
agreement.
DISQUALIFYING STATUS: Anything specifically defined in this chapter as
requiring the denial, suspension, or revocation of a license, and any of the
following:
   A.   The applicant has been criminally convicted of: 1) felony homicide, 2)
physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, 3) the sale or
distribution of controlled substances, or 4) sexual assault of any kind;
   B.   Criminal charges currently pending against the applicant for: 1) felony
homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, 3)
the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or 4) sexual assault of any
kind;
   C.   The applicant has been criminally convicted of a felony within the last
ten (10) years;
   D.   The applicant has been incarcerated in a Federal or State prison within
the past five (5) years;
   E.   The applicant has been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor within the
past five (5) years involving a crime of: 1) moral turpitude, or 2) violent or
aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
   F.   A final civil judgment has been entered against the applicant within
the last five (5) years indicating that: 1) the applicant had either engaged in
fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of the applicant was
nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)(2), (a)(4),
(a)(6), or (a)(19);
   G.   The applicant is currently on parole or probation to any court, penal
institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest or
subject to a tracking device;
H.The applicant has an outstanding arrest warrant from any jurisdiction; or
   I.   The applicant is currently subject to a protective order based on
physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
EMPLOYEE: The operator, owner, or manager of a place of business and any
persons employed by such person in the operation of that place of business, in
any capacity, and also any salesman, agent, or independent contractor engaged
in the operation of that place of business, in any capacity.
ENTITY: A corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful
entity, organization, society or association.
FEES: The cost charged to the applicant for the issuance of a license and/or
identification badge, which shall not exceed the reasonable costs of processing
the application and issuing the license and/or identification badge.
FINAL CIVIL JUDGMENT: A civil judgment that would be recognized under State law
as a judgment to which collateral estoppel would apply.
GOODS: One (1) or more tangible items, wares, objects of merchandise,
perishables of any kind, subscriptions, or manufactured products offered,
provided, or sold.
HOME BASED BUSINESS: A business conducted entirely out of the home, the public
and/or employees may enter the home, goods may be produced, and there may be a
material impact. A home based business is required to have a business license.
HOME BASED OFFICE: A business conducted entirely out of the home, where the
public and/or employees do not enter the home, where there is nothing produced,
and where there is not a material impact.
HOME OCCUPATION: A business conducted out of a residential dwelling as outlined
and defined in this chapter.
LICENSE: A document issued by the City evidencing permission of its named
holder to carry on a particular business pursuant to the terms of this chapter.
LICENSEE: The person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to the
provisions of this chapter.
LICENSING OFFICIAL: The City Manager or designee responsible for receiving the
completed application for registration.
MATERIAL OFFSITE IMPACT: An impact that a residential home based business has
that exceeds the impact of a residential home alone. The impact may be based on
traffic, noise, lighting, odor, or utility services. Businesses that are
determined to have a material offsite impact shall be required to pay all
business licensing fees.
MORAL TURPITUDE: Of or relating to moral action and conduct; professionally
right; conforming to professional standards.
NO SOLICITATION SIGN: A reasonably visible and legible sign that states "No
Soliciting", "No Solicitors", "No Salespersons", "No Trespassing", or words of
similar import.
OCCASIONALLY: A business is operated occasionally when the operation of the
business occurs less than four (4) times per year or on a seasonal basis and by
an individual who is under the age of eighteen (18).
PEDDLERS: Any person who conducts the business of selling products from a
moving vehicle or from a vehicle that continuously moves from one (1) location
to another.
PERSON: Any individual, firm, corporation, company, general or limited
partnership, joint venture, business trust, receiver, club, assignee for the
benefit of creditors, trustee in bankruptcy, trust, estate, foundation,
association, or any other form of organization, society, or other group of
individuals acting as a unit, whether mutual, cooperative, fraternal, nonprofit
or otherwise.
POLITICAL POSITION: Any actually held belief, or information for, against, or
in conjunction with any political, social, environmental, or humanitarian
belief or practice.
PREMISES OCCUPATION: A business conducted out of a customary residential
accessory structure.
REGISTERED PERSON: Any person whose application has been approved by the City.
REGISTRATION: The process used by the Licensing Official to accept a completed
application and determine whether or not a license will be issued, denied,
suspended, or revoked.
RELIGIOUS BELIEF: Any sincerely held belief, or information for, against, or in
conjunction with, any theistic, agnostic, or atheistic assumption, presumption
or position, or religious doctrine, dogma, or practice regardless of whether or
not the belief or information is endorsed by any other person or public or
private entity.
RESIDENCE: Any living unit contained within any building or structure that is
occupied by any person as a dwelling consistent with the zoning regulations of
the City, together with the lot or other real property on which the living unit
is located. This does not include the sidewalk, public street or public rights-
of-way.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON/ENTITY: That person or entity responsible to provide the
following to an applicant and the competent individual to whom a sale of goods
or services is made or attempted to be made:
   A.   Maintaining a State sales tax number, a special events sales tax
number, computing the sales taxes owing from any sale of goods or services,
paying the sales taxes, and filing any required returns or reports;
   B.   Facilitating and responding to requests from consumers who desire to
cancel the sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or law; and
   C.   Refunding any monies paid or reversing credit card charges to those
persons who timely rescind any sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights
or law.
SALE OF GOODS OR SERVICES: The conduct and agreement of a business and the
competent individual regarding a particular good(s) or service(s) that entitles
the consumer to rescind the same within three (3) days under any applicable
Federal, State, or local law.
SERVICES: Those intangible goods or personal benefits offered, provided, or
sold.
SOLICITING OR SOLICIT OR SOLICITATION OR DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION: The
practice of going upon the premises of any residence or commercial property in
the City, not having been invited by the occupant thereof, for the purpose of
engaging in or attempting to engage in conversation with any person at a
residence, whether or not that person is a competent individual, while making
or seeking to make any of the following activities:
   A.   Obtain sales or orders for the exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or
perishables of any kind, for any kind of remuneration or consideration,
regardless of whether advance payment is sought;
   B.   Obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase insurance,
subscriptions to publications, or publications;
   C.   Obtain contributions of money or any other thing of value for the
benefit of any person or entity;
   D.   Obtain orders or prospective customers for goods or services;
   E.   Engage an individual in conversation at a residence for the purpose of
promoting or facilitating the receipt of information regarding religious
belief, political position, charitable conduct, or a home solicitation sale.
SOLICITOR(S): A person engaged in solicitation.
SUBMITTED IN WRITING: The information for an appeal of a denial, suspension, or
revocation of a license, submitted in any type of written statement to the City
offices by certified, registered, priority, overnight or delivery confirmation
mail, facsimile, or hand delivery.
SUBSTANTIATED REPORT: A written or electronic report:
   A.   That is submitted to and documented by the City;
   B.   By any of the following:
  1. A competent individual who is willing to provide law enforcement or other
City employees with publicly available identification of their name, address,
and any other reliable means of contact;
  2. City law enforcement or Licensing Official; or
  3. Any other regularly established law enforcement agency at any level of
government;
   C.   That provides any of the following information regarding a business:
  1. Documented verification of a previously undisclosed disqualifying status
of a business;
  2. Probable cause that the business has committed a disqualifying status that
has not yet been determined to be a disqualifying status;
  3. Documented, eyewitness accounts that the business has engaged in repeated
patterns of behavior that demonstrates failure by the business to adhere to the
requirements of this chapter; or
  4. Probable cause that the business creates exigent circumstances that
threaten the health, safety, or welfare of any individuals or entities within
the City.
TEMPORARY BUSINESS: A licensed vendor under this chapter.
TEMPORARY USE BUSINESS: A business defined as a commercial business conducted
as outlined and defined in this chapter.
VENDOR: A business that is temporarily located on a site that has been approved
by the City for a specific period of time.
WAIVER: The written form provided to the applicant by the City wherein the
applicant agrees that the City may obtain a name/date of birth BCI background
check on the applicant for registration under this chapter. (Ord. 05-02-2017A,
5-2-2017)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 13-22-2(1)(a), (b).
3-1-4: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   Applicability: It shall be unlawful for any person to maintain, carry
on, operate, or engage in any business; or to hold itself out to the public for
such purpose without first procuring a license to do so from the City. This
chapter shall apply to all persons who conduct a business operation: 1) from a
structure or location within the City; 2) from a residence subject to prior
approval as a home occupation; 3) from an automobile or other type of mobile
unit subject to prior approval as a peddler or vendor; or 4) on foot subject to
prior approval as a solicitor; provided, that the City may waive the license
requirement where in the opinion of the Licensing Official the business
activity qualifies as an exception, in accordance with the provision of
subsection D of this section.
   B.   Separate Licenses Required For Each Business: A separate license shall
be required for each business. A business desiring to facilitate or attempt to
facilitate sales with different: 1) goods or services; or 2) responsible person
or entity, from those designated in the originally submitted completed
application, shall submit a new completed application for processing.
   C.   Nontransferability Of License(s): Any license issued under the
provisions of this chapter is nontransferable. The license does not authorize
any person or entity other than those identified in the application to do
business in the City, nor does it authorize any other business than the
business named in the license to do business.
   D.   Exceptions: This chapter shall not apply to:
      1.   Activities that are of an infrequent nature and carried on at such
an incidental level as to not require regulation by the City as determined by
the Licensing Official.
      2.   Firms providing incidental delivery of goods purchased by residents
from locations outside of the City. Also, wholesale firms delivering supplies
and materials to established businesses within the City.
      3.   Agricultural enterprises producing commodities for sale on the
premises.
      4.   Legally registered charitable and non-profit organizations or 501(C)
(3) and legally registered 501(c)(4) organizations and recognized as such by
the Internal Revenue Service.
      5.   A home based business that is operated only occasionally and by an
individual who is under eighteen (18) years of age.
      6.   A home based office. (Ord. 05-02-2017A, 5-2-2017)
3-1-5: FEES:
The City may assess fees for the reasonable cost of processing the application
and issuing the license and/or identification badge(s). Fees may also be
assessed for the purpose of defraying costs related to regulatory costs,
disproportionate costs for services and enhanced service costs. The amount of
fees charged shall be set forth by resolution of the City Council. All fees
shall be paid in advance at the time application is made to the Licensing
Official. No fee, or any part of it, shall be refunded for any reason once
registration has commenced. (Ord. 05-02-2017A, 5-2-2017)
3-1-6: PROCEDURE FOR APPLICATION, REGISTRATION AND LICENSING:
   A.   Application For License: The Licensing Official shall consider all
applications for a license, which shall be made in writing. The City shall
provide a standard application for the registration of businesses. Each
application must be signed, filled out completely and accompanied by the
appropriate fee. Each application shall require disclosure and reporting by the
applicant of the following information and documentation:
      1.   Name: The name of the business.
      2.   Function: Function of the business.
      3.   Review Of Written Disclosures: An affirmation that the applicant has
received and reviewed the disclosure information required by this chapter.
      4.   Contact Information:
         a.   Applicant's true, correct and legal name, including any former
names or aliases used during the last ten (10) years;
         b.   Applicant's telephone number, home address and mailing address,
if different;
         c.   If different from the applicant, the name, address, and telephone
number of the responsible person or entity; and
         d.   The address by which all notices to the applicant required under
this chapter are to be sent.
      5.   Proof Of Identity: The applicant shall provide an identification
photograph of himself or herself and appear before the Licensing Official for
an in person verification of identity. Any of the following proof of identity
may be used:
         a.   A valid driver's license issued by any state;
         b.   A valid passport issued by the United States;
         c.   A valid identification card issued by any state;
         d.   A valid identification issued by a branch of the United States
military;
         e.   A valid passport issued outside the United States.
Upon verification of identity, the original identification submitted to
establish proof of identity shall be returned to the applicant.
      6.   Proof Of Registration With Department Of Commerce: The applicant
shall provide proof that either the applicant, or the responsible person or
entity, has registered with the Utah State Department of Commerce.
      7.   State Licensing: Proof of appropriate State licensing if required by
the State.
      8.   Type: The type of license desired.
      9.   Fee; Fee To Be Paid: If it is determined that the impact of a home
based business materially exceeds a standard residential dwelling, the owner of
the business shall be required to pay for a business license; such a
determination shall be made by the City Business License Official.
      10.   Execution Of Application: The applicant shall execute the
application, stating upon oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that
based on the present knowledge and belief of the applicant, the information
provided is complete, truthful and accurate.
      11.   Additional Information: Such additional information as the City
deems necessary for the guidance of the City in considering the application and
registration of the business. Such additional information may include
information regarding an applicant's criminal history as further outlined in
the definition of "disqualifying status".
   B.   Registration And Licensing: The registration process shall not begin
unless the applicant has submitted a completed application. Within ten (10)
business days, the Licensing Official shall:
      1.   Registration:
         a.   Take any and all actions it deems appropriate to verify the
truthfulness and completeness of the information submitted and disclosed by the
applicant.
         b.   Obtain a recommendation from the Chief Building Official, Zoning
Administrator and/or Fire Chief after the appropriate inspection, when
applicable.
         c.   Accept the application or deny the application.
      2.   Licensing: Upon completion of registration, the Licensing Official
shall issue a license. (Ord. 05-02-2017A, 5-2-2017)
3-1-7: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Compliance: Each place of business may be inspected by the City for
compliance with building, fire, land use, and health codes prior to opening for
business. No business shall be registered if the premises and/or building to be
used are not in compliance with the building, fire, land use and health codes.
An inspection may be required when the general public or a nonresident employee
will be entering the business, and/or when hazardous chemicals and/or materials
are located at the business.
   B.   Inspections:
      1.   Whenever inspections are required or are considered reasonably
necessary to secure compliance with any provision of this chapter or State
statute or regulation, or to detect violations thereof; it shall be the duty of
the licensee or the person in charge of the premises to be inspected to admit
thereto, for the purpose of making the inspection, any official, officer or
employee of the City, County or State who is authorized or directed to make
such inspection at any reasonable time that admission is requested.
      2.   In addition to any other penalty that may be provided, the Licensing
Official may revoke the license of any business in the City that refuses to
permit any such authorized official, officer or employee to make the
inspection, or interferes with such official, officer or employee while in the
performance of his duty in making such inspection; provided, that no license
shall be revoked under this provision unless written demand is made upon the
licensee and/or person in charge of the premises, in the name of the City or
the State, stating that such inspection is desired at the time it is sought to
make the inspection.
   C.   BCI Background Check: An original BCI background check for the
applicant and for all employees of the applicant conducting "business" within
the City as defined in section
3-1-3 of this chapter is required for the following businesses. The Licensing
Official shall make a copy and return the original to the applicant.
      1.   Businesses whose primary purpose is providing services to minors.
      2.   Businesses providing services to the elderly.
      3.   Peddlers and vendors.
      4.   Solicitors.
   D.   Sales Tax Number: All businesses that offer the sale of goods or
services shall have a permanent or temporary sales tax number. (Ord. 05-02-
2017A, 5-2-2017)
3-1-8: TSSD APPLICABILITY:
Provisions of the Timpanogos Special Service District (TSSD) shall be adhered
to by any person requesting a business license. Copies of the TSSD contract and
resolution are available upon request. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006; amd. Ord.
3-20-2012A, 3-20-2012)
3-1-9: FORM OF LICENSE:
The City shall provide a standard license for businesses. The license shall
bear the name of the City and shall be dated and signed by the License
Official. The license shall contain: a) the name of the registered applicant
and/or the responsible person or entity, if any; b) address of the registered
applicant and/or the responsible person or entity, if any; and c) the date on
which the license expires. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006; amd. Ord. 3-20-2012A,
3-20-2012)
3-1-10: ACCEPTANCE OF APPLICATION:
In the event the License Official registers an application for a license, the
application shall be endorsed and a license shall be issued. (Ord. 11-21-2006A,
11-21-2006; amd. Ord. 3-20-2012A, 3-20-2012)
3-1-11: DENIAL, SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF A LICENSE OR REGISTRATION:
   A.   Denial: Upon review, the licensing official shall refuse to issue a
license to an applicant for any of the following reasons:
      1.   The information submitted by the applicant is found to be incomplete
or incorrect;
      2.   Since the submission of the completed application or renewal
application, the applicant is subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown
disqualifying status;
      3.   Failure to complete payment of the fees;
      4.   Since the submission of the application or granting of a license,
the city has received a substantiated report regarding the past or present
conduct of the applicant;
      5.   Since the submission of the application, the city or other
governmental entity has either criminally convicted or obtained a civil
injunction against the applicant for violating this chapter or similar federal,
state, or municipal laws in a manner rising to the level of a disqualifying
status;
      6.   Since the submission of the application, a final civil judgment has
been entered against the applicant indicating that: a) the applicant had either
engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or b) a debt of the
applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)
(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19);
      7.   Failure to allow the required inspection; or
      8.   The applicant is determined to have a "disqualifying status" as
defined herein.
   B.   Suspension Or Revocation: The city shall either suspend or revoke a
license when any of the reasons warranting the denial of a license occurs.
   C.   Notice Of Denial, Suspension Or Revocation: Upon determination of the
licensing official to deny an applicant's completed application or to suspend
or revoke a license, the city shall cause written notice to be sent to the
applicant. The notice shall specify the grounds for the denial, suspension, or
revocation; the documentation or information the city relied on to make the
decision; the availability of the documentation for review by applicant upon
notice to the city; and the date upon which the denial, suspension, or
revocation of the license shall take effect. It shall further state that the
applicant shall have ten (10) business days from the receipt of the notice of
denial, suspension, or revocation to appeal the same. The denial, suspension,
or revocation of the license shall be effective immediately. The denial or
suspension shall remain effective unless and until the order is rescinded,
overturned on appeal, or determined by a court to be contrary to equity or law.
Failure to appeal the suspension of a license automatically results in its
revocation. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006; amd. Ord. 3-20-2012A, 3-20-2012)
3-1-12: APPEAL:
An applicant whose license has been denied, suspended, or revoked shall have
the right to appeal to the appeals board. Any appeal must be submitted by
either the applicant, the responsible person or entity, or legal counsel for
either who: a) documents the relationship with the applicant or responsible
person or entity; or b) is licensed or authorized by the state of Utah to do
so, and makes the assertion of an agency relationship. The following procedures
and requirements shall apply:
   A.   Any appeal must be submitted in writing to the city recorder within ten
(10) business days of the decision from which the appeal is taken. Such appeal
shall describe in detail the nature of the appeal, the action complained of,
and the grounds for appeal.
   B.   Upon request of the applicant, the city will make available any
information upon which it relied in making the determination to either deny or
suspend the license.
   C.   The appeals board shall review, de novo, all written information
submitted by the applicant to the licensing official, any additional
information relied upon by the licensing official as the basis for denial,
suspension or revocation, and any additional information supplied by the city
or applicant. Any additional information submitted by any party to the appeal
to the appeals board shall be simultaneously submitted to the opposing party.
   D.   The appeals board will render a decision no later than fifteen (15)
calendar days or the next available city council meeting from the date the
appeal was taken, unless an extension of time is agreed upon by the parties.
      1.   The denial, suspension, or revocation of the license shall be
reversed by the appeals board if upon review of the written appeal and
information submitted, the appeals board finds that the licensing official made
a material mistake of law or fact in denying, suspending, or revoking the
applicant's license.
      2.   If the written appeal and information submitted indicates that the
licensing official properly denied, suspended, or revoked the license of the
applicant, the denial or suspension of the license shall be affirmed and
constitute a determination that the suspended license is revoked.
      3.   A written decision of the appeals board shall be delivered to the
applicant.
   E.   After the ruling of the appeals board, the applicant is deemed to have
exhausted all administrative remedies with the city.
   F.   Nothing herein shall impede or interfere with the applicant's or city's
right to seek relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 11-21-2006A,
11-21-2006; amd. Ord. 3-20-2012A, 3-20-2012)
3-1-13: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
Every license issued under this chapter shall be posted by the licensee in a
conspicuous place, preferably upon an interior wall at the place of business,
so that the same may be easily seen. Those businesses that do not maintain a
permanent location or building in the city shall carry the license at all times
when conducting business in the city. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006; amd. Ord.
3-20-2012A, 3-20-2012)
3-1-14: ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Administration: The license official shall be responsible for the
enforcement of this chapter. The license official may, on his or her own
initiative, or in response to complaints referred from the general public or a
city department, investigate and gather evidence of violations of the licensing
provisions of this chapter or any other city ordinances.
   B.   Nuisances: No business, whether licensed or not, shall be conducted or
operated so as to amount to a nuisance. Substantiated complaints may contribute
to consideration of a nuisance.
   C.   Business To Comply With Other Ordinances: No license shall be issued
for the conduct of any business, and no license shall be issued for any thing
or act, if the premises and building to be used for the purpose does not fully
comply with the requirements of this code. No such license shall be issued for
the conduct of any business or performance of any act that would involve a
violation of the zoning regulations of the city. Any license so issued shall be
null and void. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006; amd. Ord. 3-20-2012A, 3-20-2012)
3-1-15: CLASSIFICATION OF RECORDS:
Business and license records shall be public records and information contained
in them shall be public except for specific items of data that the city
recorder classifies as private, controlled, or protected consistent with the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated 63G et seq., government records access and
management act. To the extent permitted by state and/or federal law, a BCI
background check shall remain a private record not available for public
inspection. (Ord. 3-20-2012A, 3-20-2012)
3-1-16: MAINTENANCE OF REGISTRY:
The license official shall keep and maintain a registry containing the names of
all licensees. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006; amd. Ord. 3-20-2012A, 3-20-2012)
3-1-17: CITATIONS FOR VIOLATIONS:
The license official shall, in the discharge and performance of his or her
official duties, have and exercise the power to issue citations for the
violation of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-
2006; amd. Ord. 3-20-2012A, 3-20-2012)
3-1-18: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation who operates or conducts a business within the
city without having a current and valid business license, or who violates any
of the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006; amd. Ord. 3-20-2012A, 3-20-
2012)
3-1-19: EXPIRATION OF LICENSE; CONTINUING OBLIGATION; RENEWAL:
A license shall be valid for one year and shall expire at twelve o'clock (12:
00) midnight one year from the date issued. Renewals received after the
expiration date will be subject to late fees. Any license that is not
suspended, revoked, or expired may be renewed upon receipt of a completed
renewal application, provided, that the conditions below are met:
   A.   The operation of the business remains substantially the same as
initially approved; and
   B.   The business has remained in active operation as evidenced by the
acquisition of a valid business license for the previous year; and
   C.   There are no unresolved violations of this code or continued,
substantiated complaints; and
   D.   No conditions for the denial, suspension or revocation of a license are
present as set forth in section
3-1-11 of this chapter, or a disqualifying status is present. (Ord. 11-21-
2006A, 11-21-2006; amd. Ord. 3-20-2012A, 3-20-2012)
ARTICLE A.  COMMERCIAL BUSINESS
SECTION:
3-1A-1: Requirements And Conditions
3-1A-1: REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   A commercial business may be permitted and operated following approval
and registration of an application for such use and subject to and in
compliance with the following conditions:
      1.   Title 10, chapter 4, article E of this code.
      2.   Title 10, chapter 6, article A of this code.
      3.   "Guidelines For The Design And Review Of Planned Commercial
Development Projects".
      4.   Section
10-5-25, "Bed And Breakfast Facility", of this code.
      5.   Section
10-5-34, "Assisted Living Facility For Elderly Persons", of this code. (Ord. 3-
20-2012A, 3-20-2012)
ARTICLE B.  HOME OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
3-1B-1: Purpose
3-1B-2: License Required
3-1B-3: Requirements And Conditions
3-1B-4: Prohibited Uses
3-1B-5: Exemptions
3-1B-6: Revocation
3-1B-7: Appeal
3-1B-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   It is the purpose of this article to establish guidelines, conditions
and requirements for limited nonagricultural business activities in Residential
Zones. For the purposes of this article, "home occupation" is defined as an
occupation or profession in which the associated activity or use is clearly
incidental and secondary to the residential use of a dwelling unit, and
accessory buildings, there is no alteration to the exterior of the dwelling
unit to accommodate the occupation or profession, and such occupation or
profession does not adversely affect the residential character of the
surrounding neighborhood. A home occupation should be conducted in such a way
that neighbors or passersby would not, under normal circumstances, be aware of
its existence. (Ord. 01-08-2019A, 1-8-2019)
3-1B-2: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any entity to engage in a home occupation in
any Residential Zone without first obtaining a home occupation business license
to do so from the City business license official.
   B.   Businesses that do not have combined offsite impacts of the home based
business and the primary residential use that exceed the impact of the
residential use alone shall pay a licensing fee to cover the cost of issuing
the license, as set forth in the City's consolidated fee schedule. (Ord. 01-08-
2019A, 1-8-2019)
3-1B-3: REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Home occupations may be permitted and operated following receipt and
approval of an application for such use, subject to, and in compliance with the
following conditions:
      1.   Home occupations are listed as a conditional use in the zone.
      2.   The home occupation shall be conducted entirely within the living
area of the dwelling or accessory building and shall not be visible from
outside of the structure. The home occupation shall not involve the use of any
garages, carports, breezeways, or yard space for storage of materials or
products.
      3.   The home occupation shall contain no facilities for the display of
goods visible from outside the dwelling.
      4.   All residents, visitors, and employees who arrive at the home
because of the home occupation shall be legally parked on the lot occupied by
the residence or on that part of the street that immediately abuts the lot. All
parking must comply with title 5, "Public Safety And Traffic Regulations", of
this Code.
      5.   No commercial vehicles shall be located on the premises, except two
(2) vehicles (not to exceed 1 ton weighted rating) or trailer (not to exceed 12
feet) that is primarily used in connection with the home occupation. No on
street parking of any commercial vehicle or equipment is allowed.
      6.   The home occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to the
use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and shall not change the character of
the building from that of a dwelling. Any structure used as part of the home
occupation must have obtained a building permit and received a certificate of
occupancy from the Building Department.
      7.   Signs shall also comply with the requirements of the City's sign
regulations in section
10-5-26, "Signs", of this Code.
      8.   The home occupation shall occupy an area of not more than twenty
five percent (25%) of the combined total living area of the main dwelling and
accessory structure.
      9.   Entrance to the home occupation from the outside shall be the same
entrance normally used by the residing family; the garage door shall not be
used to satisfy this requirement.
      10.   The operation of the home occupation shall not produce any noise,
smoke, glare, light, fumes, dust, or similar condition that is readily
discernible outside the dwelling or that interferes with the residential use of
adjacent properties.
      11.   The home occupation shall not generate traffic between the hours of
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
      12.   The physical appearance, traffic or other activities in connection
with the home occupation are not contrary to the intent of the zone in which
the home occupation is located and do not depreciate surrounding values.
      13.   All preschool, daycare and childcare facilities shall also be
required to obtain a City business license. Daycare, preschool or childcare
facilities with more than four (4) children (same children) for more than four
(4) hours per day shall obtain a license from the State Department of Human
Services; and also comply with all lawful requirements for preschool, daycare
or childcare facilities in Utah.
      14.   The home occupation shall not have more than two (2) nonresiding
employees working at the residence.
      15.   BCI background check (subsection 3-1-7C of this chapter).
      16.   Sales Tax number (subsection 3-1-7D of this chapter). (Ord. 01-08-
2019A, 1-8-2019)
3-1B-4: PROHIBITED USES:
The following home occupation activities are prohibited:
   A.   The use of materials or chemicals in amounts that will significantly
increase hazards or decrease safety to the structure or occupants or of
adjacent structures or occupants;
   B.   The use of mechanical or electrical apparatus, equipment or tools shall
not exceed those commonly associated with residential use or home crafts;
   C.   Auto, truck, motorcycle, boat, trailer repair;
   D.   On site carpentry work including furniture and cabinet making or other
similar uses which generate noise, dust or fumes;
   E.   Major appliance repair (washers, dryers, refrigerators, etc.);
   F.   Dental and medical offices;
   G.   Small engine repair;
   H.   Auto body work; and
   I.   Sexually oriented businesses. (Ord. 01-08-2019A, 1-8-2019)
3-1B-5: EXEMPTIONS:
The following uses are exempt from the provisions of this article:
   A.   Sale of goods or services by residents age eighteen (18) or under;
   B.   Temporary home occupations, such as garage sales, yard sales, or craft
boutiques that occur not more than four (4) times a year with each event not
lasting more than seventy two (72) hours;
   C.   Promotional meetings for the purpose of taking orders for merchandise,
by invitation only, which occur not more than once each month;
   D.   Community or neighborhood fundraisers; and
   E.   Other exemptions as specifically approved in writing by the City
Council. (Ord. 01-08-2019A, 1-8-2019)
3-1B-6: REVOCATION:
Violation of, or failure to comply with, the requirements of this article may
result in revocation by the City business license official of the home
occupation business license. Any activity presenting an immediate threat to the
health, safety and welfare of the neighboring residents may be ordered
terminated immediately by the City business license official. (Ord. 01-08-
2019A, 1-8-2019)
3-1B-7: APPEAL:
Any person or entity denied a home occupation business license shall have the
right to appeal such denial to the City Council if a written request for an
appeal is made to the City within thirty (30) days of the denial. (Ord. 01-08-
2019A, 1-8-2019)
ARTICLE C.  PEDDLERS AND VENDORS
SECTION:
3-1C-1: Requirements And Conditions
3-1C-1: REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Peddlers and vendors may be permitted and operated following approval
and registration of an application for such use and subject to and in
compliance with the following conditions:
      1.   Sales tax number (subsection 3-1-7D of this chapter).
      2.   All employees conducting business within the city must provide
current photo identification at the time of application.
      3.   BCI background check (subsection 3-1-7C of this chapter).
      4.   Businesses shall only conduct business between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. to nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. (Ord. 3-20-2012A, 3-20-2012)
ARTICLE D.  SOLICITATION
SECTION:
3-1D-1: Purpose
3-1D-2: No Other City License Or Approval Required
3-1D-3: Exemptions
3-1D-4: Prohibited
3-1D-5: Application
3-1D-6: Written Disclosures
3-1D-7: Identification Badge
3-1D-8: Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited
3-1D-9: No Solicitation Notice
3-1D-10: Duties Of Solicitors
3-1D-11: Time Of Day Restrictions
3-1D-12: Buyer's Right To Cancel
3-1D-1: PURPOSE:
   A.   There must be a balance between the substantial interests of the city
and its citizens, and the effect of the regulations in this article on the
rights of those who are regulated. Based on the collective experiences of city
officials derived from regulating business activity, protecting persons and
property from criminal conduct, responding to the inquiries of citizens
regarding door to door solicitation, the experience of its law enforcement
officers and those affected by door to door canvassing and solicitation, as
well as judicial decisions outlining the boundaries of constitutional
protections afforded and denied persons seeking to engage in door to door
solicitation, the city adopts this article to promote the city's substantial
interests in:
      1.   Respecting citizens' decisions regarding privacy in their
residences;
      2.   Protecting persons from criminal conduct;
      3.   Providing equal opportunity to advocate for and against religious
belief, political position, or charitable activities; and
      4.   Permitting truthful and nonmisleading door to door solicitation
regarding lawful goods or services in intrastate or interstate commerce. (Ord.
11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006)
3-1D-2: NO OTHER CITY LICENSE OR APPROVAL REQUIRED:
   A.   Registered solicitors and persons exempt from registration need not
apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or registration from the city
to engage in door to door solicitation.
   B.   Any business licensed by the city under this code that uses employees,
independent contractors, or agents for door to door solicitation in an effort
to provide any tangible or intangible benefit to the business, shall be
required to have such solicitors obtain a license, unless otherwise exempt from
registration.
   C.   Those responsible persons or entities associated with registered
solicitors need not apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or
registration from the city, provided they do not establish a temporary or fixed
place of business in the city.
   D.   Nothing herein is intended to interfere with or supplant any other
requirement of federal, state, or other local government law regarding any
license, permit, or certificate that a registered solicitor is otherwise
required to have or maintain. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006)
3-1D-3: EXEMPTIONS:
The following are exempt from registration under this article:
   A.   Persons specifically invited to a residence by a competent individual
prior to the time of the person's arrival at the residence;
   B.   Persons whose license, permit, certificate or registration with the
state of Utah permits them to engage in door to door solicitation to offer
goods or services to an occupant of the residence;
   C.   Persons delivering goods to a residence pursuant to a previously made
order, or persons providing services at a residence pursuant to a previously
made request by a competent individual;
   D.   Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against, or in
conjunction with, any religious belief, or political position regardless of
whether goods, services, or any other consideration is offered or given, with
or without any form of commitment, contribution, donation, pledge, or purchase;
and
   E.   Persons representing a charitable organization.
Those persons exempt from registration are not exempt from the duties and
prohibitions outlined in sections
3-1D-8,
3-1D-10,
3-1D-11 and
3-1D-12 of this article while advocating or soliciting. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-
21-2006)
3-1D-4: PROHIBITED:
Unless otherwise authorized, permitted, or exempted pursuant to the terms and
provisions of this article, the practice of being in and upon a private
residence within the city by solicitors, for the purpose of home solicitation
sales or to provide goods or services, is prohibited and is punishable as set
forth in this chapter. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006)
3-1D-5: APPLICATION:
   A.   In addition to section
3-1-6, "Procedure For Application, Registration And Licensing", of this
chapter, each application shall require disclosure and reporting by the
applicant of the following information and documentation:
      1.   Special Events Sales Tax Number: The applicant shall provide a
special events sales tax number for either the applicant, or for the
responsible person or entity for which the applicant will be soliciting.
      2.   Marketing Information:
         a.   The goods or services offered by the applicant, including any
commonly known, registered or trademarked names;
         b.   Whether the applicant holds any other licenses, permits,
registrations, or other qualifications required by federal or state law to
promote, provide, or render advice regarding the offered goods or services.
(Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006)
      3.   Background Check: BCI background check (subsection 3-1-7C of this
chapter). (Ord. 3-20-2012A, 3-20-2012)
      4.   Responses To Questions Regarding Disqualifying Status: The applicant
shall be required to affirm or deny each of the following statements on the
application:
         a.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of: 1) felony
homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, 3)
the sale or distribution of controlled substances, 4) sexual assault of any
kind, or 5) a felony crime of violent or aggravated conduct involving persons
or property;
         b.   Are any criminal charges currently pending against the applicant
for: 1) felony homicide, 2) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting
a minor, 3) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or 4) sexual
assault of any kind;
         c.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a felony within
the last ten (10) years;
         d.   Has the applicant been incarcerated in a federal or state prison
within the past five (5) years;
         e.   Has the applicant been criminally convicted of a misdemeanor
within the past five (5) years involving a crime of: 1) moral turpitude, or 2)
violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property;
         f.   Has a final civil judgment been entered against the applicant
within the last five (5) years indicating that: 1) the applicant had either
engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or 2) that a debt of the
applicant was nondischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 USC section 523(a)
(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19);
         g.   Is the applicant currently on parole or probation to any court,
penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest
or subject to a tracking device;
         h.   Does the applicant have an outstanding arrest warrant from any
jurisdiction; or
         i.   Is the applicant currently subject to a protective order based on
physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 11-
21-2006A, 11-21-2006)
3-1D-6: WRITTEN DISCLOSURES:
The application shall be accompanied by written disclosures notifying the
applicant of the following:
   A.   The applicant's submission of the application authorizes the City to
verify information submitted with the completed application including:
      1.   The applicant's address;
      2.   The applicant's and/or responsible person's or entity's State tax
identification and special use tax numbers, if any;
      3.   The validity of the applicant's proof of identity;
   B.   The City may consult any publicly available sources for information on
the applicant, including, but not limited to, databases for any outstanding
warrants, protective orders, or civil judgments;
   C.   Establishing proof of identity is required before registration is
allowed;
   D.   Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by applicant
with a completed application;
   E.   The applicant must submit a BCI background check with a completed
application;
   F.   To the extent permitted by State and/or Federal law, the applicant's
BCI background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not
available for public inspection;
   G.   The City will maintain copies of the applicant's application form,
proof of identity, and identification badge. These copies will become public
records available for inspection at the City offices whether or not a license
is issued, denied, suspended, or revoked;
   H.   The criteria for disqualifying status, denial, revocation, or
suspension of a license under the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 11-21-
2006A, 11-21-2006)
3-1D-7: IDENTIFICATION BADGE:
The identification badge shall bear the name of the City and shall contain: a)
the name of the registered solicitor; b) address and phone number of the
registered solicitor, or the name, address, and phone number of the responsible
person or entity; c) a recent photograph of the registered solicitor; and d)
the date on which the license expires. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006)
3-1D-8: DECEPTIVE SOLICITING PRACTICES PROHIBITED:
   A.   No solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or
fraudulent statement in the course of soliciting.
   B.   A solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during face to
face solicitation; 1) the name of the solicitor; 2) the name and address of the
entity with whom the solicitor is associated; and 3) the purpose of the
solicitor's contact with the person and/or competent individual. This
requirement may be satisfied through the use of the identification badge and an
informational flier.
   C.   No solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other
than his or her true and correct name.
   D.   No solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the
granting of a license implies any endorsement by the City of the solicitor's
goods or services or of the individual solicitor. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-
2006)
3-1D-9: NO SOLICITATION NOTICE:
   A.   Any occupant of a residence may give notice of a desire to refuse
solicitors by displaying a "No Solicitation" sign that shall be posted on or
near the main entrance door. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006)
   B.   The display of such sign or placard shall be deemed to constitute
notice to any solicitor that the inhabitant of the residence does not desire to
receive and/or does not invite solicitors, nor shall solicitors leave any
advertisements, door hangers, material, or any form of literature at any
residence displaying a "No Solicitation" sign. (Ord. 10-03-2017A, 10-3-2017)
   C.   It shall be the responsibility of the solicitor to check each residence
for the presence of any such notice.
   D.   The provisions of this section shall apply also to solicitors who are
exempt from registration pursuant to the provisions of this article. (Ord. 11-
21-2006A, 11-21-2006)
3-1D-10: DUTIES OF SOLICITORS:
   A.   The registered solicitor shall carry the license at all times while
soliciting in the City.
   B.   The registered solicitor shall wear the identification badge
prominently on his or her person while soliciting in the City.
   C.   Every person soliciting or advocating shall check each residence for
any "No Solicitation" sign or any other notice notifying a solicitor not to
solicit on the premises. If such sign is posted such solicitor shall desist
from any efforts to solicit at the residence and shall immediately depart from
such property. Possession of a license does not in any way relieve any
solicitor of this duty. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006)
   D.   It is a violation of this article for any person soliciting to knock on
the door, ring the doorbell, leave any advertisements, door hangers, material,
or literature at the residence, or in any other manner attempt to attract the
attention of an occupant of a residence that bears a "No Solicitation" sign for
the purpose of engaging in or attempting to engage in home solicitation sale,
door to door soliciting, or soliciting. (Ord. 10-03-2017A, 10-3-2017)
   E.   It is a violation of this article for any solicitor through ruse,
deception, or fraudulent concealment of a purpose to solicit, to take action
calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a residence.
   F.   Any solicitor who is at any time asked by an occupant of a residence or
dwelling to leave shall immediately and peacefully depart.
   G.   The solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical
contact with, or touch another person without the person's consent.
   H.   The solicitor shall not follow a person into a residence without their
explicit consent.
   I.   The solicitor shall not continue repeated soliciting after a person
and/or competent individual has communicated clearly and unequivocally their
lack of interest in the subject, goods or services of the solicitor.
   J.   The solicitor shall not use obscene language or gestures. (Ord. 11-21-
2006A, 11-21-2006)
3-1D-11: TIME OF DAY RESTRICTIONS:
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to solicit at a
residence before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. or after nine o'clock (9:00) P.M.
Mountain Time, unless the solicitor has express prior permission from the
resident to do so. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006)
3-1D-12: BUYER'S RIGHT TO CANCEL:
In any home solicitation sale, unless the buyer requests the solicitor to
provide goods or services without delay in an emergency, the seller or
solicitor shall present to the buyer and obtain the buyer's signature to a
written statement that informs the buyer of the right to cancel within the
third business day after signing an agreement to purchase. Such notice of
"buyer's right to cancel" shall be in the form required by Utah Code Annotated
section 70C-5-103, 1953, or a current version thereof or any State or Federal
law modifying or amending such provision. (Ord. 11-21-2006A, 11-21-2006)
ARTICLE E.  PREMISES OCCUPATIONS
SECTION:
3-1E-1: Requirements And Conditions
3-1E-1: REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   Premises occupations may be permitted and operated by approval of the
City business license official following receipt and approval of an application
for such use, and subject to, and in compliance with the following conditions:
(Ord. 11-21-2017A, 11-21-2017)
      1.   Premises occupations are listed as a conditional use in the zone.
(Ord. 7-8-2008B, 7-8-2008)
      2.   The lot upon which the premises occupation is conducted shall have a
lot area of not less than one-half (1/2) acre, contain a dwelling that is
occupied by the owner of the premises occupation and be adjacent to and have
ingress and egress to an arterial road. (Ord. 11-21-2017A, 11-21-2017)
      3.   All activities of the premises occupation, except for the incidental
ingress and egress of vehicles used in the conduct of the activity, shall be
conducted entirely within a building that qualifies as a "customary residential
accessory structure" as defined in section
10-2-1 of this Code.
      4.   The accessory building containing the premises occupation shall:
         a.   Be located entirely within the portion of the rear yard area of
the lot; and
         b.   Occupy not more than eight percent (8%) of the rear yard area of
the lot or have a total floor area of not more than seven hundred fifty (750)
square feet, whichever is less; provided, however, that the floor area of an
accessory building housing a premises occupation may exceed seven hundred fifty
(750) square feet in the instance where the accessory building existed prior to
April 6, 2004; and
         c.   Conform to the height requirements applicable to accessory
buildings within the zone district in which it is located.
      5.   No equipment or vehicles used in connection with the activities of
the premises occupation shall be stored outside of the accessory building and
all materials used or intended for use in connection with the premises
occupation shall be contained within the accessory building.
      6.   No commercial vehicles shall be located on the premises except one
delivery truck that does not exceed ten thousand (10,000) GVW rated capacity.
No more than six (6) vehicles, including the owner's, shall be parked on the
premises and the public street directly in front of the premises. No storage or
parking is permitted of tractor trailers, semitrucks or any heavy equipment on
the premises or on the streets in the vicinity of the premises.
      7.   The on site activities of the premises occupation shall be conducted
by members of the residing family and not more than one nonfamily member.
      8.   The premises occupation shall contain no facilities for the display
of goods or merchandise. Any sale of goods or merchandise produced off the
premises shall constitute a clearly incidental part of the premises occupation.
      9.   The premises occupation shall be clearly incidental and secondary to
the use of the property for residential purposes and will not change the
character of the area from that of a residential neighborhood.
      10.   The premises occupation shall be registered with the business
license division of the City and shall be required to obtain a business license
in accordance with City regulations. All businesses, using a business name, are
required by law to register with the State Department of Commerce. Registration
of assumed business names is required of all businesses that are not
corporations, limited liability companies or limited partnerships. (Ord. 7-8-
2008B, 7-8-2008)
      11.   Signs shall also comply with the requirements of the City's sign
regulations section
10-5-26, "Signs", of this Code. (Ord. 8-16-2011A, 8-16-2011)
      12.   The physical appearance, traffic generation characteristics, need
for off street parking for patrons, and other activities in connection with the
premises occupation shall not be contrary to the intent of the zone in which
the premises occupation is located and will not depreciate surrounding values
or decrease the quality of life within the area.
      13.   The activities of the premises occupation shall not involve the use
of materials or chemicals in amounts that will significantly increase the
hazard of fire, explosion, or safety to structures or occupants on the lot or
of adjacent structures or occupants.
      14.   The operation of the premises occupation shall not produce any
noise, smoke, glare, light, fumes, dust or similar condition that is readily
discernible outside the accessory building or that interferes with the peaceful
enjoyment of a residential environment by the occupants of adjacent residential
dwellings.
      15.   A site plan, drawn to scale, and showing the location of the
accessory building, its relationship to dwellings on the same and adjacent
properties and provisions for safe vehicular access shall be submitted with the
application.
      16.   The premises occupation shall not generate traffic between the
hours of eight o'clock (8:00) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M.
      17.   In order to achieve the objectives of this article and to protect
the health, safety and quality of life in the community, the Planning
Commission may attach conditions to the granting of a premises occupation
consistent with the standards hereinabove stated. (Ord. 7-8-2008B, 7-8-2008)
      18.   BCI background check may be required according to the provisions of
subsection 3-1-7C of this chapter. (Ord. 11-21-2017A, 11-21-2017)
      19.   Sales Tax number (subsection 3-1-7D of this chapter). (Ord. 3-20-
2012A, 3-20-2012)
ARTICLE F.  SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING
SECTION:
3-1F-1: Title, Purpose And Applicability
3-1F-2: Definitions
3-1F-3: Statutory Provisions
3-1F-4: Location And Name Restrictions
3-1F-5: Legitimate And Artistic Modeling
3-1F-6: Categories Of Licenses; Number Limited
3-1F-7: Licenses Required
3-1F-8: Application; Disclosures
3-1F-9: Fees
3-1F-10: Bond Required
3-1F-11: Issuance Conditions
3-1F-12: Term Of License
3-1F-13: Notice Of Change Of Information
3-1F-14: Transfer Limitations
3-1F-15: Display Of License
3-1F-16: Statement In Advertising
3-1F-17: Regulations And Unlawful Activities
3-1F-18: Outcall Services; Operation Requirements
3-1F-19: Design Of Premises
3-1F-20: Alcohol Prohibited
3-1F-21: Prohibited Activities
3-1F-22: Defenses To Prosecution
3-1F-23: Suspension Or Revocation Of License
3-1F-24: Appeal Procedures
3-1F-25: Violation; Penalty
3-1F-1: TITLE, PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
   A.   The provisions of this article shall be known and may be referred to as
the SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING ORDINANCE.
   B.   It is the purpose and object of this city that the City of Cedar Hills
establishes reasonable and uniform regulations governing the time, place and
manner of operation of sexually oriented businesses and employees of those
businesses in the city. This article shall be construed, and shall have the
purpose to not only protect the governmental interests recognized by this
article, including, but not limited to, the known secondary affects of such
businesses, in a manner consistent with constitutional protections provided by
the United States and Utah constitutions. The purpose of these regulations is
to provide for the regulation of and licensing of sexually oriented businesses
within the city in a manner which will protect the property values of
surrounding businesses and neighborhoods, and residents from the potential
adverse secondary effects of sexually oriented businesses, while providing to
those who desire to patronize sexually oriented businesses the opportunity to
do so. Sexually oriented businesses are frequently used for unlawful sexual
activities, including prostitution. Licensing of sexually oriented businesses
is a legitimate and reasonable means of ensuring that operators of sexually
oriented businesses comply with reasonable regulations and that operators do
not knowingly allow their businesses to be used for illegal sexual activity or
solicitation. There is convincing documented evidence that sexually oriented
businesses, because of their nature, have a deleterious effect on both the
existing neighboring businesses and surrounding residential areas, causing
increased crime and downgrading of property values. The purpose of this article
is to control the adverse effects of sexually oriented businesses and thereby
to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens and guests of Cedar
Hills, protect the citizens from increased crime, preserve the quality of life,
preserve the property values and character of the surrounding neighborhoods,
and deter the spread of urban blight. (Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
      1.   Based on evidence of the adverse secondary effects of adult uses
presented in hearings and in reports found at www.secondaryeffectsresearch.com
and made available to the city council, and on findings incorporated in the
cases of City of Erie v. Pap's A.M., 529 U.S. 277, 120 S.Ct. 1382, 146 L.Ed.2d
265 (2000); City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41, 106 S.Ct.
925, 89 L.Ed.2d 29 (1986); Young v. American Mini Theatres, [Inc.], 427 U.S.
50, 96 S.Ct. 2440, 49 L.Ed.2d 310 (1976); Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501
U.S. 560, 111 S.Ct. 2456, 115 L.Ed.2d 504 (1991); California v. La Rue, 409
U.S. 109, 93 S.Ct. 390, 34 L.Ed.2d 342 (1972); O'Connor v. City and County of
Denver, 894 F.2d 1210 (10th Cir.1990); Z.J. Gifts D-2, L.L.C. v. City of
Aurora, 136 F.3d 683 (10th Cir.1998); Dodger's Bar & Grill, Inc. v. Johnson
County, 98 F.3d 1262 (10th Cir.1996); Dodger's Bar & Grill, Inc. v. Johnson
County Bd. of County Com'rs, 32 F.3d 1436 (10th Cir.1994); American Target
Advertising, Inc. v. Giani, 199 F.3d 1241 (10th Cir.2000); MS News Co. v.
Casado, 721 F.2d 1281 (10th Cir.1983); Cortese v. Black, 87 F.3d 1327 (10th
Cir.1996); Heideman v. South Salt Lake City, 348 F.3d 1182 (10th Cir.2003);
Doctor John's Inc. v. Roy, 465 F.3d 1150 (10th Cir.2006), Salt Lake City v.
Wood, 1999 Utah App. 323, 991 P.2d 595 (Utah Ct.App.1999); Midvale City Corp.
v. Haltom, 73 P.3d 334 (Utah 2003); United States v. Freedberg, 724 F.Supp. 851
(D.Utah 1989); and documents concerning the secondary effects occurring in and
around sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, Phoenix,
Arizona-1984; Minneapolis, Minnesota-1980; Houston, Texas-1997; Indianapolis,
Indiana-1984; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California-1991; Los Angeles,
California-1977; Whittier, California-1978; Austin, Texas-1986; Seattle,
Washington-1989; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma-1986; Cleveland, Ohio; and Dallas,
Texas-1997; St. Croix County, Wisconsin-1993; Bellevue, Washington-1998;
Newport News, Virginia-1996; New York Times Square study-1994; Phoenix,
Arizona-1995-98; and also on findings from the paper entitled "Stripclubs
According To Strippers: Exposing Workplace Sexual Violence", by Kelly
Holsopple, program director, Freedom and Justice Center for Prostitution
Resources, Minneapolis, Minnesota, and from "Sexually Oriented Businesses: An
Insider's View", by David Sherman, presented to the Michigan house committee on
ethics and constitutional law, January 12, 2000; crime statistics of the city
of South Salt Lake for the past seven (7) years; and the "Report Of The
Attorney General's Working Group On The Regulation Of Sexually Oriented
Businesses" (June 6, 1989, state of Minnesota), the city council finds as
follows: (Ord. 9-2-2008A, 9-2-2008)
         a.   Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary
unlawful and unhealthy activities that are presently uncontrolled by the
unlicensed operators of the establishments. Further, there is presently no
mechanism in this city to make the owners and operators of these establishments
responsible for the activities that occur on their premises.
         b.   Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur
at unregulated sexually oriented businesses, especially those which provide
private or semiprivate booths or cubicles for viewing films, videos or live sex
shows.
         c.   Offering and providing such unregulated space encourages such
activities, which creates unhealthy conditions.
         d.   Numerous communicable diseases may be spread by activities
occurring in sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to,
syphilis, gonorrhea, human immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital
herpes, hepatitis, salmonella, campylobacter and shigella infections,
chlamydia, mycoplasmal and ureoplasmal infections, trichomoniasis and
chancroid.
         e.   Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are
unhealthy, in part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and,
in part, because of the unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of
the owners and the operators of the facilities to self-regulate those
activities and maintain those facilities.
         f.   The findings noted in subsections B1a through B1e of this section
raise substantial governmental concerns.
         g.   A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to
place the burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators
of the sexually oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will
place a heretofore nonexistent incentive on the operators to see that the
sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the health,
safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the
city. It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is
the actual operator of the sexually oriented business, fully in possession and
control of the premises and activities occurring therein.
         h.   The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day to day operation and maintenance of the sexually
oriented business, where such information is substantially related to the
significant governmental interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in
preventing the spread of sexually transmitted diseases and will prevent the
further secondary effects of dissemination of illegal obscenity, child
pornography, and to minors, materials harmful to them.
         i.   The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of
the city will be promoted by the enactment of this article.
   C.   This article imposes regulatory standards and license requirements on
certain business activities that are characterized as sexually oriented
businesses, and certain employees of those businesses characterized as sexually
oriented business employees. Except where the context or specific provisions
require, this article does not supersede or nullify any other related
ordinances. (Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following definitions shall apply:
ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment which:
   A.   Excludes minors from the premises; and
   B.   As one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental for any
form of consideration one or more of the following: books, magazine
periodicals, printed matter, photographs, motion pictures, videocassettes,
reproductions, slides or other "representations"; the central theme of which
depicts or describes "specified sexual acts" or "specified sexual anatomical
areas" or instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in
connection with "specified sexual activities". Legitimate medically recognized
contraceptives are excepted.
ADULT BUSINESS: An adult theater, adult motion picture theater, adult
bookstore, or adult video store.
ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment that:
   A.   Excludes all minors from the premises; and
   B.   As its principal business, shows, for any form of consideration, films,
motion pictures, videocassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions
that are primarily characterized by the depiction or description of "specified
sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial
establishment that:
   A.   Holds itself out as such a business; or
   B.   Excludes minors from the premises; and
   C.   As its principal business, features persons who appear in live
performances in a state of seminudity or that are characterized by the exposure
of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
EMPLOY: Hiring an individual to work for pecuniary or any other form of
compensation, whether such person is on the payroll of the employer, as an
independent contractor, as an agent, or any form of employment relationship.
ESCORT: Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, dates, socializes, visits,
consorts with or accompanies or offers to date, consort, socialize, visit or
accompany another or others to or about social affairs, entertainment or places
of amusement or within any place of public or private resort or any business or
commercial establishment or any private quarters. Escort shall not be construed
to include persons who provide business or personal services, such as licensed
private nurses, aides for the elderly or handicapped, social secretaries or
similar service personnel whose relationship with their patron is characterized
by a bona fide contractual relationship having a duration of more than twelve
(12) hours and who provide a service not principally characterized as dating or
socializing. Escort shall also not be construed to include persons providing
services such as singing telegrams, birthday greetings or similar activities
characterized by appearances in a public place, contracted for by a party other
than the person for whom the service is being performed and of duration not
longer than three (3) hours.
ESCORT SERVICE: An individual or entity who for pecuniary compensation,
furnishes or offers to furnish escorts, or provides or offers to introduce
patrons to escorts.
ESCORT SERVICE RUNNER: Any third person, not an escort, who, for pecuniary
compensation, acts in the capacity of an agent or broker for an escort service,
escort or patron by contacting or meeting with escort services, escorts or
patrons at any location within the city, whether or not such third person is
employed by such escort service, escort, patron or by another business, or is
an independent contractor or self-employed.
NUDITY: A state of dress in which the areola of the female breast, or male or
female genitals, pubic region or anus are covered by less than the covering
required in the definition of Seminude.
OPERATOR: One who operates, manages, and supervises a sexually oriented
business.
OUTCALL SERVICES: Services of a type performed by a sexually oriented business
employee outside of the premises of the licensed sexually oriented business,
including, but not limited to, escorts, models, dancers and other similar
employees.
PATRON: Any person who contracts with or employs any escort services or escort,
or the customer of any business licensed pursuant to this article.
PECUNIARY COMPENSATION: Any commission, fee, salary, tip, gratuity, hire,
profit, reward or any other form of consideration.
PERSON: Any person, unincorporated association, corporation, partnership or
other legal entity.
SEMINUDE: A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the
areola of the female breast; and the male or female genitals, pubic region and
anus shall be fully covered by an opaque covering no narrower than four inches
(4") wide in the front and five inches (5") wide in the back.
SEMINUDE DANCING AGENCY: Any person, agency, firm, corporation, partnership or
any entity or individual that furnishes bookings, or otherwise engages or
offers to furnish bookings, or otherwise engage the service of a professional
dancer licensed pursuant to this article for performance or appearance at a
business licensed for adult theaters.
SEMINUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: A business, including adult theater, where
employees perform or appear in the presence of patrons of the business in a
state of seminudity. A business shall also be presumed to be a seminude
entertainment business if the business holds itself out as such a business.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS: "Seminude entertainment businesses", sexually
oriented "outcall services", "adult businesses", and "seminude dancing
agencies" as defined by this article.
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEES: Those employees who work on the premises
of a sexually oriented business in activities related to the sexually oriented
portion of the business. This includes all managing employees, dancers,
escorts, models and other similar employees, whether or not hired as employees,
agents or as independent contractors. Employee shall not include individuals
whose work is unrelated to the sexually oriented portion of the business, such
as janitors, bookkeepers and similar employees. Sexually oriented business
employees shall not include cooks, serving persons and similar employees,
except where they may be managers or supervisors of the business. All persons
making outcall meetings under this article, including escorts, models, guards,
escort runners, drivers, chauffeurs and other similar employees, shall be
considered sexually oriented business employees.
SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human male or female pubic area or anus with
less than a full opaque covering, or the human female breast below a point
immediately above the top of the areola, with less than full opaque covering.
SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES: Acts of:
   A.   Masturbation.
   B.   Human sexual intercourse.
   C.   Sexual copulation between a person and a beast.
   D.   Fellatio.
   E.   Cunnilingus.
   F.   Bestiality.
   G.   Pederasty.
   H.   Buggery.
   I.   Any anal copulation between a human male and another male, human female
or beast.
   J.   Manipulating, caressing or fondling by any person of:
      1.   The genitals of a human.
      2.   The pubic area of a human.
      3.   The breast or breasts of a human female.
   K.   Flagellation, torture or sadomasochistic abuse by or upon a person clad
in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being
fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of the one so
clothed.
WORKING DAYS: Weekdays excluding Saturdays, Sundays, and legal holidays. (Ord.
8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-3: STATUTORY PROVISIONS:
   A.   Obscenity: Notwithstanding anything contained in this article, nothing
in this article shall be deemed to permit or allow the showing or display of
any matter that is contrary to applicable federal or state statutes prohibiting
obscenity.
   B.   Lewdness: Notwithstanding anything contained in this article, nothing
in this article shall be deemed to permit or allow conduct or the showing or
display of any matter that is contrary to the provisions of Utah Code Annotated
section 76-5-401 et seq. (Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-4: LOCATION AND NAME RESTRICTIONS:
   A.   Zoning: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do
business at any location within the city not zoned for such business.
   B.   Premises Licensed: It is unlawful to conduct business under a license
issued pursuant to this article at any location other than the licensed
premises. Any location to which telephone calls are automatically forwarded by
such business shall require a separate license.
   C.   Name: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business
in the city under any name other than the business name specified in the
application.
   D.   Zoning; Location: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business or
its employee(s) to do business at any location within the city not specifically
and expressly zoned for such business and/or use.
   E.   Location: No sexually oriented business shall operate within six
hundred feet (600') of any of the following:
      1.   A residential zone boundary line as shown on the zone map of the
city;
      2.   The property boundary of any church, public park, public library, or
school. (Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-5: LEGITIMATE AND ARTISTIC MODELING:
   A.   Intent: The City does not intend to unreasonably or improperly prohibit
legitimate modeling that may occur in a state of nudity for purposes protected
by the First Amendment or similar State protections. The City intends to
prohibit prostitution and related offenses occurring under the guise of nude
modeling. Notwithstanding the provisions of section
3-1F-17, "Regulations And Unlawful Activities", of this article, a licensed
outcall employee may appear in a state of nudity before a customer or patron,
providing that a written contract for such appearance was entered into between
the customer or patron and the employee and signed at least twenty four (24)
hours before the nude appearance. All of the other applicable provisions of
this article shall still apply to such nude appearances.
   B.   Unlicensed Appearance; Unlawful Acts: In the event of a contract for
nude modeling or appearance signed more than forty eight (48) hours in advance
of the modeling or appearance, the individual to appear nude shall not be
required to obtain a license pursuant to this article. During such unlicensed
nude appearance, it is unlawful to:
      1.   Appear nude or seminude in the presence of minors;
      2.   Allow, offer or agree to any touching of the contracting party or
other person by the individual appearing nude;
      3.   Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of
prostitution, solicitation of a minor or committing activities harmful to a
minor;
      4.   Allow, offer, commit or agree to any sex act as validly defined by
City ordinances or State Statute;
      5.   Allow, offer, agree or permit the contracting party or other person
to masturbate in the presence of the individual contracted to appear nude;
      6.   Allow, offer or agree for the individual appearing nude to be within
five feet (5') of any other person while performing or while nude or seminude.
(Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-6: CATEGORIES OF LICENSES; NUMBER LIMITED:
   A.   Number: It is unlawful for any business premises to operate or be
licensed for more than one category of sexually oriented business, except that
a business may have a license for both outcall services and a seminude dancing
agency on the same premises.
   B.   Categories: The categories of sexually oriented businesses are:
      1.   Outcall services;
      2.   Adult businesses;
      3.   Seminude entertainment businesses;
      4.   Seminude dancing agency. (Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-7: LICENSES REQUIRED:
   A.   Businesses; Exemptions:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to operate a sexually oriented
business, as specified herein, without first obtaining a general business
license and a sexually oriented business license. The sexually oriented
business license shall specify the type of business for which it is obtained.
Operating a sexually oriented business without a license shall be a Class A
misdemeanor.
      2.   The provisions of this article shall not apply to any sex therapist
or similar individual licensed by the State to provide bona fide sexual therapy
or counseling, licensed medical practitioner, licensed nurse, psychiatrist,
psychologist, nor shall it apply to any educator licensed by the State for
activities in the classroom.
   B.   Employees: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to employ
or for any individual to be employed by a sexually oriented business in the
capacity of a sexually oriented business employee, unless that employee first
obtains a sexually oriented business employee license. (Ord. 07-16-2019C, 7-16-
2019)
3-1F-8: APPLICATION; DISCLOSURES:
Before any applicant may be licensed to operate a sexually oriented business or
as a sexually oriented business employee pursuant to this article, the
applicant shall submit on a form to be supplied by the city license authority,
the following:
   A.   Name: The correct legal name of each applicant, corporation,
partnership, limited partnership or entity doing business under an assumed
name.
   B.   Corporations, Partnerships, Assumed Names:
      1.   If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or limited
partnership, or individual or entity doing business under an assumed name, the
information required below for individual applicants shall be submitted for
each partner and each principal of an applicant, and for each officer, director
and any shareholder. Any holding company or any entity holding stock of any
applicant shall be considered an applicant for purposes of disclosure under
this article.
      2.   The shareholder disclosure requirements above shall only be
applicable for outcall service licenses.
      3.   All corporations, partnerships or noncorporate entities included on
the application shall also identify each individual authorized by the
corporation, partnership or noncorporate entity to sign the checks for such
corporation, partnership or noncorporate entity.
   C.   Personal Information: For all applicants or individuals, the
application must also state:
      1.   Any other names or aliases used by the individual;
      2.   The age, date and place of birth;
      3.   Height;
      4.   Weight;
      5.   Color of hair;
      6.   Color of eyes;
      7.   Present business address and telephone number;
      8.   Present residence and telephone number; and
      9.   Social security number.
   D.   Proof Of Age: Acceptable written or documented proof that any
individual is at least twenty one (21) years of age.
   E.   Photographs; Fingerprints: Attached to the form, as provided above, two
(2) color photographs of the applicant clearly showing the individual's face
and the individual's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department.
For persons not residing in the city, the photographs and fingerprints may be
on a form from the law enforcement jurisdiction where the person resides. Fees
for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant directly to
the issuing agency.
   F.   Health Certificate: For any individual applicant required to obtain a
sexually oriented business employee license as an escort or a seminude
entertainer, a certificate from the Utah County health department, stating that
the individual has, within thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date of
the original or renewal application, been examined and found to be free of any
contagious or communicable diseases.
   G.   Employment History: A statement of the business, occupation or
employment history of the applicant for three (3) years immediately preceding
the date of the filing of the application.
   H.   License Or Permit History: A statement detailing the license or permit
history of the applicant for the five (5) year period immediately preceding the
date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant
previously operated or sought to operate a sexually oriented business in this
or any other county, city, state or territory, has ever had a license, permit
or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended, or has ever had
any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended.
In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the date, the
name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction and state in full the reasons for
the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation
or suspension shall be attached to the application.
   I.   Criminal Convictions: All criminal convictions or pleas of nolo
contendere, except those that have been expunged, and the disposition of all
such arrests for the applicant, individual or other entity subject to
disclosure under this article, for five (5) years prior to the date of the
application. This disclosure shall include identification of all ordinance
violations, excepting minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as
a felony shall not be construed as a minor traffic offense), stating the date,
place, nature of each conviction or plea of nolo contendere, and sentence of
each conviction or other disposition, identifying the convicting jurisdiction
and sentencing court, and providing the court identifying case numbers or
docket numbers. Application for a sexually oriented business or employee
license shall constitute permission for disclosure of any criminal conviction
or plea of nolo contendere for the purposes of any proceeding involving the
business or employee license.
   J.   Lease Or Rental Of Property: In the event the applicant is not the
owner of record of the real property upon which the business or proposed
business is or is to be located, the application must be accompanied by a
notarized statement from the legal or equitable owner of the possessory
interest in the property specifically acknowledging the type of business for
which the applicant seeks a license for the property. In addition to furnishing
such notarized statement, the applicant shall furnish the name, address and
phone number of the owner of record of the property, as well as the copy of the
lease or rental agreement pertaining to the premises in which the service is or
will be located.
   K.   Description Of Services: A description of the services to be provided
by the business, with sufficient detail to allow reviewing authorities to
determine what business will be transacted on the premises, together with a
schedule of usual fees for services to be charged by the licensee and any
rules, regulations or employment guidelines under or by which the business
intends to operate. This description shall also include:
      1.   The hours that the business or service will be open to the public
and the methods of promoting the health and safety of the employees and patrons
and preventing them from engaging in illegal activity.
      2.   The methods of supervision preventing the employees from engaging in
acts of prostitution or other related criminal activities.
      3.   The methods of supervising employees and patrons to prevent
employees and patrons from charging or receiving fees for services or acts
prohibited by this article or other statutes or ordinances.
      4.   The methods of screening employees and customers in order to promote
the health and safety of employees and customers and prevent the transmission
of disease, and prevent the commission of acts of prostitution or other
criminal activity.
   L.   False Or Misleading Information: It is unlawful to knowingly submit
false or materially misleading information on or with a sexually oriented
business license application or to fail to disclose or omit information for the
purpose of obtaining a sexually oriented business or employee license. (Ord. 8-
5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-9: FEES:
Each applicant for a sexually oriented business or employee license shall be
required to pay regulatory license fees as set by resolution and added in the
consolidated fee schedule. The fees will be reviewed periodically. An
application is not complete until all appropriate fees have been paid. (Ord. 8-
5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-10: BOND REQUIRED:
Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall post with the
city recorder, a cash or corporate surety bond payable to the city in the
amount designated on the city's fees, bonds, and fines schedule. Any fines
assessed against the business, officers or managers for violations of city
ordinances shall be taken from this bond if not paid in cash within ten (10)
days after notice of fine, unless an appeal is filed as provided by this
article. In the event the funds are drawn against the cash or surety bond to
pay such fines, the bond shall be replenished to the original amount within
fifteen (15) days of the date of notice of any draw against it. (Ord. 9-2-
2008A, 9-2-2008)
3-1F-11: ISSUANCE CONDITIONS:
   A.   Specified: The city business licensing official shall approve the
issuance of a license to the applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of
a completed application, unless the official finds one or more of the
following:
      1.   The applicant is a minor.
      2.   The applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees,
fines or penalties assessed against the applicant or imposed on the applicant
in relation to a sexually oriented business.
      3.   The applicant has falsely answered a material question or request
for information as authorized by this article.
      4.   The applicant has violated a provision of this article or similar
provisions found in statutes or ordinances from any jurisdiction within five
(5) years immediately preceding the application; a criminal conviction for a
violation of a provision of this article or similar provisions from any
jurisdiction, whether or not it is being appealed, is conclusive evidence of a
violation, but a conviction is not necessary to prove a violation.
      5.   The premises to be used for the business has been disapproved by the
Utah County health department, the fire department, the police department, the
building officials or the zoning officials as not being in compliance with
applicable laws and ordinances of the city.
If any of the foregoing reviewing agencies cannot complete their review within
the thirty (30) day approval or denial period, the agency or department may
obtain from the city business licensing official an extension of time of no
more than thirty (30) days for their review.
      6.   The required license fees have not been paid.
      7.   All applicable sales and use taxes have not been paid.
      8.   An applicant for the proposed business is in violation of or not in
compliance with this article or any other applicable provisions of state law.
      9.   An applicant has been convicted or pleaded or pled nolo contendere
to a crime involving: prostitution; exploitation of prostitution; aggravated
promotion of prostitution; aggravated exploitation of prostitution;
solicitation of sex acts; sex acts for hire; compelling prostitution; aiding
prostitution; sale, distribution or display of material harmful to minors;
sexual performance by minors; possession of child pornography; lewdness;
indecent exposure; any crime involving sexual abuse or exposure; any crime
involving sexual abuse or exploitation of a child; sexual assault or aggravated
sexual assault; rape; forcible sodomy; forcible sexual abuse; incest; harboring
a runaway child; criminal attempt; conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of
the foregoing offenses; or offenses involving similar elements from any
jurisdiction, regardless of the exact title of the offense for which:
         a.   Less than two (2) years have elapsed from the date of conviction,
if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense or less than five (5) years if
the convictions are of five (5) or more misdemeanors within the five (5) years;
or
         b.   Less than five (5) years have elapsed from the date of
conviction, if the offense is of a felony.
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification pursuant to this subsection.
   B.   Approval Time; Review: The total time for the city to approve or deny a
license shall not exceed sixty (60) days from the receipt of a completed
application and payment of all fees. Businesses located outside of the
corporate boundaries of the city, but requiring a license under this article,
may be denied a license pursuant to this article if the business does not have
a valid business license to conduct business at the business location from the
appropriate jurisdiction for that location.
      1.   Upon receipt of an application, all departments required to review
the application shall determine within ten (10) days whether or not the
application is incomplete in items needed for processing. Incomplete
applications shall immediately be returned to the applicant with a
specification of the items that are incomplete.
      2.   The time for processing applications specified in this section shall
begin to run from the receipt of a complete application.
      3.   In the event that a license for seminude entertainment, seminude
dancing agencies, adult businesses or seminude entertainment businesses has not
been disapproved within thirty (30) days or the sixty (60) days allowed after
an extension, the city shall issue the license pending completion of the city's
review.
      4.   Any license pursuant to subsection B3 of this section may be revoked
by the city pursuant to the revocation procedures provided for herein, if the
completed review determines that the license should have been denied. (Ord. 8-
5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-12: TERM OF LICENSE:
Sexually oriented business and employee licenses issued pursuant to this
article shall be valid from the date of issuance through January 1 of each
succeeding year. The license fees required under the consolidated fee schedule
shall not be prorated for any portion of a year, but shall be paid in full for
whatever portion of the year the license is applied for. (Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-5-
2008)
3-1F-13: NOTICE OF CHANGE OF INFORMATION:
Any change in the information required to be submitted under this article for
either a sexually oriented business license or sexually oriented business
employee license shall be given, in writing, to the city business licensing
official and the police department within fourteen (14) days after such change.
(Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-14: TRANSFER LIMITATIONS:
Sexually oriented business licenses granted under this article shall not be
transferable. It is unlawful for a license held by an individual to be
transferred. It is unlawful for a license held by a corporation, partnership or
other noncorporate entity to transfer any part thereof, without filing a new
application and obtaining prior city approval. If any transfer of the
controlling interest in a business licensee occurs, the license is immediately
null and void and the business shall not operate until a separate new license
has been properly issued by the city as provided in this article. (Ord. 8-5-
2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-15: DISPLAY OF LICENSE:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business location within the
boundaries of the city to fail to display the license granted pursuant to this
article in a prominent location within the business premises. It is unlawful
for any individual licensed pursuant to this article to fail to carry, at all
times while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate boundaries of
the city, their employee license on their person. If the individual is nude,
such license shall be visibly displayed within the same room the employee is
performing. When requested by the police department, city licensing or other
enforcement personnel or health official, it is unlawful to fail to show the
appropriate licenses while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate
boundaries of the city. (Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-16: STATEMENT IN ADVERTISING:
It is unlawful for any advertisement by the sexually oriented business or
employee to fail to state that the business or employee is licensed by the
city, and shall include the city license number. (Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-17: REGULATIONS AND UNLAWFUL ACTIVITIES:
It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business or sexually oriented business
employee to:
   A.   Minors: Allow minors on the licensed premises or allow, offer, or agree
to conduct any outcall business with minors.
   B.   Alcoholic Beverages: Allow, offer or agree to allow any alcohol to be
stored, used or consumed on or in the licensed premises.
   C.   Locking Outside Door: Allow the outside door to the premises to be
locked while any customer is in the premises.
   D.   Gambling: Allow, offer or agree to gambling on the licensed premises.
   E.   Touching: Allow, offer or agree to any sexually oriented business
employee touching or being touched by any patron or customer; except that
outcall employees and customers may touch, except that any touching of
specified anatomical areas, whether clothed or unclothed, is prohibited.
   F.   Controlled Substances:
      1.   Allow, offer or agree to illegal possession, use, sale or
distribution of controlled substances on the licensed premises.
      2.   Allow sexually oriented business employees to possess, use, sell or
distribute controlled substances while engaged in the activities of the
business.
   G.   Prostitution: Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution,
solicitation of prostitution, solicitation of a minor or permitting activities
harmful to a minor to occur on the licensed premises or, in the event of an
outcall employee or business, the outcall employee committing, offering or
agreeing to commit prostitution, attempting to commit prostitution, soliciting
prostitution, soliciting a minor or committing activities harmful to a minor.
   H.   Specified Sexual Activities: Allow, offer, commit or agree to any
"specified sexual activity" as validly defined by city ordinances or state
statute in the presence of any customer or patron.
   I.   Nudity: Allow, offer or agree to any outcall employee appearing before
any customer or patron in a state of nudity.
   J.   Masturbation: Allow, offer or agree to allow a patron or customer to
masturbate in the presence of the sexually oriented business employee or on the
premises of a sexually oriented business. (Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-18: OUTCALL SERVICES; OPERATION REQUIREMENTS:
It is unlawful for any business or employee providing outcall services
contracted for in the city to fail to comply with the following requirements:
   A.   Contract: All businesses licensed to provide outcall services pursuant
to this article shall provide to each patron a written contract in receipt of
pecuniary compensation for services. The contract shall clearly state the type
of services to be performed, the length of time such services shall last, the
cost to the patron and any special terms or conditions relating to the services
performed. The contract need not include the name of the patron. The business
licensee shall keep and maintain a copy of each written contract pursuant to
this section for a period not less than one year from the date of provision of
services thereunder. The contracts shall be numbered and entered into a
register listing the contract number, date, names of all employees involved in
the contract and pecuniary compensation paid.
   B.   Office; Phone: All outcall businesses licensed pursuant to this article
shall maintain an open office or telephone at which the licensee or licensee's
designated agent may be personally contacted during all hours outcall employees
are working. The address and phone number of the license location shall appear
and be included in all patron contracts and published advertisements. For
outcall businesses that premises are licensed within the corporate limits of
the city, private rooms or booths where the patrons may meet with the outcall
employee shall not be provided at the open office or any other location by the
service, nor shall patrons meet outcall employees at the business premises.
   C.   Advertising: Outcall services shall not advertise in such manner that
would lead a reasonably prudent person to conclude that specified sexual
activities would be performed by the outcall employee.
   D.   Licensing Regardless Of Business Location: All employees of outcall
services who provide outcall services within the city shall be licensed in
accordance with this article, regardless of the primary location of the
business. (Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-19: DESIGN OF PREMISES:
   A.   Adult Business:
      1.   In addition to the general requirements of disclosure for a sexually
oriented business, any applicant for a license as an adult business shall also
submit a diagram, drawn to scale, of the premises of the license. The design
and construction, prior to granting a license or opening for business, shall
conform to the following:
         a.   The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner
that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of
the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding
restrooms.
         b.   Restrooms may not contain any video reproduction equipment or any
of the business merchandise. Signs shall be posted requiring only one person be
allowed in the restroom and only one person in any stall at a time; and
requiring that patrons shall not be allowed access to manager's station areas.
         c.   For businesses that exclude minors from the entire premises, all
windows, doors and other apertures to the premises shall be darkened or
otherwise constructed to prevent anyone outside the premises from seeing the
inside of the premises.
         d.   The diagram required does not necessarily need to be a
professional engineer's or architect's blueprint; however, the diagram must
show marked internal dimensions, all overhead lighting fixtures and ratings for
illumination capacity.
      2.   It shall be the duty of the licensee and the licensee's employees to
ensure that the views from the manager's station in subsection A1 of this
section remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or
any other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises and
to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises that
has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.
      3.   The premises shall at all times be equipped and operated with
overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to
which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one
foot-candle, measured at the floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensee
and the licensee's employees present on the premises to ensure that the
illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is
present on the premises.
   B.   Seminude Entertainment Business:
      1.   It is unlawful for a business premises licensed for seminude
entertainment to:
         a.   Permit a bed, sofa, mattress or similar item in any room on the
premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the
public or in any office to which patrons are not admitted, and except that in
an adult theater, such items may be on the stage as part of a performance.
         b.   Allow any door on any room used for business, except for the door
to an office to which patrons shall not be admitted, outside doors and restroom
doors to be lockable from the inside.
         c.   Provide any room in which the employee or employees and the
patron are alone together without a separation by a solid physical barrier at
least three feet (3') high and six inches (6") wide. The patron or patrons
shall remain on one side of the barrier and the employee or employees shall
remain on the other side of the barrier.
      2.   Adult theaters shall also require that the performance area shall be
separated from the patrons by a minimum of three feet (3'), which separation
shall be delineated by a physical barrier at least three feet (3') high. (Ord.
8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-20: ALCOHOL PROHIBITED:
   A.   It is unlawful for any business licensed pursuant to this article to
allow the sale, storage, supply or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the
premises.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic
beverage on the premises of any sexually oriented business. (Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-
5-2008)
3-1F-21: PROHIBITED ACTIVITIES:
   A.   Seminude Dancing Agencies:
      1.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or
otherwise engage the services of a professional dancer, model or performer to
appear in a state of seminudity for pecuniary compensation in or for any
seminude entertainment business or adult theater if licensed pursuant to this
article, unless such agency is licensed pursuant to this article.
      2.   It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or
otherwise engage or permit any person to perform as a professional dancer,
model or performer in a state of seminudity or nudity, either gratuitously or
for compensation, in or for any business licensed pursuant to this article
unless such person is licensed pursuant to this article.
   B.   Performers: It is unlawful for any professional dancer, model or
performer, while performing in any business licensed pursuant to this article,
to:
      1.   Touch in any manner any other person;
      2.   Throw any object or clothing off the stage area;
      3.   Accept any money, drink or any other object directly from any
person;
      4.   Allow another person to touch such performer or to place any money
or object on the performer or within the costume or person or the performer;
      5.   Place anything within the costume or adjust or move the costume
while performing so as to render the performer in a state of nudity.
   C.   Patrons: It is unlawful for any person or any patron of any business to
touch in any manner any performer; to place any money or object on or within
the costume or person of any performer; or to give or offer to give to any such
performer any drinks, money or object while such performer is performing;
except that money may be placed on the stage, which shall not be picked up by
the performer except by hand. (Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-22: DEFENSES TO PROSECUTION:
It is a defense to prosecution or violation under this article that a person
appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
   A.   By a proprietary school licensed by the state or a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation;
   B.   By a private college or university that maintains and operates
educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior
college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. (Ord. 8-5-
2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-23: SUSPENSION OR REVOCATION OF LICENSE:
   A.   Procedure: The denial, suspension or revocation of any license issued
pursuant to this article shall be done in accordance with section
3-1F-24, "Appeal Procedures", of this article, which sets forth the applicant's
right to present evidence why the license should not be suspended or denied.
   B.   Conditions Specified: The city may issue a notice suspending or
revoking a sexually oriented business license or employee license granted under
this article if a licensee or an employee of the licensee has:
      1.   Violated or is not in compliance with the provisions of this
article;
      2.   Refused to allow any inspection of the premises of the sexually
oriented business specifically authorized by this article or by any other
statute or ordinance;
      3.   Failed to replenish the bond as provided in this article (such a
suspension shall extend until the bond has been replenished);
      4.   Given materially false or misleading information in obtaining the
license;
      5.   Knowingly operated the sexually oriented business or worked under
the employee license during the period when the business license or employee
licensee's license was suspended;
      6.   Committed an offense that would be grounds for denial of a license
for which the time period required has not elapsed;
      7.   On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a
person committed in or on, or solicited for on the licensed premises, or an
outcall employee solicited or committed on or off the premises, an offense that
would be grounds for denial of a license for which a conviction has been
obtained, and the person was an employee, whether or not licensed, of the
sexually oriented business at the time the offenses were committed;
      8.   Delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem taxes or sales
taxes related to the sexually oriented business.
   C.   Effective Date: Suspension or revocation shall take effect within ten
(10) working days of the issuance of notice, unless an appeal is filed as
provided by this article. The notification shall be directed to the most
current business address or other mailing address on file with the business
licensing authority for the applicant or licensee.
   D.   Appeal No Effect On Revocation: The fact that a conviction is being
appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license.
   E.   Length Of Revocation: When a license issued pursuant to this article is
revoked, the revocation shall continue for one year from its effective date and
the license shall not be reissued to the sexually oriented business or employee
for one year from the date of such revocation. (Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-24: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
   A.   If the license is denied or approved with qualifications, or if a
notice of suspension, revocation or citation of a civil fine is imposed, the
applicant or licensee may file an appeal with the business licensing authority.
   B.   Filing of an appeal must be within ten (10) working days of the date of
service of the notice of any denial, qualified approval, suspension, revocation
or civil fine. Upon receiving the notice of such appeal, the business licensing
authority shall schedule a hearing before the city manager within twenty (20)
days from the date of the appeal unless such time shall be extended for good
cause.
   C.   The city manager shall hold a public hearing on the record, and take
such facts and evidence as necessary to determine whether the denial, qualified
approval, suspension, revocation or civil fine was proper under the law. The
applicant or licensee shall have the opportunity to present all of his or her
arguments and to be represented by counsel, present evidence and witnesses on
his or her behalf, and cross examine any of the city's witnesses. The hearing
shall take no longer than two (2) working days, unless extended to meet the
requirements of due process and proper administration of justice.
   D.   After the hearing, the City Manager shall have seven (7) working days,
unless extended for good cause, in which to render findings of fact,
conclusions of law, and make a recommendation to the City Council.
   E.   Either party may object to the recommendation of the Hearing Officer by
filing the party's objections and reason, in writing, to the City Council
within seven (7) working days following the recommendation. In the event the
City Manager recommends upholding a suspension or revocation, the license shall
be immediately revoked or suspended, and shall remain revoked or suspended
until any subsequent appeal is decided. If no objections are received within
the seven (7) working days, the City Council may immediately adopt the
recommendation of the City Manager.
   F.   If objections are received, the City Council shall have ten (10)
working days to consider such objections before issuing the City Council's
final decision. The City Council may, in the City Council's discretion, take
additional evidence or require written memorandum on issues of fact or law. The
standard by which the City Council shall review the decision of the Hearing
Officer is whether substantial evidence exists in the record to support the
Hearing Officer's recommendation. The final decision shall be sent, by
certified mail, to the applicant or licensee that the license has been denied,
suspended or revoked. Such notice shall include a statement advising the
respondent of the right to appeal such decision to a court of competent
jurisdiction.
   G.   An applicant aggrieved by the City Council's decision shall have the
right to appeal such action to a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 8-5-
2008C, 8-5-2008)
3-1F-25: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
   A.   Suit For Injunction: An entity or individual who operated or causes a
sexually oriented business to be operated without a valid license, or who
employs or is employed as an employee of a sexually oriented business, or who
operates such a business or functions as such an employee in violation of the
provisions of this article is subject to a suit for injunction in addition to
the civil and criminal violations provided herein and any other remedy
available at law or in equity.
   B.   Civil Penalty: In addition to revocation or suspension of a license, as
provided in this article, each violation of this article shall, upon citation
by the business licensing official or zoning official, require the licensee to
pay a civil penalty. Such fines shall be deducted from the bond posted pursuant
to this article, unless paid within ten (10) days of notice of the fine or the
final determination after any appeal. (Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-5-2008)
   C.   Misdemeanor Offense: In addition to a civil fine provided in this
article, the violation of any provision of this article shall be a Class A
misdemeanor, and subject the violator to the penalty provisions as provided
(each day of a violation shall be considered a separate offense):
      1.   Penalty For Violation Of Nuisance Ordinance: Unless otherwise
specifically authorized by statute, the City Council may provide a penalty for
the violation of any City ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum Class A
misdemeanor fine under Utah Code Annotated section 76-3-301, or by a term of
imprisonment up to a year, or by both the fine and the term of imprisonment.
The City Council may prescribe a minimum penalty for the violation of any City
ordinance and may impose a civil penalty for the unauthorized use of City
property, including, but not limited to, the use of parks, streets and other
public grounds or equipment. Rules of civil procedure shall be substantially
followed. (Ord. 07-16-2019C, 7-16-2019)
   D.   Employee Violations: Every act or omission by an employee constituting
a violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or
omission of the sexually oriented business licensee and/or operator. If such
act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of
the licensee and/or operator, or as a result of the licensee's and/or
operator's negligent failure to supervise the conduct of the employee, the
sexually oriented business licensee shall be punishable for such act or
omission in the same manner as if the licensee committed the act or caused the
omission.
   E.   Responsibility For Conduct: A sexually oriented business licensee and/
or operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the
licensed premises and any act or omission of any employee constituting a
violation of the provisions of this article shall be deemed the act or omission
of the licensee and/or operator for the purposes of determining whether the
licensee's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed. (Ord. 8-5-2008C, 8-
5-2008)
ARTICLE G.  TEMPORARY USE BUSINESS
SECTION:
3-1G-1: Requirements And Conditions
3-1G-1: REQUIREMENTS AND CONDITIONS:
   A.   A temporary use business may be permitted and operated following
approval and registration of an application for such use and subject to and in
compliance with the following conditions:
      1.   Title 10, chapter 4, article E of this code.
      2.   Businesses shall only conduct business between the hours of nine
o'clock (9:00) A.M. and ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Ord. 3-20-2012A, 3-20-2012)
ARTICLE H.  RENTAL DWELLING UNIT
SECTION:
3-1H-1: Title, Purpose And Applicability
3-1H-2: Definitions
3-1H-3: License Required
3-1H-4: Application For License
3-1H-5: License Fees
3-1H-6: Review And Approval Procedures
3-1H-7: Effect Of License Issuance
3-1H-8: Inspections
3-1H-9: Penalty
3-1H-1: TITLE, PURPOSE AND APPLICABILITY:
In addition to all rules and regulations set forth in this chapter, the
regulations contained in this article shall apply to rental dwelling licenses.
(Ord. 06-18-2013B, 6-18-2013)
3-1H-2: DEFINITIONS:
OWNER: The person(s) or entity having ownership.
RENTAL DWELLING UNIT: Any nonowner occupied dwelling unit that is used for or
designated for use as a single-family home or residence by one or more persons
and available to be rented, loaned, leased or hired out, with or without
consideration to be used or occupied as a home or residence. (Ord. 06-18-2013B,
6-18-2013)
3-1H-3: LICENSE REQUIRED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person, as owner, lessee or agent thereof,
to own, keep, conduct, operate or maintain any rental dwelling unit within the
city without a valid license issued pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   If there is more than one owner, including purchases under contract,
each owner shall be jointly and severally liable to obtain the business license
for a rental dwelling unit.
   C.   A business license for a rental dwelling unit is not transferable
between persons or structures.
   D.   A business license for a rental dwelling unit shall not be required for
a rental dwelling unit which is ordinarily owner occupied but is temporarily
rented because:
      1.   The owner is placed in the hospital, nursing home, assisted living
center, or similar facility, or
      2.   The owner has a bona fide, temporary absence of three (3) years or
less for activity such as temporary job assignments, sabbaticals, or voluntary
service. Indefinite periods of absence from the dwelling shall not qualify for
this exemption. (Ord. 06-18-2013B, 6-18-2013)
3-1H-4: APPLICATION FOR LICENSE:
All applications for a rental dwelling license shall be made in writing upon
the forms provided by the city. In addition to the information required by this
chapter, an application for a rental dwelling license shall also show the
following information, and all additional information as deemed necessary for
application:
   A.   The street address of each rental dwelling unit owned by the applicant
within the city.
   B.   A valid e-mail address and phone number for the owner and property
manager of each rental dwelling unit.
   C.   The maximum number of occupants per rental dwelling unit.
   D.   A signed statement certifying the rental dwelling unit's compliance
with applicable safety and building codes. (Ord. 06-18-2013B, 6-18-2013)
3-1H-5: LICENSE FEES:
   A.   Required: Owners of rental dwelling units or multiple-family dwelling
units shall pay the general business license fee. Owners of multiple rental
dwelling units shall be required to obtain only one regulatory business license
for the operation and maintenance of those rental dwelling units; owners shall
pay for inspection fees for every additional dwelling unit past the initial
unit.
   B.   License Amendment: Any licensee who acquires or sells any rental
dwelling unit within the city after licensure but before renewal shall amend
the license within thirty (30) days of acquisition or sale of the rental
dwelling unit and shall pay the fees required by this chapter.
   C.   Time Of Payment: The base business license fee shall be paid at the
time of application for a new or renewal license.
   D.   Failure: Failure to timely make a payment required pursuant to a
payment plan as described above may result in the suspension or revocation of
the license and the imposition of penalty fees as set forth in this code. (Ord.
06-18-2013B, 6-18-2013)
3-1H-6: REVIEW AND APPROVAL PROCEDURES:
The process for review and approval of an application for a rental dwelling
license shall be in accordance with this chapter. (Ord. 06-18-2013B, 6-18-2013)
3-1H-7: EFFECT OF LICENSE ISSUANCE:
The issuance of a rental dwelling unit license shall not have the effect of
changing the legal status of a rental dwelling, including, but not limited to:
a) legalizing an illegally created dwelling unit, use, or other circumstances;
or b) recognizing the nonconforming use, structure or other nonconformity.
(Ord. 06-18-2013B, 6-18-2013)
3-1H-8: INSPECTIONS:
   A.   The business license official or their designee shall be permitted to
make an inspection of any rental dwelling unit prior to any rental dwelling
unit license being issued or renewal of any rental dwelling unit licenses, or
to enforce any of this title or any other applicable statute or ordinance. The
business license official or their designee shall provide the property owner or
property owner's representative and tenant a minimum of seventy two (72) hours'
prior notice before the inspection. The tenant shall be allowed to be present
during any inspection of the rental dwelling unit. Prior notice shall be in
writing and served in person or by certified mail with return receipt. If the
property owner or other responsible person refuses to allow an inspection, the
business license official or their designee may obtain and execute a search
warrant.
   B.   No owner, occupant, or any other person having charge, care, or control
of any building or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made
as herein provided, to properly permit entry therein by the business license
official or their designee for the purpose of inspection and examination to
ensure compliance with this title. (Ord. 06-18-2013B, 6-18-2013)
3-1H-9: PENALTY:
Any person or party violating any of the provisions of this article shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in section
3-1-18 of this chapter. Each separate day a person violates any provision of
this article shall be a separate violation. (Ord. 06-18-2013B, 6-18-2013)
CHAPTER 2
TAXES
ARTICLE A.  SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-2A-1: Title
3-2A-2: Purpose
3-2A-3: Effective Date
3-2A-4: Tax Imposed
3-2A-5: Penalty
3-2A-1: TITLE:
This article shall be known as THE SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCEOF THE CITY OF
CEDAR HILLS. (Ord. 1-19-90A, 1-19-1990)
3-2A-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   Authorization Of Tax: The forty eighth session of the Utah legislature
authorized the counties and municipalities of the state to enact sales and use
tax ordinances imposing a one percent (1%) tax.
   B.   Tax Established: It is the purpose of this article to conform the sales
and use tax of the city to conform to the requirements of the sales and use tax
act, Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, as currently amended. (Ord. 1-
19-90A, 1-19-1990)
3-2A-3: EFFECTIVE DATE:
This article shall become effective as of one minute after twelve o'clock (12:
01) A.M., January 1, 1990. (Ord. 1-19-90A, 1-19-1990)
3-2A-4: TAX IMPOSED:
   A.   Imposed:
      1.   From and after the effective date hereof, there is levied and there
shall be collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of tangible personal
property, services and meals made within the city at the rate of one percent
(1%).
      2.   An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other
consumption in the city of tangible personal property from any retailer on or
after the operative date hereof at the rate of one percent (1%) of the sales
price of the property.
      3.   For the purposes of this article, all retail sales shall be presumed
to have been consummated at the place of business delivered by the retailer or
his agent to an out of state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to
an out of state designation. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of
business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall
be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed and adopted by the
state tax commission. "Public utilities", as defined by Utah Code Annotated
title 54, shall not be obligated to determine the place or places within any
county or municipality where public utilities are rendered, but the place of
sale or the sales tax revenue arising from such service allocable to the city
shall be as determined by the state tax commission pursuant to an appropriate
formula and other rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it.
   B.   Adoption Of State Codes; Provisions:
      1.   Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are
inconsistent with the provisions of the sales and use tax act, all of the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, as amended, insofar as
they relate to sales taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof,
are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as though fully set forth
herein.
      2.   Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, the state of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the
name of this city shall be substituted therefor. Nothing in subsection B of
this section shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the city
for the word "state" when the word is used as part of the title of the state
tax commission, or of the constitution of the state of Utah, nor shall the name
of the city be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result
of that substitution would require action to be taken by or against the state
tax commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or
operation of this article.
      3.   If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under Utah Code
Annotated section 59-12-106, an additional license shall not be required by
reason of this section.
      4.   There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or charged by
which the tax is measured:
         a.   The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the state upon a
retailer or consumer.
         b.   The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use
or other consumption of tangible personal property upon which a sales or use
tax has become due by reason of the sales transaction to any other municipality
and any county in the state under the sales or use tax ordinance enacted by
that county or municipality in accordance with the sales and use tax act. (Ord.
1-19-90A, 1-19-1990)
3-2A-5: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed
guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1-19-90A, 1-19-1990; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE B.  MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX
SECTION:
3-2B-1: Purpose
3-2B-2: Definitions
3-2B-3: Tax Imposed
3-2B-4: Exemptions To Tax
3-2B-5: Existing Franchise Agreements
3-2B-6: Contract With State Tax Commission
3-2B-7: State Statutes Incorporated
3-2B-8: Additional License Or Reporting Not Required
3-2B-9: Effective Date Of Levy
3-2B-1: PURPOSE:
It is the intent of the city to adopt the municipal energy sales and use tax
pursuant to and in conformance with Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-301 et
seq., the municipal energy sales and use tax act. (Ord. 6-19-97A, 6-19-1997)
3-2B-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meanings
ascribed to them in this section:
CONSUMER: A person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to
the municipal energy sales and use tax.
CONTRACTUAL FRANCHISE FEE: A. A fee:
  1. Provided for in a franchise agreement; and
  2. That is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
   B.   1. A fee similar to subsection A of this definition; or
  2. Any combination of subsections A or B of this definition.
DELIVERED VALUE: A. The fair market value of the taxable energy delivered for
sale or use in the city and includes:
  1. The value of the energy itself; and
  2. Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, service charges or
other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in usable form to
each class of customer in the city.
   B.   Delivered value does not include the amount of a tax paid under Utah
Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1 or part 2, or this article.
ENERGY SUPPLIER: A person supplying taxable energy, except for persons
supplying a de minimis amount of taxable energy, if such persons are excluded
by rule promulgated by the state tax commission.
FRANCHISE AGREEMENT: A franchise or an ordinance, contract or agreement
granting a franchise.
FRANCHISE TAX: A. A franchise tax.
   B.   A tax similar to a franchise tax; or
   C.   Any combination of subsection A or B of this definition.
PERSON: Includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association,
corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, this state,
any county, city, municipality, district, or other local governmental entity of
the state, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
SALE: Any transfer of title, exchange or barter, conditional or otherwise, in
any manner, of taxable energy for a consideration. It includes:
   A.   Installment and credit sales;
   B.   Any closed transaction constituting a sale;
   C.   Any transaction under which right to acquire, use or consume taxable
energy is granted under a lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable
if an outright sale were made.
STORAGE: Any keeping or retention of taxable energy in this city for any
purpose, except sale in the regular course of business.
TAXABLE ENERGY: Gas and electricity.
USE: A. The exercise of any right or power over taxable energy incident to the
ownership or the leasing of the taxable energy.
   B.   "Use" does not include the sale, display, demonstration or trial of the
taxable energy in the regular course of business and held for resale. (Ord. 6-
19-97A, 6-19-1997)
3-2B-3: TAX IMPOSED:
There is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of this article, a tax on
every sale or use of taxable energy made within the city equaling six percent
(6%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. This tax
shall be known as the municipal energy sales and use tax.
   A.   Calculation: The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the
taxable energy to the consumer.
   B.   Additional Tax: The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on
taxable energy imposed by the city as authorized by Utah Code Annotated title
59, chapter 12, part 2, the local sales and use tax act. (Ord. 6-5-2007B, 6-5-
2007)
3-2B-4: EXEMPTIONS TO TAX:
   A.   No exemptions are granted from the municipal energy sales and use tax,
except as expressly provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b);
notwithstanding an exemption granted under Utah Code Annotated section 59-1-
104.
   B.   The following are exempt from the municipal energy sales and use tax,
pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-305(2)(b):
      1.   Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel and special fuels subject
to taxation under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13;
      2.   Sales and use of taxable energy that is exempt from taxation under
federal law, the United States constitution or the Utah constitution;
      3.   Sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored for resale;
      4.   Sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if the primary use of
the taxable energy is for use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a
fuel subject to taxation under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 13;
      5.   Taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the
nonresident's own personal use or enjoyment while within the state, except
taxable energy purchased for use in the state by a nonresident living or
working in the state at the time of purchase;
      6.   The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than as a
fuel or energy; and
      7.   The sale of taxable energy for use outside the boundaries of the
city.
   C.   The sale, storage, use or other consumption of taxable energy is exempt
from the municipal energy sales and use tax levied by this article, provided:
      1.   The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a
municipal energy sales or use tax levied by another municipality within the
state authorized by Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 3; and
      2.   The city is paid the difference between the tax paid to the other
municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this article, if the
tax due under this article exceeds the tax paid to the other municipality.
(Ord. 6-19-97A, 6-19-1997)
3-2B-5: EXISTING FRANCHISE AGREEMENTS:
   A.   No Alteration: This article shall not alter any existing franchise
agreements between the city and energy suppliers.
   B.   Credit Against Tax Due: There is a credit against the tax due from any
consumer in the amount of a contractual franchise fee paid if:
      1.   The energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to the city
pursuant to a franchise agreement in effect on July 1, 1997;
      2.   The contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy
supplier to a consumer as a separately itemized charge; and
      3.   The energy supplier has accepted the franchise. (Ord. 6-19-97A, 6-
19-1997)
3-2B-6: CONTRACT WITH STATE TAX COMMISSION:
   A.   Required; Authority Of Mayor: On or before the effective date hereof,
the city shall contract with the state tax commission to perform all functions
incident to the administration and collection of the municipal energy sales and
use tax, in accordance with this article. (This contract may be a supplement to
the existing contract with the commission to administer and collect the local
sales and use tax, as provided in article 2A of this chapter, as applicable.)
The mayor is hereby authorized to enter (supplementary, as applicable) into
agreements with the state tax commission that may be necessary to the continued
administration and operation of the municipal energy sales and use tax
ordinance enacted by this article.
   B.   Monthly Payments By Supplier; Conditions: An energy supplier shall pay
the municipal energy sales and use tax revenues collected from consumers
directly to the city monthly if:
      1.   The city is the energy supplier; or
      2.   a. The energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and
use tax collected annually from its Utah consumers equals one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) or more; and
         b.   The energy supplier collects the municipal energy sales and use
tax.
   C.   Deduction Of Franchise Fees: An energy supplier paying the municipal
energy sales and use tax directly to the city may deduct any contractual
franchise fees collected by the energy supplier qualifying as a credit and
remit the net tax less any amount the energy supplier retains as authorized by
Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-307(4). (Ord. 6-19-97A, 6-19-1997)
3-2B-7: STATE STATUTES INCORPORATED:
   A.   Specified; Exemptions: Except as herein provided, and except insofar as
they are inconsistent with the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 10,
chapter 1, part 3, municipal energy sales and use tax act, as well as this
article, all of the provisions of Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12,
part 1, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective date hereof,
insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, excepting sections 59-12-101 and
59-12-119 thereof, and excepting for the amount of the sales and use taxes
levied therein, are hereby adopted and made a part of this article as if fully
set forth herein.
   B.   Substitution Of Terms: Wherever, and to the extent that in Utah Code
Annotated title 59, chapter 12, part 1, as amended, the state is named or
referred to as the "taxing agency", the name of the city shall be substituted,
insofar as is necessary for the purposes of that part, as well as Utah Code
Annotated title 10, chapter 1, part 3, as amended. Nothing in this subsection
shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the city for the word
"state" when that word is used as part of the title of the state tax
commission, or of the constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of the city be
substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of such a
substitution would require action to be taken by or against the city or any
agency thereof, rather than by or against the state tax commission in
performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this
article.
   C.   Amendments: Any amendments made to Utah Code Annotated title 59,
chapter 12, part 1, as amended, which would be applicable to the city for the
purposes of carrying out this article are hereby incorporated herein by
reference and shall be effective upon the date that they are effective as a
Utah statute. (Ord. 6-19-97A, 6-19-1997)
3-2B-8: ADDITIONAL LICENSE OR REPORTING NOT REQUIRED:
No additional license to collect or report the municipal energy sales and use
tax levied by this article is required, provided the energy supplier collecting
the tax has a license issued under Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-106. (Ord.
6-19-97A, 6-19-1997)
3-2B-9: EFFECTIVE DATE OF LEVY:
This article is effective June 30, 1997. The municipal energy sales and use tax
shall be levied beginning one minute after twelve o'clock (12:01) A.M., July 1,
1997. (Ord. 6-19-97A, 6-19-1997)
ARTICLE C.  TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE PROVIDERS TAX
SECTION:
3-2C-1: Definitions
3-2C-2: Levy Of Tax
3-2C-3: Rate
3-2C-4: Rate Limitation And Exemption (Rep. by Ord. 6-15-2010A, 6-15-2010)
3-2C-5: Effective Date Of Levy
3-2C-6: Changes In Rate Or Repeal Of Tax
3-2C-7: Interlocal Agreement For Collection
3-2C-8: Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees
3-2C-1: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this article:
COMMISSION: The Utah state tax commission.
CUSTOMER: A. Subject to subsections B and C of this definition, the person who
is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for
telecommunications service received under the contract.
   B.   For purposes of this article, "customer" means:
      1.   The person who is obligated under a contract with a
telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received
under the contract; or
      2.   If the end user is not the person described in subsection B1 of this
definition, the end user of telecommunications service.
   C.   "Customer" does not include a reseller:
      1.   Of telecommunications service; or
      2.   For mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an
agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider's
licensed service area.
END USER: A. The person who uses a telecommunications service.
   B.   For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is
not an individual, "end user" means the individual who uses the
telecommunications service on behalf of the person who is provided the
telecommunications service.
GROSS RECEIPTS ATTRIBUTED TO THE MUNICIPALITY: Those gross receipts from a
transaction for telecommunications services that is located within the
municipality for the purposes of sales and use taxes under Utah Code Annotated
title 59, chapter 12, sales and use tax act, and determined in accordance with
Utah Code Annotated section 59-12-207.
GROSS RECEIPTS FROM TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The revenue that a
telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered,
except for amounts collected or paid as:
   A.   A tax, fee or charge:
      1.   Imposed by a governmental entity;
      2.   Separately identified as a tax, fee or charge in the transaction
with the customer for the telecommunications service; and
      3.   Imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
   B.   Sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a
customer under Utah Code Annotated title 59, chapter 12, sales and use tax act;
or
   C.   Interest, a fee or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications
provider on a customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when
payment is due.
MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: As defined in the mobile telecommunications
sourcing act, 4 USC 124.
MUNICIPALITY: The City of Cedar Hills, Utah.
PLACE OF PRIMARY USE: A. For telecommunications service other than mobile
telecommunications service, means the street address representative of where
the customer's use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which
shall be:
      1.   The residential street address of the customer; or
      2.   The primary business street address of the customer; or
   B.   For mobile telecommunications service, is as defined in the mobile
telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC 124.
SERVICE ADDRESS: Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid, "service
address" means:
   A.   If the location described in this subsection is known, the location of
the telecommunications equipment:
      1.   To which a call is charged; and
      2.   From which the call originates or terminates;
   B.   If the location described in subsection A of this definition is not
known but the location described in this subsection is known, the location of
the origination point of the signal of the telecommunications service first
identified by:
      1.   The telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or
      2.   If the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the
telecommunications provider, information received by the telecommunications
provider from its service provider; or
   C.   If the locations described in subsection A or B of this definition are
not known, the location of a customer's place of primary use.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: A. Subject to subsections B and C of this
definition, "telecommunications provider" means a person that:
      1.   Owns, controls, operates or manages a telecommunications service; or
      2.   Engages in an activity described in subsection A1 of this definition
for the shared use with or resale to any person of the telecommunications
service.
   B.   A person described in subsection A of this definition is a
"telecommunications provider" whether or not the public service commission of
Utah regulates:
      1.   That person; or
      2.   The telecommunications service that the person owns, controls,
operates or manages.
   C.   "Telecommunications provider" does not include an aggregator as defined
in Utah Code Annotated section 54-8b-2.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: A. "Telephone service", as defined in Utah Code
Annotated section 59-12-102, other than mobile telecommunications service, that
originates and terminates within the boundaries of this state; and
   B.   Mobile telecommunications service, as defined in Utah Code Annotated
section 59-12-102:
      1.   That originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state;
and
      2.   Only to the extent permitted by the mobile telecommunications
sourcing act, 4 USC 116 et seq. (Ord. 5-4-2004A, 5-4-2004)
3-2C-2: LEVY OF TAX:
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross
receipts from telecommunications service attributed to this municipality. (Ord.
5-4-2004A, 5-4-2004)
3-2C-3: RATE:
The rate of the tax levy shall be 3.5 percent of the telecommunication
provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service that are attributed
to the municipality, subject to the following:
If the location of a transaction is determined to be other than this
municipality, then the rate imposed on the gross receipts for
telecommunications services shall be the lower of: a) the rate imposed by the
taxing jurisdiction in which the transaction is located; or b) the rate for
nonmobile telecommunication services shall be the rate imposed by the
municipality in which the customer's service address is located; or for mobile
telecommunications service, the rate imposed by the municipality of the
customer's primary place of use. (Ord. 6-15-2010A, 6-15-2010)
3-2C-4: RATE LIMITATION AND EXEMPTION:
(Rep. by Ord. 6-15-2010A, 6-15-2010)
3-2C-5: EFFECTIVE DATE OF LEVY:
This tax shall be levied beginning the earlier of October 1, 2010, or the first
day of any calendar quarter after a ninety (90) day period beginning on the
date the commission received notice pursuant to Utah code section 10-1-403 that
this municipality has enacted the ordinance codified herein. (Ord. 6-15-2010A,
6-15-2010)
3-2C-6: CHANGES IN RATE OR REPEAL OF TAX:
This article is subject to the requirements of Utah Code Annotated section 10-
1-403. If the tax rate is changed or the tax is repealed, then the appropriate
notice shall be given as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-403.
(Ord. 5-4-2004A, 5-4-2004)
3-2C-7: INTERLOCAL AGREEMENT FOR COLLECTION:
On or before the effective date hereof, the municipality shall enter into the
uniform interlocal agreement with the commission as described in Utah Code
Annotated section 10-1-405 for the collection, enforcement and administration
of this municipal telecommunications license tax. (Ord. 5-4-2004A, 5-4-2004)
3-2C-8: REPEAL OF INCONSISTENT TAXES AND FEES:
   A.   Any tax or fee previously enacted by this municipality under authority
of Utah Code Annotated section 10-1-203, or Utah Code Annotated title 11,
chapter 26, local taxation of utilities limitation, is hereby repealed.
   B.   Nothing in this article shall be interpreted to repeal any municipal
ordinance or fee which provides that the municipality may recover from a
telecommunications provider the management costs of the municipality caused by
the activities of the telecommunications provider in the rights of way of the
municipality, if the fee is imposed in accordance with Utah Code Annotated
section 72-7-102 and is not related to the municipality's loss of use of a
highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a
right of way, or increased deterioration of a highway as a result of the
activities of the telecommunications provider in a right of way, nor does this
article limit the municipality's right to charge fees or taxes on persons that
are not subject to the municipal telecommunications license tax under this
article and locate telecommunications facilities, as defined in Utah Code
Annotated section 72-7-108, in this municipality. (Ord. 5-4-2004A, 5-4-2004)
ARTICLE D.  PARC TAX
SECTION:
3-2D-1: Purpose
3-2D-2: Tax Imposed
3-2D-3: Effective Dates
3-2D-1: PURPOSE:
The City of Cedar Hills hereby imposes a 0.1% Sales and Use Tax, referred to as
the "PARC Tax", pursuant to the City or Town Option Funding for Botanical,
Cultural, Recreational, and Zoological Organizations or Facilities, title 59,
chapter 12, part 14 of the Utah Code (the "Act") for the purpose of financing
cultural, recreational and botanical organizations or facilities within the
City of Cedar Hills. The PARC Tax will be levied and administered under the
terms of the Act. (Ord. 12-05-2017A, 12-5-2017)
3-2D-2: TAX IMPOSED:
The PARC Tax will be imposed upon the transactions described in section 59-12-
103(1) of the Act, that are located within the City of Cedar Hills, except as
such transactions are exempt from Sales and Use Taxes under section 59-12-104
of the Act. The PARC Tax shall be used to fund any eligible facilities and
organizations described in the Act. The PARC Tax supplements, but does not
replace, the Sales and Use Tax established under article A of this chapter.
(Ord. 12-05-2017A, 12-5-2017)
3-2D-3: EFFECTIVE DATES:
The PARC Tax will take effect on April 1, 2018 and will remain effective for
ten (10) years after that date. For transactions subject to the PARC Tax
pursuant to section 59-12-103(1)(b) - (m), the effective date shall be the
first day of the billing period that begins after April 1, 2018, if the billing
period for the transaction begins before April 1, 2018. For catalogues sales
(as defined by the Utah State Tax Commission) where the amount of the tax due
is based on tax rates published in the catalogue, the effective date shall be
June 1, 2018. (Ord. 12-05-2017A, 12-5-2017)
TITLE 4
HEALTH AND SAFETY 1
CHAPTER 1
WASTE AND RECYCLING
SECTION:
4-1-1: Intent
4-1-2: Definitions
4-1-3: Improper Disposal Of Waste Prohibited
4-1-4: Accumulation Of Waste Prohibited; Exception
4-1-5: MSW Pick Up Services
4-1-6: Recyclable Pick Up Services
4-1-7: Title To MSW And Recyclables
4-1-8: User Charges; Board Of Equalization
4-1-9: Billing And Payment Of Fees; Collection
4-1-10: Penalty
 
Notes
1 1. Fire and emergency services are provided through agreement whereby the
  City became a member of the Lone Peak Public Safety District.
4-1-1: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter shall be to:
   A.   Prohibit the creation of nuisances or health hazards to the community
and its residents as the result of the unsafe accumulation of waste or the
improper disposal of waste.
   B.   Prohibit the indiscriminate disposal and/or accumulation of waste
except in established disposal sites that have been approved and are maintained
in accordance with public health standards.
   C.   Encourage the efficient collection and disposal of waste in a safe,
sanitary manner. (Ord. 1-17-2012B, 1-17-2012)
4-1-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
AUTOMATED COLLECTION VEHICLE: A vehicle equipped with automatic features
designed to empty MSW and recycling containers.
AUTOMATED RESIDENTIAL/MSW CONTAINER: As approved by the city, a container
designed specifically for automated collection and equipped with wheels for
easy movement by residents and other city users and a permanently attached
tightfitting lid.
AUTOMATED RESIDENTIAL/MUNICIPAL RECYCLING CONTAINER: As approved by the city, a
container designed specifically for automated collection and equipped with
wheels for easy movement by residents and other city users and a permanently
attached tightfitting lid.
BULKY WASTE: Waste that is not capable of being stored in the approved
containers and cannot be picked up by an automated collection vehicle including
items such as appliances, furniture, large tree branches, lawn sod, Christmas
trees, etc.
COLLECTION SERVICES: The removal and disposal of MSW and recyclables.
COMMERCIAL USERS: An enterprise, not a residence, such as a business,
association, corporation, manufacturer, hotel, motel, resort, church, school,
etc.
COMMERCIAL WASTE: Garbage, rubbish, food waste, etc., resulting from the normal
activities of commercial uses.
CONSTRUCTION/DEMOLITION WASTE: Waste building materials and rubble resulting
from construction, remodeling, repair, or demolition operations on houses,
buildings, structures, or pavements.
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste or food packaging refuse resulting from
handling, preparing, cooking, or consumption of food.
HAZARDOUS WASTE: Any chemical, compound, mixture, substance, or article that is
designated by the United States environmental protection agency and/or the
state of Utah department of environmental quality to be "hazardous" as that
term is defined by or pursuant to federal, state or local law.
ILLEGAL DISPOSAL: The discharge, deposit, injection, dumping, spilling,
leaking, burning, or placing of any waste into or on any land or water.
MUNICIPAL SOLID WASTE (MSW): Any garbage, trash, refuse, rubbish, sludge or
discarded material, including solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous
material resulting from residential, commercial, and community activities, but
does not include solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage or in
irrigation return flows or discharge for which a permit is required under Utah
Code Annotated, as amended.
NONPROCESSIBLE WASTE: Goods and material that are not residential/municipal
waste and/or recyclables are prohibited by the disposal facility, which may
include, but is not limited to, the following items:
   A.   Any loads the majority of which consists of any combustible material.
   B.   Hazardous waste of any kind.
   C.   Any material that when incinerated clearly conducts electricity.
   D.   Explosives, medical or pathological waste, animal or human body parts
or remains, any materials the majority of which is liquid, white goods or
appliances, construction debris or nonprocessible proportions, large metal
objects of any kind, large sealed containers of any kind, motor vehicles or
related parts, any item exceeding two feet by two feet by five feet (2' x 2' x
5') in dimensions, wood having a cross section exceeding nine inches (9") or
five feet (5') in length, any vehicle containing material that is on fire, "hot
load", or drywall.
   E.   Commercial waste, food waste, and bulky waste.
PERSON: An individual, family, trust, firm, joint stock company, corporation
(including government corporation), partnership, association, state,
municipality, commission or political subdivision of the state, or any
interstate body whether organized for profit or not.
RECYCLABLES: Used or waste materials fit to undergo reuse or renewal.
RESIDENTIAL/MUNICIPAL WASTE: Garbage and rubbish produced by or resulting from
the normal activities of a residential unit or city properties.
RESIDENTIAL UNIT: An occupied dwelling unit such as a single- family dwelling
or a multi-family dwelling of four (4) or less units that is located adjacent
to a public street. Each unit of a multi-family dwelling shall be considered a
separate residence for purposes of billing. A dwelling unit is not occupied if
the persons living therein are absent for over ninety (90) days or are absent
for thirty (30) continuous days after notice to the city, whichever period is
shorter.
RUBBISH: All waste except garbage and hazardous waste including, but not
limited to, ashes, bedding, cardboard, paper, wood, cans, metal, glass,
crockery, rubber, plastic, leather, rags, and yard trimmings. (Ord. 1-17-2012B,
1-17-2012)
4-1-3: IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF WASTE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dispose of any waste on any property
within the city. It shall also be unlawful for any person to allow the disposal
of waste on property belonging to or owned by said person. It shall be unlawful
to burn any waste within the city corporate limits, except as permitted by city
ordinance, by rules and regulations of the Lone Peak public safety district,
and by the state board of health. (Ord. 1-17-2012B, 1-17-2012)
4-1-4: ACCUMULATION OF WASTE PROHIBITED; EXCEPTION:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit waste to accumulate, collect, or
remain upon any property except that the temporary accumulation of MSW for
subsequent disposal, as provided in this chapter, shall be permitted provided:
   A.   The period of accumulation shall not exceed two (2) weeks.
   B.   All accumulated MSW shall be placed in approved residential/municipal
waste containers. (Ord. 1-17-2012B, 1-17-2012)
4-1-5: MSW PICK UP SERVICES:
   A.   City To Remove MSW: The city shall provide collection services to all
persons owning and/or occupying any property in the city. It shall be presumed
that all dwellings, commercial establishments, and other producers of MSW are
to utilize such collection services unless they shall have made application to
and received authorization from the city to remove and dispose of their own
MSW.
   B.   MSW Made Available For Collection:
      1.   All persons owning and/or occupying any property in the city shall
make all MSW on said property available for collection services on a regular
basis in accordance with the terms of this chapter.
      2.   If MSW is determined to be unacceptable due to insufficient
preparation of materials, a sticker or other form of notification explaining
the proper method of preparation of MSW shall be left at the residence.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to accumulate and/or place in an approved
residential/municipal waste container any waste defined herein as
"nonprocessible waste".
   C.   Collection Containers:
      1.   The city shall provide the owner and/or occupant of each residence
with one approved residential/municipal waste container. The cost for use of
said container shall be borne by the owner and/or occupant to be included as a
part of the city's monthly utility billing. Only MSW placed in said container
will be collected. Additional containers may be obtained at the user's expense.
      2.   In the case of multiple dwellings or commercial users, the city may
approve the use of bulk containers.
      3.   Where so authorized, bulk containers shall be so constructed as to
be capable of being collected by vehicles designed for that purpose. Such
containers shall be of a condition and state of repair to permit safe operation
and shall be kept clean, neat and sanitary. Said containers shall be placed at
locations, as specified by the city, which are readily accessible for
collection services and will not constitute a nuisance or hazard.
   D.   Time And Place Of Pick Up:
      1.   Collection services shall be once a week. Service may be delayed one
day on certain holidays.
      2.   Approved residential/municipal waste containers shall be made
available for collection services no earlier than the evening prior to the day
of collection and shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours after
collection. See also subsection 4-2-3C5 of this title.
      3.   Approved residential/municipal waste containers shall be placed
within two feet (2') of the blacktop or in the gutter, if curb and gutter is
present, and at a location that is readily accessible to the automated
collection vehicle. (Ord. 1-17-2012B, 1-17-2012)
4-1-6: RECYCLABLE PICK UP SERVICES:
   A.   City To Remove Recyclables: The city shall provide recyclable
collection services to all persons owning and/or occupying any property in the
city upon request.
   B.   Collection Containers: The city shall provide the owner and/or occupant
of each residence, upon request, with an approved residential/municipal
recycling container. The cost for use of said container will be borne by the
owner and/or occupant to be included as a part of the city's monthly utility
billing. Only recyclables placed in said container will be collected.
Additional containers may be obtained at the user's expense.
   C.   Acceptable Recyclables:
      1.   A list of acceptable recyclables will be provided to the owner and/
or occupant of each residence. The list will be provided yearly or when there
are any changes or additions to the items that can be recycled.
      2.   If recyclables are determined to be unacceptable due to insufficient
preparation of materials, a sticker or other form of notification explaining
the proper method of preparation of recyclables shall be left at the residence.
      3.   It shall be unlawful to accumulate and/or place in an approved
residential/municipal recycling container anything other than acceptable
recyclables.
   D.   Time And Place Of Pick Up:
      1.   Collection services shall be biweekly along with and on the same day
as MSW collection services. Service may be delayed one day on certain holidays.
      2.   Approved residential/municipal recycling containers shall be made
available for collection services no earlier than the evening prior to the day
of collection and shall be removed within twenty four (24) hours after
collection. See also subsection 4-2-3C5 of this title.
      3.   Approved residential/municipal recycling containers shall be placed
within two feet (2') of the blacktop or in the gutter, if curb and gutter is
present, and at a location that is readily accessible to the automated
collection vehicle. (Ord. 1-17-2012B, 1-17-2012)
4-1-7: TITLE TO MSW AND RECYCLABLES:
The owner and/or occupant shall relinquish title to all MSW and/or recyclables
following collection services. (Ord. 1-17-2012B, 1-17-2012)
4-1-8: USER CHARGES; BOARD OF EQUALIZATION:
   A.   Rates And Fees Established By City Council: Rates and charges for the
rental and use of automated residential/MSW and recycling containers for use,
penalty fees for delinquency in payment, and other fees applicable to the
operation shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the city council
according to the city fee schedule. The city council may also, by resolution,
establish various classes of users, enact rules for levying, billing,
guaranteeing, and collecting charges for city utility services.
   B.   Board Of Equalization: The city council is hereby constituted as the
board of equalization of city utility rates to hear complaints and make
corrections of any assessments or charges deemed to be illegal, unequal, or
unjust. (Ord. 1-17-2012B, 1-17-2012)
4-1-9: BILLING AND PAYMENT OF FEES; COLLECTION:
See section
7-1A-4 of this code. (Ord. 1-17-2012B, 1-17-2012)
4-1-10: PENALTY:
Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be a class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 1-17-2012B, 1-17-2012)
ARTICLE A.  CONSTRUCTION RELATED WASTE DISPOSAL
SECTION:
4-1A-1: Intent
4-1A-2: Definitions
4-1A-3: Improper Disposal Of Solid Waste Prohibited
4-1A-4: Accumulation Of Waste Material In Approved Dumpsters
4-1A-5: Provision For Adequate Toilet Facilities
4-1A-6: Penalty
4-1A-1: INTENT:
The intent of this article shall be to:
   A.   Prohibit the creation of nuisances or health hazards to the community
and its residents as the result of the unsafe accumulation of garbage or other
waste material or the improper disposal of such materials as it relates to
construction sites.
   B.   Prohibit the indiscriminate dumping of solid waste material except in
established disposal sites that have been approved and are maintained in
accordance with public health standards.
   C.   Encourage the efficient collection and disposal of solid waste material
in a safe, sanitary manner.
   D.   Eliminate unsanitary conditions at construction sites as it relates to
lack of adequate toilet facilities. (Ord. 5-5-98A, 5-5-1998)
4-1A-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following
meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CONSTRUCTION SITES: Shall connote, unless otherwise explicitly stated, any
parcel of land that is being improved, including, but not limited to, any site
that has received any type of building permit.
DUMPSTER: Any covered metal or covered wood container with a capacity of at
least five (5) cubic yards and used for disposal of construction related waste
material. (Ord. 5-5-98A, 5-5-1998)
4-1A-3: IMPROPER DISPOSAL OF SOLID WASTE PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to dump or otherwise dispose of any solid
waste material on any property within the city. It shall also be unlawful for
any owner of land to allow such unlawful dumping or disposal of solid waste on
property belonging to said owner. It shall be unlawful to burn any solid waste
within the city corporate limits, except as permitted by city ordinance and by
rules and regulations of the fire department and state board of health. (Ord.
5-5-98A, 5-5-1998)
4-1A-4: ACCUMULATION OF WASTE MATERIAL IN APPROVED DUMPSTERS:
All construction sites shall maintain and service a dumpster that has been
approved by the chief building official for the purpose of disposing of any
type of solid waste related to the construction site. The dumpster may be
placed anywhere within the setback area and may not impede or obstruct the
corner lot clear view of intersections or sidewalks. (Ord. 5-5-98A, 5-5-1998;
amd. 2004 Code)
   A.   Number Of Dumpsters Required: Each construction site shall be required
to have at least one covered dumpster.
   B.   Retainage Of Waste Material Within Dumpsters Required: All nonwood
waste material on each construction site shall be contained within the confines
of a dumpster. Wood waste may be stacked in a specified location on site. (Ord.
5-5-98A, 5-5-1998)
4-1A-5: PROVISION FOR ADEQUATE TOILET FACILITIES:
Each construction site shall be required to provide and maintain an adequate,
sanitary, toilet facility for on site workers.
   A.   Location: The toilet facility shall be located anywhere within the
setback area and may not impede or obstruct the corner lot clear view of
intersections or sidewalks.
   B.   Exceptions: A contractor having more than one job on the same street
and block may be allowed by the chief building official to have one toilet
facility to accommodate up to a total of four (4) construction sites within the
same street and block. All exceptions must be submitted in writing to the chief
building official prior to work beginning. (Ord. 5-5-98A, 5-5-1998)
4-1A-6: PENALTY:
   A.   Notice; Fine; Stop Order: Failure to comply with the provisions as set
forth herein shall be subject to the following:
      1.   A warning notice shall be either hand delivered to the on site
workers or posted on the construction site. Notice shall indicate the
violation, a compliance date and the fine amount.
      2.   Should the violation not be corrected within the set time given by
the chief building official, the contractor shall be fined fifty dollars
($50.00) per day until such time as the violation is corrected.
      3.   After seven (7) days of noncompliance, a stop work order shall be
issued to the contractor and all work shall cease immediately until proper
resolution of the outstanding violation.
   B.   Maximum Fines And Fees: Fines and fees shall not exceed the amount
allowable under a class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 5-5-98A, 5-5-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 2
NUISANCES
SECTION:
4-2-1: Purpose
4-2-2: Definitions
4-2-3: Nuisance Defined And Enumerated
4-2-4: Exceptions
4-2-5: Responsibility Of Nuisances
4-2-6: Abatement; Administration
4-2-7: Finding Of Nuisance
4-2-8: Voluntary Correction
4-2-9: Administrative Citation
4-2-10: Other Remedies
4-2-11: Appeals
4-2-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to provide a means for the city and individuals
to identify nuisances within the city and to provide a means for correcting or
abating the nuisances. The city needs the ability to abate nuisances in order
to protect the health and safety of the public, to foster neighborhood
stability, to preserve the appearance, character and beauty of neighborhoods,
to encourage community pride, to preserve the value of property, and to protect
the general welfare of the city and its citizens, businesses, and visitors. The
provisions of this code shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the
abatement of the growth and spread of injurious and noxious weeds, garbage and
refuse, public nuisances, and illegal objects and structures. This chapter
provides for progressive enforcement measures to abate nuisances; the most
aggressive forms of enforcement are generally preserved for the most
recalcitrant violators of this chapter. (Ord. 04-02-2013A, 4-2-2013)
4-2-2: DEFINITIONS:
ABATE: To repair, replace, remove, destroy, correct or otherwise remedy a
condition that constitutes a nuisance by such means, in such a manner and to
such an extent as the zoning administrator, or his designee, determines is
necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the
community.
COMPLETION DATE: The date by which the responsible person must abate a
nuisance. The completion date is originally set by the zoning administrator in
the voluntary correction notice/agreement or in the administrative citation.
The completion date may be modified by the hearing officer.
EMERGENCY: A situation that, in the opinion of the zoning administrator,
requires immediate action to prevent or eliminate an immediate threat to the
health or safety of a person or property.
HEARING OFFICER: The person(s) designated to hear appeals pursuant to this
chapter. The hearing officer shall be the City of Cedar Hills city manager or
his or her designee. The designee need not be a city employee. The city manager
may also appoint a committee to function as the hearing officer.
OWNER: Any property owner, lessee, occupant or other person who, alone or with
others, has title or interest in any building or premises, with or without
accompanying actual possession thereof. For the purpose of giving notice, the
term "owner" also includes any person in charge or physical possession of the
premises and/or property involved.
PREMISES: A plot of ground, whether occupied or not.
PROPERTY: Any real or personal property, or any combination thereof, including,
but not limited to, land, buildings, fixtures and vehicles.
PUBLIC PLACE: An area generally visible to public view and includes alleys,
bridges, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks, streets and
buildings open to the general public, including those that serve food or drink
or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or
dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
RESPONSIBLE PERSON: The person(s) responsible for correcting or abating a
nuisance pursuant to this chapter. The responsible person includes the property
owner who commits, creates, aids in creating, or contributes to a nuisance, or
who supports, continues, maintains, retains, or otherwise causes or permits a
nuisance to occur or remain upon property in the city, and includes, but is not
limited to, the owner(s), lessor(s), lessee(s), agent(s), occupant(s), or other
person(s) entitled to control, use and/or occupy property where a nuisance
occurs. In cases where there are more than one responsible persons, the city
may proceed against one, some, or all of them.
WEED: A plant out of place, not intentionally sown, whose undesirable qualities
outweigh its good points. County noxious weed is any plant which is not on the
state noxious weed list, is especially troublesome in a particular county, and
is declared by the county legislative body to be noxious weed within its
county. Noxious weed is any plant the Utah state commissioner of agriculture
and food determines to be especially injurious to public health, crops,
livestock, land, or other property.
ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: Enforcement personnel hired or assigned by the city to
enforce this chapter. (Ord. 04-02-2013A, 4-2-2013)
4-2-3: NUISANCE DEFINED AND ENUMERATED:
   A.   Scope: This section defines "nuisance" by providing five (5) general
definitions of what constitutes a nuisance, and then providing specific
examples of situations, conduct or activities that constitute nuisances. Every
situation, conduct or activity listed herein constitutes a nuisance and shall
be subject to abatement pursuant to this chapter.
   B.   Purpose: The purpose of the general definitions is to allow the city to
classify an offending situation, conduct or activity as a nuisance, even though
the situation, conduct or activity may not be listed as a nuisance in the
specific examples. The first three (3) general definitions are taken directly
from Utah state law. The purpose of listing the specific examples is to
identify some of the specific situations, conduct and activities that the city
intends to abate as nuisances.
   C.   General Definitions Of Nuisance: Any activity that meets any one or
more of the five (5) definitions set forth below shall constitute a "nuisance"
if it occurs within the City of Cedar Hills:
      1.   Nuisance As Defined In Utah Code Annotated Section 78B-6-1101:
Anything that is injurious to health, indecent, offensive to the senses, or an
obstruction of the free use of property, so as to interfere with the
comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
      2.   Nuisance As Defined In Utah Code Annotated Section 76-10-801(1): Any
item, thing, manner, or condition whatsoever that is dangerous to human life or
health or renders soil, air, water, or food impure or unwholesome.
      3.   Nuisance As Defined In Utah Code Annotated Section 76-10-803:
Unlawfully doing any act or omitting to perform any duty, which act or
omission:
         a.   Annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health or
safety of three (3) or more persons;
         b.   Offends public decency;
         c.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage, any lake, stream, canal, or basin, or any public
park, square, street, or highway; or
         d.   In any way renders three (3) or more persons insecure in life or
the use of property;
         e.   An act that affects three (3) or more persons in any of the ways
specified in this subsection is still a nuisance regardless of the extent to
which the annoyance or damage inflicted on individuals is unequal.
      4.   Nuisance: A condition that:
         a.   Wrongfully annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health or safety of others; or
         b.   Unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or
render dangerous for passage, any public park, square, street, or highway, or
any other public place or right-of-way; or
         c.   In any way renders other persons insecure in life, or in the use
of property, and that affects the rights of an entire community or
neighborhood, although the extent of the damage may be unequal.
      5.   Specific Nuisances Enumerated: The examples enumerated below are not
exhaustive. A situation, conduct or activity not listed below, but coming
within one of the general definitions of nuisance listed above, shall also
constitute a nuisance. The first six (6) listed nuisances are also listed as
nuisances pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 78B-6-1107:
         a.   Drug Houses: Every building or premises where the unlawful sale,
manufacture, service, storage, distribution, dispensing, or acquisition of any
controlled substance, precursor, or analog specified in title 58, chapter 37 of
the Utah Code (Utah Controlled Substance Act) occurs.
         b.   Gambling: Every building or premises where gambling is permitted
to be played, conducted, or dealt upon as prohibited in title 76, chapter 10,
part 11 of the Utah Code (gambling) that creates the conditions of a "nuisance"
as defined in subsection C1 of this section.
         c.   Gangs: Every building or premises wherein criminal activity is
committed in concert with two (2) or more persons as provided in section 76-3-
203.1 of the Utah Code.
         d.   Party Houses: Every building or premises where parties occur
frequently that create the conditions of a "nuisance" as defined in subsection
C1 of this section.
         e.   Prostitution: Every building or premises where prostitution or
the promotion of prostitution is regularly carried on by one or more persons as
provided in title 76, chapter 10, part 13 (prostitution) of the Utah Code.
         f.   Weapons: Every building or premises where a violation of title
76, chapter 10, part 5 (weapons) of the Utah Code occurs on the premises.
         g.   Unsafe Condition: A condition that unreasonably or unlawfully
affects the health or safety of one or more persons.
         h.   Fire Hazard: A fire hazard.
         i.   Noxious Emanations: Emanation of noxious or unreasonable odors,
fumes, gas, smoke, soot or cinders. (Ord. 04-02-2013A, 4-2-2013)
         j.   Weeds: Vegetation which is uncultivated, useless, unsightly, or
which has become a fire hazard or is otherwise determined by the City to be
noxious, dangerous, or a nuisance. The term "weeds" shall also include, but is
not limited to, poison ivy (Rhus toxicodendron), poison oak (Rhus diversiloba),
poison sumac (Rhus vernix), and those plants named in or listed pursuant to the
Utah Noxious Weed Act, as set forth in Utah Code Annotated section 4-17-101 et
seq., as amended.
            (1)   Weeds on any property shall be eradicated by chemicals,
cutting or some other acceptable method so they do not exceed six inches (6")
in height.
            (2)   Weeds that are rototilled, plowed, or harrowed shall be
buried under the soil as part of the eradication.
            (3)   If the Zoning Administrator determines that the large size of
the property makes cutting of all the weeds impractical, the Zoning
Administrator may issue an order limiting the required cutting of weeds to a
firebreak of not less than fifteen feet (15') in width around any structures
and around the complete perimeter of the property or part thereof, except as
allowed by subsection C5j(4) of this section.
            (4)   Upon written request by the owner of real property, and upon
good cause showing, real property not in close proximity to buildings or other
structures or not creating a serious nuisance or fire hazard may be exempted by
the Zoning Administrator from the weed control requirements.
            (5)   Lots being used for livestock pasture or agricultural crops
are exempt from the maximum height limit. (Ord. 11-21-2017C, 11-21-2017)
         k.   Refuse: Keeping or storing of any refuse or waste matter that
interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of nearby property.
         l.   Stagnant Water: Polluted or stagnant water that constitutes an
unhealthy or unsafe condition.
         m.   Improper Accumulations: Accumulation of soil, litter, debris,
plant trimmings, or trash, visible from the street or an adjoining property.
         n.   Accumulation Of Junk: Accumulation of used or damaged lumber;
junk; salvage materials; abandoned, discarded or unused furniture; stoves,
sinks, toilets, cabinets, or other fixtures or equipment stored so as to be
visible from a public street, alley, or adjoining property. However, nothing
herein shall preclude the placement of stacked firewood for personal
noncommercial use on the premises.
         o.   Attractive Nuisances: Any attractive nuisance dangerous to
children and other persons including, but not limited to, abandoned, broken, or
neglected household appliances, equipment and machinery, abandoned foundations
or excavations, or improperly maintained or secured pools.
         p.   Vegetation: Dead, decayed, diseased, or hazardous trees, weeds,
hedges, and overgrown or uncultivated vegetation that is in a hazardous
condition, is an obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or that is
likely to harbor rats, vermin, or other pests. Trees and landscaping which
overhang the street pavement shall be trimmed to a minimum height of thirteen
and one-half feet (131/2') above the street pavement.
         q.   Dust: Any premises that causes excessive dust due to lack of
landscaping, nonmaintenance or other cause.
         r.   Improper Storage: The keeping, storing, depositing or
accumulating on the premises or in the public right of way for an unreasonable
period of time of dirt, sand, gravel, concrete, or other similar materials, or
maintenance of such material on public rights of way. Material stored as part
of an active construction project shall not be considered a nuisance.
         s.   Garbage Can: The presence of any outdoor garbage can or refuse
container without a lid or with a lid that is not closed, or the leaving of any
garbage can or refuse container in the street, other than on collection day,
for more than twenty four (24) hours after the collection day 1 .
         t.   Construction Equipment: Construction equipment or machinery of
any type or description parked or stored on property when it is readily visible
from a public street, alley or adjoining property, except while excavation,
construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit are
in progress on the subject property or an adjoining property, or where the
property is zoned for the storage of construction equipment and/or machinery.
         u.   Improper Sign: Improper maintenance of a sign, or signs that
advertise a business that is no longer extant on the property.
         v.   Improper Parking Or Storage:
            (1)   Parking or storage of inoperative, unregistered, abandoned,
wrecked or dismantled vehicles, boats, trailers or vehicle parts, including
recreational vehicles, on a premises or in the public right of way. Storage or
parking that is specifically allowed by the city's zoning ordinance shall not
be considered a nuisance.
            (2)   Parking or storage of registered vehicles, trailers or boats
in violation of city ordinance.
            (3)   The parking or storage of any recreational vehicle on any
premises or property shall be considered a nuisance unless the recreational
vehicle is parked or stored upon a hard concrete pad surface that extends to
the edges of the recreational vehicle.
         w.   Hazardous Conditions: Any wall, sign, fence, gate, hedge, or
structure maintained in such condition of deterioration or disrepair as to
constitute a hazard to persons or property.
         x.   Graffiti: Graffiti that remains on the exterior of any building,
fence, sign, or other structure and is visible from a public street.
         y.   Improper Maintenance: Maintenance of buildings and/or structures
in such condition as to be deemed defective or in a condition of deterioration
or disrepair, including, but not limited to:
            (1)   Any building or structure that is unfit for human habitation,
or that is an unreasonable hazard to the health of people residing in the
vicinity thereof, or that presents an unreasonable fire hazard in the vicinity
where it is located; or
            (2)   Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed,
altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of
city ordinances, or any use of land, buildings or premises in violation of city
ordinances; or
            (3)   Buildings that are abandoned, partially destroyed, or left in
an unreasonable state of partial construction for a period of six (6) months or
longer. An "unreasonable state of partial construction" is defined as any
unfinished building or structure where the appearance or condition of the
building or structure does not meet the requirements for finished buildings or
structures as required by applicable city ordinances or building codes. The
building or structure shall not be considered to be a nuisance if it is under
active construction; or
            (4)   Buildings having dry rot, warping, termite infestation,
decay, excessive cracking, peeling, or chalking, as to render the building
unsightly and/or in a state of disrepair; or
            (5)   Buildings with missing doors and/or windows containing broken
glass and/or no glass at all where the window is of a type that normally
contains glass; or
            (6)   Building exteriors, walls, fences, gates, driveways,
sidewalks, walkways, signs or ornamentation, or alleys maintained in such
condition as to render them unsightly and/or in a state of disrepair; or
            (7)   Buildings or conditions that violate any building,
electrical, plumbing, fire, housing, or other code adopted by the city.
         z.   City Code Nuisances: Any violation of a City of Cedar Hills
ordinance that expressly declares a specific situation, conduct or activity to
be a nuisance.
         aa.   Alcohol: Every property or premises not licensed under
applicable state law or city ordinance where any intoxicating liquors or
alcohol are kept for unlawful use, sale or distribution.
         bb.   Inappropriate Conduct: Every property or premises where there
exists an environment that causes, encourages or allows individuals or groups
of individuals to commit one or more of the following acts on the property,
premises or adjacent public place, including, but not limited to:
            (1)   Illegally consuming intoxicating liquor or alcohol;
            (2)   Publicly urinating or defecating;
            (3)   By physical action, intentionally causing or attempting to
cause another person to reasonably fear imminent bodily injury or the
commission of a criminal act upon their person or upon property in their
immediate possession;
            (4)   Engaging in acts of violence, including fighting amongst
themselves;
            (5)   Discharging a firearm or explosive in violation of city
ordinance 2  or state law;
            (6)   Creating unreasonable noise that disturbs others;
            (7)   Intentionally obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or
            (8)   Soliciting acts of prostitution.
         cc.   Dangerous Conditions: Any fence, wall, shed, deck, house,
garage, building, structure or any part of the aforesaid; or any tree, pole,
smokestack; or any excavation, hole, pit, basement, cellar, sidewalk, subspace,
dock, or loading dock; or any lot, land, yard, premises or location that in its
entirety, or in any part thereof, by reason of the condition in that the same
is found or permitted to be or remain, shall or may endanger the health,
safety, life, limb or property, or cause any hurt, harm, inconvenience,
discomfort, damage or injury to any one or more individuals in the city, in any
one or more of the following particulars:
            (1)   By reason of being a menace, threat and/or hazard to the
general health and safety of the community.
            (2)   By reason of being a fire hazard.
            (3)   By reason of being unsafe for occupancy, or use on, in, upon,
about or around the aforesaid property.
            (4)   By reason of lack of sufficient or adequate maintenance of
the property, and/or being vacant, any of which depreciates the enjoyment and
use of the property in the immediate vicinity to such an extent that it is
harmful to the community in which such property is situated or such condition
exists.
         dd.   Illegal Accessory Apartments: Any violation of the city's zoning
ordinance.
         ee.   Family: Keeping or allowing people at a premises in violation of
the city's single-family residence requirements.
         ff.   Parking On Landscaping: Parking in an area required to be
landscaped by city ordinance.
         gg.   Banner Signs: Keeping or allowing banner signs in violation of
city ordinance.
         hh.   Required Landscaping: Failure to install or maintain landscaping
required by city ordinance.
         ii.   Miscellaneous Sanitary Regulations: It shall be unlawful and a
nuisance to do any of the following:
            (1)   To place, conduct or discharge into or on any street, alley,
sidewalk, gutter, water ditch or canal, or any vacant lot, any rancid fat or
grease waste material, any filthy or offensive water, liquid, waste refuse or
discharge of any kind that is offensive or likely to become so, or any putrid
or unsound meat, fish, hides or skin of any kind, or filth, offal, dead
animals, vegetables or any unsound offensive matter whatsoever. Provided,
however, that this subsection shall not apply to the spreading of manure upon
land for the purpose of fertilizing of the soil.
            (2)   To process dead animals for the purpose of fertilizing
material or other products, or any boiling of offal, fat or grease that shall
be done or carried on in an offensive, unclean or defective manner.
            (3)   To fail to abate any collection of waste, rags, damaged
merchandise, wet, broken or leaking barrels, casks or boxes, or any materials
that are offensive or tend to decay, to become putrid, or to pollute the air.
            (4)   For the owner or occupant of real property, or any other
responsible person, to cause or permit upon said property any of the following
unsanitary, fly producing, disease causing condition:
               (A)   Manure that is not securely protected from flies.
               (B)   Any privy, vault, cesspool, sink, pit or like place that
is not securely protected from flies.
               (C)   Garbage that is not securely protected from flies.
               (D)   Vegetable or animal waste, trash, litter, rags, or refuse
of any kind, nature or description in which flies may breed or multiply.
         jj.   Allowing Weed Growth; Failure To Remove After Notice: It is
unlawful for any owner or occupant of real property in the city to let the
height of weeds on such property to grow beyond the maximum permitted, or to
fail to remove from such property any injurious and noxious weeds, garbage and
refuse, unsightly or deleterious objects or structures, after having been given
notice pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-11-2. (Ord. 04-02-2013A, 4-2-
2013)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 4-1-5D of this title.
2 1. See also section
  5-2-3 of this code.
4-2-4: EXCEPTIONS:
No act that is done or maintained under the express authority of an
authoritative statute, ordinance or court ruling shall be declared a nuisance.
(Ord. 04-02-2013A, 4-2-2013)
4-2-5: RESPONSIBILITY OF NUISANCES:
The responsible person(s) is responsible for abating nuisances pursuant to this
chapter. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or occupant, who creates, aids in
creating, or contributes to a nuisance, or who supports, continues, or retains
a nuisance, is responsible for the nuisance and is therefore a responsible
person pursuant to this chapter. Every successive owner or tenant of a property
or premises who fails to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such
property or premises caused by a former owner or tenant is responsible therefor
in the same manner as the one who first created it. (Ord. 04-02-2013A, 4-2-
2013)
4-2-6: ABATEMENT; ADMINISTRATION:
This chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building and zoning
department. (Ord. 04-02-2013A, 4-2-2013)
4-2-7: FINDING OF NUISANCE:
If the zoning administrator finds that a nuisance exists, the zoning
administrator shall attempt to have the responsible person abate the nuisance.
Although the zoning administrator's first step in correcting or abating the
nuisance will always be to obtain voluntary compliance, the zoning
administrator may pursue any remedy or combination of remedies available
pursuant to this chapter, state law or common law in order to abate the
nuisance. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit the city
from engaging in its standard prosecution practices. Therefore, the city may
prosecute violators of city ordinances or state laws without first having to
comply with the provisions of this chapter, even though the activity or conduct
prosecuted may also constitute a nuisance under this chapter. Nothing in this
chapter shall be interpreted to prevent the city from enforcing applicable city
ordinances or building codes without first treating the offending conduct,
situation or activity as a nuisance pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 04-02-
2013A, 4-2-2013)
4-2-8: VOLUNTARY CORRECTION:
   A.   Applicability: This section applies whenever the zoning administrator
determines that a nuisance exists.
   B.   Contact: Before taking other steps to abate the nuisance, the zoning
administrator shall make a reasonable attempt to secure voluntary correction or
abatement of the nuisance by:
      1.   Contacting the responsible person, where possible;
      2.   Explaining the nuisance;
      3.   Requesting the responsible person to abate the nuisance; and
      4.   Agreeing to terms with the responsible person to abate the nuisance.
   C.   No Agreement: If the zoning administrator and the responsible person
cannot agree to terms for correcting or abating the nuisance, the zoning
administrator may still abate the nuisance using one or more of the procedures
set forth in this chapter, state law, or common law.
   D.   Voluntary Correction Notice/Agreement: If the zoning administrator and
the responsible person agree to terms for abating the nuisance, they shall
enter into and sign a voluntary correction notice/agreement. The voluntary
correction notice/agreement is a contract between the city and the responsible
person in which the responsible person agrees to abate the nuisance within a
specified time and according to specified conditions. The voluntary correction
notice/agreement shall include the following terms:
      1.   The name and current address of the responsible person;
      2.   The street address of the nuisance, or a description sufficient to
identify the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the
nuisance is occurring;
      3.   A description of the nuisance;
      4.   The necessary corrective action to be taken, and a date or time by
which correction must be completed;
      5.   An agreement by the responsible person that the city may inspect the
premises as may be necessary to determine compliance with the voluntary
correction notice/agreement;
      6.   An agreement by the responsible person that the city may abate the
nuisance and recover its costs and expenses to abate the nuisance, as well as a
monetary fine pursuant to this chapter from the responsible person, if the
terms of the voluntary correction notice/agreement are not met;
      7.   An agreement by the responsible person acknowledging that he/she
waives the right to appeal the zoning administrator's finding that a nuisance
exists and waiving the right to appeal the specific corrective action required
in the voluntary correction notice/agreement; and
      8.   An agreement by the responsible person that failure to comply with
the voluntary correction notice/agreement may be grounds for criminal
prosecution.
   E.   Extensions: The zoning administrator may grant an extension of the time
limit for correcting or abating the nuisance if the responsible person has
shown due diligence and/or substantial progress in correcting or abating the
nuisance but unforeseen circumstances render abatement under the original
conditions unattainable. If the responsible person complies with the terms of
the voluntary correction notice/agreement, the city shall take no further
action against the responsible person related to the nuisance described in the
voluntary correction notice/agreement unless the nuisance recurs. (Ord. 04-02-
2013A, 4-2-2013)
4-2-9: ADMINISTRATIVE CITATION:
   A.   Administrative Citation: When the zoning administrator determines that
a nuisance exists, and is unable to secure voluntary correction pursuant to
this chapter, the zoning administrator may issue an administrative citation to
the responsible person. The zoning administrator may issue an administrative
citation without having attempted to secure voluntary correction as provided in
this chapter under the following circumstances:
      1.   When an emergency exists; or
      2.   When the zoning administrator is unable to locate or determine the
identity of the responsible person.
   B.   Content Of Administrative Citation: The administrative citation shall
include the following:
      1.   The name and last known address of the responsible person; and
      2.   The street address of the nuisance or a description sufficient for
identifying the building, structure, premises, or land upon or within which the
nuisance is occurring; and
      3.   A description of the nuisance; and
      4.   The required corrective action and date for completion thereof; and
      5.   A notice that the city may abate the nuisance and charge the
responsible person for all abatement costs and expenses if the responsible
person does not correct the nuisance before the completion date; and
      6.   The time for appealing the administrative citation to the hearing
officer and the procedure for filing an appeal; and
      7.   A statement indicating that no monetary fine will be assessed if the
zoning administrator approves the completed, required corrective action prior
to the completion date; and
      8.   A statement that the city may assess a monetary fine against the
responsible person if the correction is not completed by the responsible person
and approved by the zoning administrator before the completion date.
   C.   Service Of Administrative Citation: The zoning administrator shall
serve the administrative citation upon the responsible person, either
personally or by mailing, certified, return receipt requested, a copy of the
administrative citation to the responsible person at his/her last known
address. If the responsible person cannot after due diligence be personally
served and if an address for mailed service cannot after due diligence be
ascertained, notice shall be served by posting a copy of the administrative
citation conspicuously on the affected property. Proof of service shall be made
by a written declaration under penalty of perjury executed by the person
effecting the service, declaring the time and date of service, the manner by
which the service was made, and if by posting, the facts showing that due
diligence was used in attempting to serve the person personally or by mail.
   D.   No Extension: No extension of the time specified in the administrative
citation for correction of the nuisance may be granted, except by order of the
hearing officer. (Ord. 04-02-2013A, 4-2-2013)
4-2-10: OTHER REMEDIES:
The city may take one or more of the following actions against any responsible
person who fails to comply with the terms of a voluntary correction notice/
agreement, an administrative citation, or an order of the hearing officer:
   A.   Abatement By The City:
      1.   The city may abate a nuisance when:
         a.   The terms of a voluntary correction notice/agreement have not
been met; or
         b.   The requirements of an administrative citation have not been
complied with, or, if the administrative citation is appealed to a hearing
officer and the terms of the administrative citation are amended by the hearing
officer, the terms of the hearing officer's order have not been complied with;
or
         c.   The condition is subject to summary abatement as provided for in
subsection A2 of this section.
      2.   Whenever a nuisance is occurring that constitutes an immediate and
emergent threat to the public health, safety or welfare or to the environment,
the city may summarily and without prior notice abate the condition. Notice of
such abatement, including the reason for it, shall be given to the responsible
person as soon as reasonably possible after the abatement.
      3.   Using any lawful means, the city may enter upon the subject property
and may remove or correct the condition that is subject to abatement. The city
may seek, but is not required to seek, such judicial process as it deems
necessary to effect the removal or correction of such condition.
      4.   The costs, including incidental expenses, of correcting or abating
the violation shall be billed to the responsible person and/or the owner,
lessor, tenant or other person entitled to control, use and/or occupy the
property and shall become due and payable to the city within ten (10) days of
actual receipt of the bill (within 15 days of the mailing date if the bill is
mailed). The term "incidental expenses" includes, but is not limited to:
         a.   Personnel costs, both direct and indirect, including attorney
fees and costs;
         b.   Costs incurred in documenting the violation;
         c.   Hauling, storage and disposal expenses;
         d.   Actual expenses and costs for the city in preparing notices,
specifications and contracts, and in accomplishing and/or contracting and
inspecting the work; and
         e.   The costs of any required printing and mailing.
   B.   Monetary Fine: The responsible person shall pay the city a monetary
fine for each day the nuisance continues after the completion date. The
nuisance shall be considered to continue until the zoning administrator
approves the responsible person's actions to correct or abate the nuisance. The
amount of the monetary fine shall be as follows:
      1.   One hundred dollars ($100.00) per day for each day during the first
week that the nuisance remains uncorrected or unabated after the completion
date;
      2.   Two hundred dollars ($200.00) per day for each day thereafter until
the nuisance is corrected or abated according to the terms set forth in the
administrative citation.
The monetary fine shall be cumulative and may not be waived by the zoning
administrator. Payment of a monetary fine pursuant to this chapter does not
relieve the responsible person from the duty to abate the nuisance as required
by the voluntary correction notice/agreement or the administrative citation.
The monetary fine constitutes a personal obligation of the responsible person.
Any monetary fine assessed must be paid to the city within ten (10) calendar
days from the date of mailing of the hearing officer's decision and order or a
notice from the city that the fine is due. The city attorney or his/her
designee is authorized to take appropriate action to collect the monetary fine,
plus reasonable attorney fees, interest, and costs incurred in collecting said
monetary fine.
   C.   Civil Actions: Either the city or any private person directly affected
by a nuisance may bring a civil action to abate or enjoin the nuisance, or for
damages for causing or maintaining the nuisance (including the cost, if any, of
cleaning the subject property). The civil action may be brought pursuant to
this chapter or pursuant to state law. Any action brought by the city may
include claims for costs and expenses associated with abatement of the
nuisance, plus reasonable attorney fees, interest, and costs incurred in
collecting any judgment thereon.
   D.   Criminal Actions: Criminal actions may be initiated by criminal
citation from the zoning administrator or by long form information.
      1.   Any person who maintains or assists in maintaining a nuisance is
guilty of a class C misdemeanor. No person shall be prosecuted under this
chapter unless the zoning administrator first attempted to obtain voluntary
correction as provided in this chapter.
      2.   If the alleged nuisance is also a violation of a provision of a city
ordinance (other than this chapter) or state law, the responsible person may be
charged under the specific provision of the city ordinance or state law, even
if the zoning administrator did not first attempt to obtain voluntary
correction as provided in this chapter.
      3.   Any person who knowingly obstructs, impedes, or interferes with the
city or its agents, or with the responsible person, in the performance of
duties imposed by this chapter, or a decision and order issued by the hearing
officer, or a voluntary correction notice/agreement, is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor.
   E.   Abatement By Eviction: Whenever there is reason to believe that a
nuisance is kept, maintained, or exists in the city, the city attorney or any
citizen(s) residing in the city, or any person or entity doing business in the
city, in his or their own names, may maintain an action in a court of competent
jurisdiction to abate the nuisance and obtain an order for the automatic
eviction of the tenant of the property harboring the nuisance. The eviction
shall take place as specified in Utah law.
   F.   Other Remedies: In the event that the property owner fails to pay any
fines or costs related to nuisance abatement when due and cannot be adequately
served within Utah County, or in the event that he resides outside Utah County,
the city may refer the matter to the county treasurer for inclusion in the tax
notice of the property owner, including all costs associated both with the
abatement of the nuisance in the manner anticipated by this chapter together
with administrative expenses in the manner described herein.
   G.   Nonexclusive Remedies: The city may take any or all of the above
mentioned remedies (administrative, civil or criminal) to abate a nuisance and/
or to punish any person or entity who creates, causes or allows a nuisance to
exist. The abatement of a nuisance does not prejudice the right of the city or
any person to recover damages or penalties for its past existence. (Ord. 04-02-
2013A, 4-2-2013)
4-2-11: APPEALS:
   A.   Grounds: Any person receiving an administrative citation may appeal the
administrative citation to the hearing officer. Only the following issues may
be appealed to the hearing officer:
      1.   The person charged in the administrative citation as the responsible
person is not the "responsible person" as defined by this chapter.
      2.   The condition described as a nuisance in the administrative citation
is not a "nuisance" as defined by this chapter.
      3.   The method required by the administrative citation to abate the
nuisance is inappropriate or is not the most cost effective method of
effectively correcting or abating the nuisance.
      4.   The time period given to abate the nuisance in the administrative
citation is unreasonable.
      5.   The monetary fine set forth in the administrative citation is not
consistent with the provisions of subsection 4-2-10B of this chapter.
      6.   The zoning administrator refused to approve a corrective action that
met the requirements of the administrative citation.
      7.   The responsible person claims that the requirement(s) of the
administrative citation violates his/her constitutional rights.
   B.   Filing: The person desiring to appeal must file a notice with the city
manager within ten (10) days of receipt of the administrative citation (within
15 days of the mailing date if the administrative citation is mailed). Failure
to request an appeal hearing as provided shall constitute a waiver to such
hearing and a waiver of the right to appeal.
   C.   Hearing: The hearing before the hearing officer shall be informal
according to rules and procedures established by the hearing officer. The
appellant may, but is not required to, bring an attorney or other
representative to assist him or her. The appellant and the zoning administrator
may each call witnesses at the hearing. The hearing officer may, with or
without the parties present, visit the site of the alleged nuisance. If the
hearing officer allows the parties at the site visit, both parties must be
given the opportunity to be present. The hearing shall be scheduled by the
hearing officer within thirty (30) days from the date the notice of appeal is
filed with the city.
   D.   Burden Of Proof: The appellant shall have the burden of proof to
demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that he/she had legitimate
grounds for an appeal. The determination of the zoning administrator as to the
need for the required corrective action shall be accorded substantial weight by
the hearing officer in determining the reasonableness of the corrective action.
   E.   Authority Of Hearing Officer: The hearing officer shall have authority
to affirm or vacate the administrative citation, or to modify or waive specific
provisions of the administrative citation. If the appellant fails to attend the
hearing, the hearing officer shall affirm the administrative citation. The
hearing officer shall not vacate the administrative citation unless he/she
finds that no nuisance exists. The hearing officer shall modify the
administrative citation if he/she finds that a nuisance exists, but that one or
more of the requirements of the administrative citation is improper or
inappropriate. A requirement is improper if it is contrary to this chapter. A
requirement is inappropriate if the hearing officer finds that there is a
better means of resolving the problem or that the proposed solution is
inappropriate given the nature or severity of the problem. When determining
whether to waive or modify a requirement of the administrative citation, the
hearing officer may also consider:
      1.   Whether the appellant responded to the zoning administrator's
attempts to contact the appellant and cooperated with efforts to correct the
nuisance;
      2.   Whether the appellant has shown due diligence and/or substantial
progress in correcting the nuisance;
      3.   The financial ability of the appellant and the amount, if any, that
the appellant has benefited financially by maintaining the nuisance;
      4.   Any other relevant factors.
If the appellant appeals the zoning administrator's refusal to approve
appellant's corrective action, the hearing officer shall visit the site and
determine if the appellant complied with the requirements of the administrative
citation.
   F.   Order: The hearing officer shall issue a written order to the appellant
and the city notifying them of his/her decision. The order shall include the
hearing officer's findings of fact and ultimate decision. If the hearing
officer modifies or waives provisions of the administrative citation, the order
shall specify which portions are modified and how they are modified. The
hearing officer shall mail a copy of the order to the appellant and the city
within five (5) working days of the close of the hearing.
   G.   Appeal To District Court: Either the city or the appellant may appeal
the hearing officer's order by filing a petition for review of the order. The
petition must be filed in the 4th district court within thirty (30) calendar
days from the date the hearing officer's order was mailed to the appellant. In
the petition, the plaintiff may only allege that the hearing officer's order
was arbitrary, capricious, or illegal. The hearing officer shall transmit to
the reviewing court the record of its proceedings, including any minutes,
findings, orders and, if available, a true and correct transcript of its
proceedings. If, in the opinion of the district court, there is a sufficient
record to review the hearing officer's order, the court's review is limited to
the record provided by the hearing officer. The district court may not accept
or consider any evidence outside of the hearing officer's record unless the
evidence was offered to the hearing officer and the court determines that it
was improperly excluded by the hearing officer. If, in the opinion of the
district court, there is not a sufficient record to review the hearing
officer's order, the court may call witnesses and take evidence. No petition or
appeal may be filed in district court unless the responsible person first
appeals to the hearing officer pursuant to the terms set forth in this chapter.
(Ord. 04-02-2013A, 4-2-2013)
CHAPTER 3
PROHIBITION ON THE SALE OR DISTRIBUTION OF ANY TOBACCO PRODUCT TO A PERSON
UNDER THE AGE OF TWENTY ONE
SECTION:
4-3-1: Purpose
4-3-2: Definitions
4-3-3: Minimum Legal Sales Age For Tobacco Products
4-3-4: Age Verification
4-3-5: Enforcement
4-3-6: Signage
4-3-7: Penalties
4-3-8: Exceptions And Defenses
4-3-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to reduce tobacco initiation, particularly among
adolescents 15 - 17, improve health across the lifespan, and decrease smoking
prevalence by keeping tobacco products out of the hands of those under the age
of twenty one (21). (Ord. 02-19-2019A, 2-19-2019)
4-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
As used in this chapter:
DISTRIBUTE OR DISTRIBUTION: Means to sell, barter, exchange, or to attempt to
do so for any type of compensation.
DISTRIBUTOR: Means a licensed tobacco retailer who sells a tobacco product.
ELECTRONIC SMOKING DEVICE: Means any device that can be used to deliver
aerosolized or vaporized nicotine or other substance and which simulates
smoking through its use or through inhalation of the device to the person,
including, but not limited to, an e-cigarette, e-cigar, e-pipe, vape pen or e-
hookah. Electronic smoking device includes any component, part, or accessory of
such a device, whether or not sold separately, and includes any substance
intended to be aerosolized or vaporized during the use of the device.
Electronic smoking device does not include drugs, devices, or combination
products authorized for sale by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, as those
terms are defined in the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act.
PERSON: Means any natural person, partnership, joint venture, society, club,
trustee, trust, association, organization, or corporation, or any officer,
agent, employee, factor, or any other personal representative thereof, in any
capacity.
RECIPIENT: Means any person who obtains or attempts to obtain a tobacco
product.
TOBACCO PRODUCT: Means:
   A.   A cigar, cigarette, electronic smoking device, or electronic cigarette
as those terms are defined in section 76-10-101 of Utah State Code Annotated.
   B.   A tobacco product as that term is defined in section 59-14-102 of Utah
State Code, including:
      1.   Chewing tobacco; or
      2.   Any substitute for a tobacco product, including flavoring or
additives to tobacco; or
   C.   Tobacco paraphernalia as that term is defined in section 76-10-104.1 of
Utah State Code.
TOBACCO RETAILER: Means a person that is required to obtain a Tax Commission
license. (Ord. 02-19-2019A, 2-19-2019)
4-3-3: MINIMUM LEGAL SALES AGE FOR TOBACCO PRODUCTS:
The sale or distribution of any tobacco product to a person under the age of
twenty one (21) is prohibited. (Ord. 02-19-2019A, 2-19-2019)
4-3-4: AGE VERIFICATION:
Before distributing any tobacco product, the tobacco retailer shall verify that
the recipient is at least twenty one (21) years of age. Each tobacco retailer
shall examine the recipient's government issued photographic identification. A
tobacco retailer is not required to verify the age of a person over the age of
thirty (30), but that a recipient appeared to be thirty (30) years of age or
older shall not constitute a defense to a violation of this section. (Ord. 02-
19-2019A, 2-19-2019)
4-3-5: ENFORCEMENT:
The Utah County Health Department or any authorized designee and law
enforcement official shall conduct random, unannounced inspections at locations
where tobacco products are distributed to test and ensure compliance with this
chapter. The compliance checks shall be done two (2) times a year, unless there
is reasonable suspicion that the retailer is selling tobacco to persons under
twenty one (21). (Ord. 02-19-2019A, 2-19-2019)
4-3-6: SIGNAGE:
A tobacco retailer shall display a printed warning sign within six feet (6') of
each register and any other location where sales occur, in a manner conspicuous
to both employees and customers, and where the sign(s) are unobstructed in
their entirety. The sign(s) shall have a minimum height of fourteen inches
(14") and width of eleven inches (11"); each letter shall be at least one-half
inch (1/2") high; and the text shall be capitalized in its entirety. The sign
(s) shall include the following statement: "CEDAR HILLS CITY PROHIBITS THE SALE
OR DISTRIBUTION OF ANY TOBACCO PRODUCT TO A PERSON UNDER THE AGE OF 21." (Ord.
02-19-2019A, 2-19-2019)
4-3-7: PENALTIES:
Violations of this chapter may be subject to both criminal prosecution and
civil penalties.
   A.   The person who sold the product may be cited by law enforcement as
follows:
      1.   First offense - Class C misdemeanor.
      2.   Second offense - Class B misdemeanor.
      3.   Third offense - Class A misdemeanor.
      4.   Subsequent offenses - Class A misdemeanor.
   B.   A civil penalty may be imposed by the local Health Department against
the tobacco retailer as follows:
      1.   First violation - five hundred dollars ($500.00).
      2.   Second violation (within 12 months) - seven hundred fifty dollars
($750.00).
      3.   Third violation (within 24 months of 2 or more previous violations)
- one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) or a tobacco permit suspension for up to
thirty (30) consecutive calendar days.
      4.   Fourth violation (within 24 months of 3 previous violations) -
tobacco permit may be revoked.
   C.   The department or a local Health Department may:
      1.   Revoke a tobacco retail permit if a fourth violation occurs within
two (2) years of three (3) previous violations;
      2.   In addition to a monetary penalty imposed under subsection B of this
section, suspend the tobacco permit if the violation is due to a sale of
tobacco products to a person under twenty one (21) years of age; and
      3.   If applicable, recommend to a municipality or county that a retail
tobacco specialty business license issued under section 10-8-41.6 of Utah Code
Annotated be suspended or revoked. (Ord. 02-19-2019A, 2-19-2019)
4-3-8: EXCEPTIONS AND DEFENSES:
   A.   The penalties in this chapter do not apply to a person younger than
twenty one (21) years old who purchases or attempts to purchase tobacco
products while under the direct supervision of the City of Cedar Hills or the
Utah County Health Department staff for training, education, research, or
enforcement purposes.
   B.   Nothing in this chapter prohibits an underage person from handling
tobacco products in the course of lawful employment.
   C.   It shall be an affirmative defense to a violation of this chapter for a
person to have reasonably relied on proof of age as described by State law.
(Ord. 02-19-2019A, 2-19-2019)
TITLE 5
PUBLIC SAFETY AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS 1
CHAPTER 1
ANIMAL CONTROL
 
Notes
1 1. Police services are provided through contract with American Fork City.
ARTICLE A.  GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
5-1A-1: Definitions
5-1A-2: General Regulations Relating To Animals
5-1A-3: Cruelty To Animals
5-1A-4: Animals Kept For Fighting
5-1A-5: Disposal Of Dead Animals
5-1A-6: Wild Animals
5-1A-7: Vicious Animals
5-1A-8: Nuisance Animals
5-1A-9: Animals Running At Large
5-1A-10: Sanitation
5-1A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings respectively ascribed to them:
ANIMAL: Any nonhuman living creature, whether wild or domesticated.
ANIMAL AT LARGE: Any domesticated animal, whether or not licensed, not under
restraint.
ANIMAL SHELTER: A facility owned or operated by a governmental entity or any
animal welfare organization that is incorporated under the laws of the state of
Utah and used for the care and custody of seized, stray, homeless, quarantined,
abandoned or unwanted dogs, cats or other small domestic animals.
ANIMAL UNDER RESTRAINT: Any animal under the control of its owner or custodian,
except a dog shall not be considered under control of the owner or custodian
unless on a leash or lead, confined within a vehicle, or within the real
property limits of the owner or custodian.
BITE: An actual puncture, tear or abrasion of the skin, inflicted by the teeth
of an animal.
CAT: Any age feline of the domesticated types.
DOG: Any canis familiaris of the domesticated types.
DOMESTICATED ANIMAL: Any animal domesticated by man so as to live and breed in
a tame condition, including, but not limited to, cats, dogs, fowl, horses,
swine, cattle, sheep and goats.
GUARD DOG: A dog trained as such and used by a commercial establishment for the
purpose of deterring crime, which must be kept in a fenced run or other
suitable enclosure during business hours, or on leash or under absolute
control, so it cannot come into contact with the public.
IMPOUNDED ANIMAL: Any animal taken into custody as provided in this chapter.
KENNEL OR CATTERY: A lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises where upon
or wherein four (4) or more dogs or cats over four (4) months of age are kept
or maintained for any purpose, including boarding, breeding, buying, grooming,
letting for hire, training for fee, or selling.
LEASH OR LEAD: Any rope, leather strap, chain, device or other material being
held in the hand of the person capable of control to restrain an animal and
actually controlling the animal to which it is tied.
LICENSE: A properly completed and validated license and rabies certificate
issued by the city or other city designated licensing agency.
LICENSE AND RABIES CONTROL CERTIFICATE: The official license application form
issued by the city.
LICENSE TAG: A piece of metal or other durable material inscribed with "City of
Cedar Hills" and a number that has been issued by city or other city designated
licensing agency.
LICENSED ANIMAL: An animal wearing its current license tag as required by this
chapter.
NEUTERED: Having had the testicles removed; a castrated animal.
OWNER OR CUSTODIAN: Any person who is either the legal owner, keeper,
possessor, or the actual custodian of an animal. Ownership is established by a
person registering as owner on a license or other legal document or being a
person claiming ownership and taking possession of an animal.
PETS: A domesticated animal kept for pleasure rather than utility, including,
but not limited to, birds, cats, dogs, fish, hamsters, mice and other animals
associated with man's environment.
QUARANTINE: The isolation of an animal under the observation of a licensed
veterinarian or in the custody of the animal shelter in a substantial enclosure
so that the animal is not subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized
persons.
SPAYED: Having had the ovaries and uterus removed or extirpated; an
ovariohysterectomy.
STRAY: Any "animal at large".
VACCINATED ANIMAL: An animal inoculated with an approved, currently valid,
anti-rabies vaccine, and wearing a current license tag indicating proof of such
vaccination.
VICIOUS ANIMAL: An animal with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to
attack without provocation, to cause injury to, or to otherwise endanger the
safety of, humans or other animals; or that attacks a human being or other
animal without provocation; or that is trained or used as a fighting animal.
This provision shall not apply to dogs owned or used by government entities.
WILD ANIMALS: Any animals of a species that in their natural life are wild,
including hybrids and animals that, as a result of their natural or wild
condition, cannot be vaccinated effectively for rabies. These animals, however
domesticated, shall include, but are not limited to:
   A.   Alligators and crocodiles;
   B.   Bears (Ursidae). All bears, including grizzly bears, brown bears, black
bears, etc.;
   C.   Cat family (Felidae). All except the commonly accepted domesticated
cats, and including cheetah, cougar, leopard, lion, lynx, panther, mountain
lion, tiger, wildcat, etc.;
   D.   Dog family (Canidae). All except domesticated dogs, and including wolf,
part wolf, fox, part fox, coyote, part coyote, dingo, etc.;
   E.   Porcupine (Erethizontidae);
   F.   Primate (nonhuman). All subhuman primates;
   G.   Raccoon (Prosynnidae). All raccoons, including eastern raccoon, desert
raccoon, ringtailed cat, etc.;
   H.   Skunks;
   I.   Venomous fish and piranha;
   J.   Venomous snakes and lizards;
   K.   Weasels (Mustelidae). All including weasels, martens, wolverines,
ferrets, badgers, otters, ermine, mink, mongoose, etc. (2004 Code)
5-1A-2: GENERAL REGULATIONS RELATING TO ANIMALS:
Every person within the city who owns any animal, or who owns, conducts,
manages or operates any animal establishment for which a license is required,
is also required by this section:
   A.   Housing Facilities: Housing facilities for animals shall be
structurally sound and shall be maintained in good repair to protect the
animals from injury, to contain the animals, and to restrict the entrance of
other animals.
   B.   Food And Water: All animals shall be supplied with sufficient good and
wholesome food and fresh water as often as the feeding habits of the respective
animals require.
   C.   Sanitation: All animals and all animal buildings or enclosure shall be
maintained in a clean and sanitary condition.
   D.   Odor And Noise: All animals shall be maintained so as to eliminate
excessive odor and noise.
   E.   Attention To Animals: No animal shall be without attention more than
twenty four (24) consecutive hours. Whenever an animal is left unattended at a
commercial animal facility, the name, address and telephone number of the
responsible person shall be posted in a conspicuous place at the front of the
property; however, this provision shall not apply to livestock. Livestock shall
be attended at reasonable intervals.
   F.   Treatment: Animals shall be treated humanely and no conditions shall be
maintained or permitted that is or could be injurious to the animal.
   G.   Buildings And Enclosures:
      1.   For Protection: Animal buildings and enclosures shall be so
constructed and maintained as to prevent escape of the animal. All reasonable
precautions shall be taken to protect the public from the animal and the animal
from the public.
      2.   Construction: Every building or enclosure wherein animals are
maintained shall be constructed of a material easily cleaned and shall be kept
in a sanitary condition. The building shall be properly ventilated to prevent
drafts and to remove odors. Heating, cooling and shelter shall be provided as
required according to the physical need of the animal, with sufficient light to
allow observation of animals and sanitation.
   H.   Medical Treatment: Medical treatment shall be provided as necessary in
order to maintain the health of the animals.
   I.   Size Of Facilities: All animal rooms, cages, kennels and runs shall be
of sufficient size to provide adequate and proper accommodations for the
animals kept therein.
   J.   Confinement: Owners shall not allow animals that are natural enemies,
temperamentally unsuited, or otherwise incompatible, to be quartered together
or so near each other as to cause injury, fear or torment.
   K.   Injuries And Communicable Diseases: No person shall knowingly harbor or
keep any animal with a serious injury or afflicted with mange, ringworm,
distemper or any other contagious disease, unless such animal is, in the
opinion of the city or a licensed veterinarian, being given adequate treatment
for such disease. The city or licensed veterinarian may take immediate
possession of any such animal not being so treated or that is not responding to
such treatment, and immediately dispose of the animal unless the owner shall
forthwith place such animal under the control and treatment of a licensed
veterinarian. (2004 Code)
5-1A-3: CRUELTY TO ANIMALS:
   A.   Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to
wilfully or maliciously kill, maim, disfigure, torture, beat, mutilate, burn or
scald, drive over or otherwise cruelly set upon any animal. Each such act shall
constitute a separate violation.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to hobble livestock or other
animals in such a way as to cause injury or damage to the animal.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person to carry or confine any animal in
or upon any vehicle in a cruel or inhumane manner, including, but not limited
to, carrying or confining such animal without adequate ventilation.
   D.   It shall be unlawful for any owner or custodian of an animal to abandon
such animal within the city.
   E.   When it becomes necessary to destroy any domestic animal because of
age, sickness or other cause that renders the destruction of the animal
necessary or desirable, it shall be the responsibility of the owner of such
animal to humanely dispose of the animal.
   F.   Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any person by any
means to make accessible to any animal, with intent to cause harm or death, any
substance that has in any manner been treated or prepared with any harmful or
poisonous substance. This provision shall not be interpreted so as to prohibit
the use of poisonous substances for the control of vermin in furtherance of the
public health when applied in such a manner as to reasonably prohibit access to
other animals.
   G.   Every operator of a motor vehicle or self-propelled vehicle within the
city shall, immediately upon injuring, striking, maiming or running down any
animal, notify the city, furnishing requested facts relative to such injury.
   H.   It shall be unlawful for any person to take or kill any bird, or to rob
or destroy any nest, egg or young of any bird in violation of the laws of the
state.
   I.   It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously keep secret or
impound an animal belonging to another person. (2004 Code)
5-1A-4: ANIMALS KEPT FOR FIGHTING:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to raise, keep or use any animal
for the purpose of fighting or baiting, or for any person to knowingly permit
the use of his building, shed, room, yard, ground or premises for such
purposes.
   B.   Law enforcement officers or animal control officers may enter any
building or place where there is an exhibition of fighting or baiting of a live
animal, or where preparations are being made for such an exhibition, and may
arrest persons there present and take possession of all animals engaged in
fighting, along with all implements or applications used in such exhibition.
This provision shall not be interpreted to authorize a search or arrest without
a warrant when such is required by law. (2004 Code)
5-1A-5: DISPOSAL OF DEAD ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal that shall die or
be killed within the limits of the city to fail to dispose of or bury the
carcass of such animal within ten (10) hours after its death; provided, that no
horse, cow, ox or other large animal shall be buried within the city limits. It
shall also be unlawful to dispose of the carcass or offal of any animal in
violation of state law. (2004 Code)
5-1A-6: WILD ANIMALS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter, give
away, keep, own, harbor or purchase any wild animal, except that an animal
shelter, zoological park, veterinary hospital, humane society shelter, public
laboratory, circus, side show, amusement show or facility for education or
scientific purposes may keep such an animal if protective devices adequate to
prevent it from escaping or injuring the public are provided.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to keep an animal of a species
prohibited or protected by any regulation or law of the county, the state or
the United States. (2004 Code)
5-1A-7: VICIOUS ANIMALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person to have any animal determined to be
vicious within the city, except for guard dogs.
   B.   Whenever a complaint is made to the city that an animal is vicious, the
animal control officer shall conduct an investigation of the alleged incident.
If the animal control officer finds reasonable cause to believe the animal
involved is vicious, he may, pending a judicial determination of the animal's
vicious nature, require the owner or custodian to either show sufficient
ability to secure the animal so that it cannot come into contact with other
persons or animals, or remove the animal from the city. The animal control
officer may instead, in his discretion, impound the animal pending a judicial
determination of the animal's vicious nature. (2004 Code)
   C.   Guard dogs shall be kept in such a manner so that they cannot come into
contact with other persons or animals who are legally upon the premises where a
guard dog is maintained. The property shall be posted with a sign clearly
visible stating that a guard dog is on the premises. Signs shall comply with
the requirements of the city's sign regulations section
10-5-26, "Signs", of this code. (Ord. 8-16-2011A, 8-16-2011)
   D.   It shall be unlawful to bring any animal into the city that has been
judicially determined to be vicious, a nuisance, or a threat to the health or
safety of human beings. (2004 Code)
5-1A-8: NUISANCE ANIMALS:
   A.   Any animal that does any of the following shall be deemed a nuisance:
      1.   Causes damages to the property of anyone other than its owner or
custodian.
      2.   Causes unreasonable fouling of the air by odors.
      3.   Defecates on any public street, sidewalk, park or building, or on
any private property without the consent of the owner of the property, unless
the owner or custodian of the animal shall immediately remove any such
defecation to his own property.
      4.   Barks, whines or howls, or makes other disturbing noises in an
excessive or continuous fashion.
      5.   Molests passersby or chases passing vehicles.
      6.   Is determined by the city or the county health department to be a
public nuisance by virtue of being offensive or dangerous to the public health,
welfare or safety.
      7.   Any animals that, by virtue of the number maintained, are determined
by the city to be offensive or dangerous to the public health, welfare or
safety.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person to have any animal determined to be
a nuisance within the city.
   C.   Whenever a complaint is made to the city that an animal constitutes a
"nuisance", as defined in subsection A of this section, the animal control
officer shall conduct an investigation of the alleged nuisance. If he finds
reasonable cause to believe that a nuisance exists, he shall notify the owner
or custodian of the offending animal that the nuisance must be abated within
two (2) days. The animal control officer shall specify the method of abatement.
If the owner or custodian fails to abate the nuisance in a timely fashion, or
if the officer determines that a nuisance animal constitutes an immediate
threat to the public health, safety or welfare, he may impound the animal
pending a judicial determination of the status of the animal as a nuisance.
(2004 Code)
5-1A-9: ANIMALS RUNNING AT LARGE:
   A.   It is unlawful for any animal to be at large at any time within the
corporate limits of the city. The owner or custodian of any animal that is at
large shall be strictly liable for any violations regardless of the precautions
taken to prevent the escape of the animal and regardless of lack of knowledge
of the offense at the time it occurs.
   B.   However, dogs may be at large while participating in field trials and
obedience classes organized and sanctioned by recognized dog clubs, while
assisting their owner or trainer in legal hunting or in herding of livestock,
while assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, or while
being trained for the above purposes so long as such dogs are under direct and
effective sound or gesture control within sight of such individuals to assure
that they do not violate any other provisions of law.
   C.   Any person who finds an animal at large may take it into his possession
and must, within twenty four (24) hours, thereafter notify the city or animal
control officer and surrender the animal to the animal control officer upon
demand. No such action shall result in a charge against the city. The finder of
an animal at large shall use reasonable care to preserve it from injury;
however, he shall not be held liable if the animal dies, escapes or injures
itself while he is carrying out the provisions of this section, except as
occasioned by his own negligence. (2004 Code)
5-1A-10: SANITATION:
Where any animal defecates on any street, sidewalk or other public place or on
any private property without the consent of the owner of the property, it shall
be unlawful for the owner or custodian of the animal to fail to clean up the
defecation and remove it to his own property for proper disposal. (2004 Code)
ARTICLE B.  ANIMAL CONTROL REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-1B-1: Animal Control Services
5-1B-2: Powers Of Animal Control Officers
5-1B-3: Duties Of Animal Control Officers
5-1B-4: Interference With Officers Prohibited
5-1B-1: ANIMAL CONTROL SERVICES:
The American Fork police department, under contract, shall be responsible for
providing animal control services. (2004 Code)
5-1B-2: POWERS OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS:
   A.   Any person employed as an animal control officer shall take the oath of
office and shall be vested with the power and authority to enforce this
chapter.
   B.   Each animal control officer is hereby authorized and empowered to
apprehend and impound any animal found in violation of this chapter and to
issue citations to persons in violation of this chapter.
   C.   In the enforcement of this chapter, any peace officer or animal control
officer is authorized to enter onto the open premises of any person to take
possession of any animal in violation of this chapter.
   D.   Any law enforcement officer may humanely destroy any animal found
suffering past recovery for any useful purpose. Before destroying the animal,
the officer shall obtain the judgment of a veterinarian, or of two (2)
reputable citizens called by him to view the animal in his presence, or shall
obtain consent to the destruction from the owner of the animal. Its owner may
be cited and/or charged for impound and sheltering fees.
   E.   The city, animal control officer and any peace officer may enter
privately owned land to investigate reports of vicious animals, rabies, or
other contagious animal diseases, and to investigate violations of and enforce
the provisions of this chapter. (2004 Code)
5-1B-3: DUTIES OF ANIMAL CONTROL OFFICERS:
Animal control officers shall:
   A.   Enforce the provisions of this chapter in all respects pertaining to
animal control, including the care and impounding of animals and the prevention
of cruelty to animals.
   B.   Carry out all duties prescribed or delegated by the city. (2004 Code)
5-1B-4: INTERFERENCE WITH OFFICERS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person by use of force, threat of force or use of
any weapon, to knowingly and intentionally interfere with any animal control
officer in the lawful discharge of his duties as herein prescribed. (2004 Code)
ARTICLE C.  LICENSING AND REGULATION
SECTION:
5-1C-1: Dog/Cat Licensing
5-1C-2: License Tag
5-1C-3: Licensing And Fee Exemptions
5-1C-4: Allowable Number Of Dogs/Cats
5-1C-5: Cattery
5-1C-6: Loss Of Privilege To Maintain Dog/Cat In City
5-1C-7: Unlawful To Harbor Stray Animals
5-1C-8: Dogs On Unenclosed Premises
5-1C-9: Female Dogs/Cats In Heat
5-1C-10: Places Prohibited To Animals
5-1C-11: Dogs Attacking Persons And Animals
5-1C-1: DOG/CAT LICENSING:
Any person owning a dog/cat within the city shall license the dog/cat pursuant
to the following provisions:
   A.   Time Limit To Obtain: Except as otherwise provided in this article, the
owner or custodian of any dog/cat shall obtain a license for such animal within
thirty (30) days after the dog/cat reaches the age of four (4) months, or in
the case of a dog/cat over four (4) months, within thirty (30) days of the
acquisition of the dog/cat. Persons seeking dog/cat licenses shall be eighteen
(18) years of age or older.
   B.   Forms: License forms must be submitted annually in March to the city,
utilizing the license and rabies certificate form for each animal. The form
shall be accompanied by the prescribed license fee and by a current rabies
vaccination certificate.
   C.   Effective Date; Late Fee: A license shall be effective from the date of
purchase to the following March. A late fee shall be imposed unless a new
license is purchased prior to April 30. (2004 Code)
5-1C-2: LICENSE TAG:
   A.   Required: Upon payment of the license fee, the city shall issue to the
owner a certificate and a tag for each dog/cat licensed. The tag shall have
stamped thereon the license number corresponding with the tag number on the
certificate. The owner shall attach the tag to a collar or harness for the
animal and see that the collar and the tag are constantly worn. Failure to
attach the tag as provided shall constitute a violation of this chapter, except
that dogs/cats that are kept for show purposes are exempt from wearing the
collar and tag during a show.
   B.   Transferability; Refunds: Dog/cat tags shall not be transferable from
one dog/cat to another. No refunds shall be made on any dog/cat license fee for
any reason. Replacements for lost or destroyed tags shall be issued upon
payment of a replacement fee to the city.
   C.   Removal Prohibited: No person shall remove or cause to be removed the
collar, harness or tag from any licensed dog/cat without the consent of the
owner or custodian of the dog/cat, except a licensed veterinarian or animal
control officer who removes such for medical or other reasons. (2004 Code)
5-1C-3: LICENSING AND FEE EXEMPTIONS:
   A.   The provisions of sections
5-1C-1 and
5-1C-2 of this article shall not apply to:
      1.   Any dog/cat whose owner is a nonresident of the city and the dog/cat
is temporarily within the city for a period of not more than thirty (30) days.
      2.   Individual dogs/cats within a properly licensed kennel/cattery or
other such establishment when such dogs/cats are held for sale or resale.
   B.   The fee provisions of section
5-1C-1 of this article shall not apply to:
      1.   Seeing eye dogs properly trained to assist blind persons if such
dogs are actually being used by blind persons to assist them in moving from
place to place.
      2.   Hearing dogs properly trained to assist deaf persons if such dogs
are actually used by deaf persons to aid them in responding to an auditory
stimulus.
      3.   Dogs specially trained to assist officials of government agencies in
the performance of their duties and that are owned by such agencies.
   C.   Nothing in this section shall be construed to exempt any dog/cat from
having a current rabies vaccination. (2004 Code)
5-1C-4: ALLOWABLE NUMBER OF DOGS/CATS:
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, no more than three (3) dogs/cats
four (4) months of age or older shall be kept at any residence or commercial
establishment at any time. This provision shall not apply to licensed kennels/
catteries or grooming parlors. (2004 Code)
5-1C-5: CATTERY:
   A.   Definitions:
ANIMAL ROOM: An indoor area wherein cats are housed.
CAGES: Individual, portable facilities for containing cats. A structure or
enclosure that does not contain space for an animal to exercise.
CATTERY: See section
5-1A-1 of this chapter.
EXERCISE AREA: An indoor area wherein cats are allowed to run and exercise.
INDOOR CATTERY: A lot, building, structure, enclosure or premises whereupon or
wherein a maximum of six (6) cats over six (6) months of age are kept or
maintained for any purpose, including boarding, breeding, buying, grooming,
letting for hire, training for fee, or selling. An indoor area used to house
cats, which contains cages, runs, animal room or an exercise area.
OUTDOOR EXERCISE AREA: An outdoor area wherein cats are allowed to run and
exercise.
RUN: A structure or enclosure that contains an exercise area for an animal(s).
   B.   Requirements:
      1.   License Required: Each cattery must have a current city business
license to operate a cattery. Such licenses are required to be displayed and
readily available for inspection by any authorized person;
         a.   Business License: Contact the city planner regarding your request
prior to filing an application for a home occupation business license for a
cattery business.
Submit the following materials to the Cedar Hills city planner:
            (1)   A completed home occupation business license application.
            (2)   Any supplemental documents required by business licensing
department for a cattery license.
            (3)   A diagram showing the dimensions, layout and location of the
cattery.
      2.   Records: Cattery records must be kept available for inspection. Such
record to show: name, current address, a telephone number of the owner of the
cat, the date the cat entered the cattery, the reason for it being in the
cattery, i.e., for boarding, sale, breeding, grooming, etc., the description of
the cat (age, breed, sex, color, etc.). On any cat over four (4) months of age,
a current valid rabies certificate shall be maintained as a part of such
record, as long as the cat is maintained in the cattery;
      3.   Nuisance: Be operated in such a manner as not to constitute a
nuisance;
      4.   Control: Keep all boarded animals caged or under control of the
owner or operator of the cattery;
      5.   Care Of Animals: Care for all animals in the cattery, whether or not
owned by the cattery, and comply with all the requirements of this chapter for
the general care of animals;
      6.   Comply With All Laws: Comply with all applicable Federal, State and
local laws and all regulations respecting catteries which are adopted by the
City;
      7.   Comply With Home Occupation Requirements: Comply with section
3-1B-3 of this Code, home occupations requirements and conditions;
      8.   Attendance; Feeding Requirements: Catteries shall not be left
unattended for a period in excess of twenty four (24) hours. All animals shall
be supplied with sufficient good wholesome food as feeding habits of such
animals require. Clean (potable) water shall be continuously available unless
otherwise recommended and documented by a licensed veterinarian;
      9.   Information Posted: An emergency name, address and phone number must
be posted in a conspicuous place at the front of the property for use by
authorized persons.
   C.   Physical Facilities: The basic intent of these regulations is to see
that all animals receive proper care, that they are being treated kindly,
properly fed, and that their surroundings are being kept in a sanitary
condition.
      1.   Facilities:
         a.   Cages:
            (1)   Minimum Size Requirements:
               (A)   Cage length and width shall exceed the animal's length
from the base of the tail to the tip of the animal's nose by at least four
inches (4"). Cage height shall exceed the animal's height from the bottom of
the foot to the top of the shoulder by at least four inches (4"). Cages shall
allow an animal to stand, sit, lie, and turn about freely and comfortably.
               (B)   Communal cages for cats more than four (4) months old
shall be as long and wide as the total for all cages if the cats had been
housed separately.
            (2)   Communal Cage: All animals kept in a communal cage or run
shall be either from the same litter or belong to the same owner, unless
written permission is given by the owners of each of the animals in a communal
cage or run.
            (3)   Construction: Cages shall be so constructed and be of such
material as to be maintained in a sanitary condition. All cages must be cleaned
and sanitized daily, animal droppings, spoiled food, and other wastes shall be
removed no less frequently than daily to prevent odors, attraction and breeding
of insects and rodents, and other nuisances. All cages shall have bedding,
feeding bowl, and water container that are easily sanitizable and in the case
of cats, litter boxes or trays that are easily sanitizable.
            (4)   Removal From Cages: Animals shall be removed from cages and
be provided with an exercise area for their daily use for such periods as
determined by the size, age and condition of the animal. Diseased animals must
be maintained apart from healthy animals in suitable and separate quarters.
         b.   Runs:
            (1)   Minimum Size Requirements: Cats shall not be kept in runs
with less than four (4) square feet (0.37 square meters) of floor space and
less than two feet (2') (0.61 m) in height.
            (2)   Cleanliness: All runs must be cleaned and sanitized daily,
animal droppings, spoiled food, and other wastes shall be removed no less
frequently than daily to prevent odors, attraction and breeding of insects and
rodents, and other nuisances. All runs shall have bedding, feeding bowl, and
water container that are easily sanitizable and in the case of cats, litter
boxes or trays that are easily sanitizable.
            (3)   Diseased Animals: Diseased animals must be maintained apart
from healthy animals in suitable and separate quarters.
         c.   General: Walls, ceilings and floors shall be constructed of
materials which are resistant to the absorption of moisture and odors or such
surfaces shall be treated with a sealant or with paint, when such materials are
not originally resistant to moisture or odors. The room shall be properly
screened and insect and vermin proof. It shall be properly ventilated to
prevent drafts and to assist in the removal of foul and obnoxious odors.
Heating and cooling shall be provided as required. Animal rooms shall be
sufficiently heated or cooled to protect such animals from temperatures to
which they are not normally acclimated and have sufficient light (preferably
natural) to allow observation of animals and sanitation.
         d.   Food And Bedding: Suitable food and bedding shall be provided and
stored in facilities adequate to provide protection against infestation or
contamination by insects or rodents. Refrigeration shall be provided for the
protection of perishable foods.
         e.   Space Requirements: Cages and runs shall not occupy more than
fifty percent (50%) of the business area floor space.
         f.   Wastes: Provision shall be made to effectively collect, treat,
and dispose of animal liquid and solid wastes. Solid waste shall be stored,
collected, and disposed of in such a manner as will minimize vermin
infestation, odor or other health hazards. No solid or liquid waste shall be
washed into adjoining properties, gutters, storm drains, irrigation ditches or
canals.
         g.   Housing Of Animals: Indoor catteries shall not house or board any
animals in outbuildings, kennel buildings or outside kennel runs. Exercising
cats in an approved outdoor exercise area is allowed.
         h.   Outdoor Exercise Area:
            (1)   Minimum Size Requirements: Cats shall not be kept in an
exercise area with less than four (4) square feet (0.37 square meters) of floor
space and less than two feet (2') (0.61 m) in height. The maximum allowed
height is six feet (6').
            (2)   Fencing; Water; Maintenance: Outdoor exercise areas shall be
enclosed by a fence (chainlink or welded wire) and constructed in such a manner
as to protect the cat from other animals, wind or weather and prevent it from
escaping its confines. Clean water shall be continuously available unless
otherwise recommended by a veterinarian. They shall be adequately drained and
maintained in a sanitary manner. Adequate and sanitary means of disposing of
droppings shall be provided. All animal droppings and other wastes shall be
removed no less frequently than daily to prevent odors, attraction and breeding
of insects, rodents and other nuisances.
            (3)   Setbacks; Use: Every portion of an outdoor exercise area
shall be separate and removed from any boundary fence. Exercise areas shall be
a minimum of ten feet (10') from any property line. Outdoor exercise areas
shall be used for the exercising of cats housed in an indoor cattery.
            (4)   Restrictions: The following restrictions shall apply to the
use of outdoor exercise areas: Cats shall only be placed in the outdoor
exercise area while a representative of the indoor cattery is on the premises.
Cats shall be exercised individually and not during the hours of eight o'clock
(8:00) P.M. until nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. Care should be taken to minimize
unreasonable noises and odors from the exercise area so as not to create a
nuisance for residents of adjoining properties. Cats in heat shall not be
exercised in an outdoor exercise area.
      2.   Inspection: All areas of indoor housing, cages, runs, food storage,
indoor and outdoor exercise areas shall be subject to inspection by authorized
persons. The animal control officer, the code enforcement officer, the zoning
administrator, or their designees, shall have the authority to enter the
premises of any cattery to inspect and assure compliance with the cattery
license requirements and conditional use permit requirements. Catteries shall
be inspected prior to the business license being issued or renewed and to
investigate complaints. Failure to allow an inspection for business licensing
purposes or investigation of complaints shall constitute grounds for revocation
of the business license.
   D.   Zoning Applicability: This section shall not be construed or
interpreted as permitting the establishment or maintenance of a cattery in
violation of the city zoning regulations. The provisions of this section
regulating catteries shall be applicable only in those locations within the
city wherein catteries are (may be) used under the terms of the city zoning
regulations.
      1.   In addition to obtaining a business license required by this
chapter, all catteries within the city shall comply with all zoning
requirements.
      2.   Indoor catteries shall limit the maximum number of boarded cats to
six (6) cats over six (6) months of age. Only one litter of kittens may be
boarded in the cattery and are not included in the maximum number of allowable
cats. The owner of the cattery may have up to three (3) personal cats which are
not included in the maximum number of boarded cats. (Ord. 02-05-2013A, 2-5-
2013)
5-1C-6: LOSS OF PRIVILEGE TO MAINTAIN DOG/CAT IN CITY:
If the owner or custodian of any dog/cat is convicted of violations of this
chapter on three (3) or more different occasions during any twelve (12) month
period, the city may issue an order denying the right of the owner or custodian
to maintain a dog/cat in the city for a period of one year. Prior to final
denial of such privilege, written notice shall be sent to the owner or
custodian's last known address informing the owner or custodian of the city's
intent to deny his privilege of maintaining a dog/cat in the city. The owner or
custodian may seek a hearing before the city manager to be informed of the
alleged violations against him that have resulted in the loss of his privilege
and shall be given an opportunity to refute the applicability of this section
to his situation. If the city manager finds that grounds exist to deny the
owner or custodian's privilege to maintain a dog/cat within the city, he may
order the owner or custodian to either remove his dog/cat from the city or, in
the event the owner or custodian fails to remove the dog/cat from the city, to
have the dog/cat impounded. Any dog/cat impounded under this section shall be
dealt with in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for impounded
animals except that the person from whom the dog/cat was taken shall not be
allowed to redeem the dog/cat under any circumstances. (2004 Code)
5-1C-7: UNLAWFUL TO HARBOR STRAY ANIMALS:
   A.   Whenever any animal shall be found that appears to be lost or strayed,
it shall be the duty of the finder to notify the city within twenty four (24)
hours. This notice shall include an accurate description of the animal and
accurate information regarding the location of the harbored animal.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person, except an animal welfare society
incorporated under the laws of the state, to harbor or keep any lost or strayed
animal unless that person shall immediately notify the city as required herein.
(2004 Code)
5-1C-8: DOGS ON UNENCLOSED PREMISES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to chain, stake out or tether any dog on
any unenclosed premises in such a manner that the animal may go beyond the
property lines of the animal's owner or custodian unless such person has
permission of the owner of the affected property. (2004 Code)
5-1C-9: FEMALE DOGS/CATS IN HEAT:
Any owner or custodian of any female dog/cat in heat shall, in addition to
restraining such dog/cat from running at large, cause such dog/cat to be
constantly confined in a building or secure enclosure so as to prevent it from
coming into contact with other dogs/cats and creating a nuisance, except for
planned breeding. (2004 Code)
5-1C-10: PLACES PROHIBITED TO ANIMALS:
It shall be unlawful for any person to take or permit any animal, whether loose
or on a leash or in arms, in or about any establishment or place of business
where food or food products are sold or displayed, including, but not limited
to, restaurants, grocery stores, convenience stores, meat markets, and fruit or
vegetable stores. This section shall not apply, however, to seeing eye dogs,
hearing dogs or dogs owned by government agencies described in section
5-1C-3 of this article. (2004 Code)
5-1C-11: DOGS ATTACKING PERSONS AND ANIMALS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any dog to attack, chase or worry any person,
any domestic animal, or any species of hoofed protected wildlife, or to attack
domestic fowl. "Worry", as used in this section, shall mean to harass by
tearing, biting or shaking with the teeth.
   B.   The owner or custodian of any dog in violation of subsection A of this
section shall be strictly liable for violation of this section. In addition to
being subject to prosecution under subsection A of this section, the owner or
custodian of such dog shall also be liable in damages to any person injured or
to the owner of any animals injured or destroyed thereby.
   C.   Any person may kill a dog while it is committing any of the acts
specified in subsection A of this section or while such dog is being pursued
thereafter; provided, however, that such persons do so in a safe manner without
endangering people, other animals or property. (2004 Code)
ARTICLE D.  RABIES CONTROL
SECTION:
5-1D-1: Control Of Rabies And Rabid Animals
5-1D-2: Bites; Duty To Report
5-1D-3: Quarantine And Disposition Of Biting Or Rabid Animals
5-1D-1: CONTROL OF RABIES AND RABID ANIMALS:
   A.   Vaccination Required: The owner or custodian of a dog or cat four (4)
months of age or over shall have the animal vaccinated within thirty (30) days
after it reaches this age. Unvaccinated dogs or cats over four (4) months of
age that are acquired by the owner or brought into the city shall be vaccinated
within thirty (30) days of acquisition or of being moved into the city. Every
dog and cat shall be revaccinated as required by law to maintain a current
vaccination using a modified virus rabies vaccine approved by the county health
department. This provision shall not apply to veterinarians or kennel operators
temporarily maintaining on their premises animals owned by others, provided
said animals are not kept for more than thirty (30) days.
   B.   Exception: The provisions of this section with respect to vaccination
shall not apply to any animal remaining within the city for less than thirty
(30) days. Such animals shall be kept under strict supervision of the owner. It
shall be unlawful to bring any animal into the city that does not comply with
all applicable animal health laws and import regulations.
   C.   Certificate:
      1.   It shall be the duty of each veterinarian, when vaccinating any
animal for rabies, to complete a rabies vaccination certificate that includes
the following information:
         a.   Owner's name and address.
         b.   Description of animal (breed, sex, markings, age, name).
         c.   Date of vaccination.
         d.   Rabies vaccination tag number.
         e.   Type of rabies vaccine administered.
         f.   Manufacturer's serial number of vaccine.
      2.   A copy of the certificate shall be distributed to the owner and the
original retained by the issuing veterinarian. The veterinarian and the owner
shall retain their copies of the certificate for the interval between
vaccinations specified in this section. A metal or durable plastic rabies
vaccination tag, serially numbered, shall be securely attached to the collar or
harness of the animal. An animal not wearing such tag shall be deemed to be
unvaccinated and may be impounded and dealt with pursuant to the provisions of
this chapter. (2004 Code)
5-1D-2: BITES; DUTY TO REPORT:
   A.   The owner of an animal that bites a person and any person bitten by an
animal shall report the bite to the city, county health department or the state
division of health within twenty four (24) hours of the bite, regardless of
whether or not the biting animal is of a species subject to rabies.
   B.   Any person having knowledge of any individual or animal having been
bitten by an animal of a species subject to rabies shall report the incident
immediately to the city, county health department or the state division of
health.
   C.   A physician or other medical personnel who renders professional
treatment to a person bitten by an animal shall report such treatment to the
city within twenty four (24) hours of his first professional attendance. He
shall report the name, sex and address of the person bitten as well as the type
and location of the bite. If known, he shall give the name and address of the
owner of the animal that inflicted the bite and other facts that may assist
animal control officers in ascertaining the immunization status of the animal.
   D.   Any person treating an animal bitten, injured or mauled by another
animal shall report the incident to the city. The report shall contain the name
and address of the owner of the wounded, injured or bitten animal, the name and
address of the owner and description of the animal that caused the injury, and
the location of the incident.
   E.   Any person having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal known to
have been exposed to, or suspected of having rabies, or of an animal or person
bitten by such a suspect animal, shall notify the city, the county health
department or the state division of health. (2004 Code)
5-1D-3: QUARANTINE AND DISPOSITION OF BITING OR RABID ANIMALS:
   A.   An animal that has rabies or shows signs of having rabies and every
animal bitten by another animal affected with rabies or that has been exposed
to rabies shall be reported by the owner or custodian of such animal as set
forth in section
5-1D-2 of this article and shall immediately be confined in a secure place by
the owner or custodian.
   B.   The owner of any animal of a species subject to rabies that has bitten
another animal or person shall immediately surrender the animal to an
authorized official upon demand. Any person authorized to enforce the
provisions of this chapter may enter upon private property to seize the animal.
If the owner refuses to surrender the animal, the officer shall immediately
obtain a search warrant authorizing seizure and impoundment of the animal.
   C.   Any animal of a species subject to rabies that bites a person or animal
or is suspected of having rabies may be seized and quarantined for observation
for a period of not less than ten (10) days by an animal control officer. The
owner of the animal shall bear the cost of confinement. The animal shelter
shall be the normal place for quarantine, but other arrangements, including
confinement by the owner, may be made by the animal control officer if the
animal had a current rabies vaccination at the time the bite was inflicted or
if there are other special circumstances justifying an exception. A person who
has custody of an animal under quarantine shall immediately notify the animal
control officer if the animal shows any signs of sickness or abnormal behavior,
or if the animal escapes confinement. It shall be unlawful for any person who
has custody of a quarantined animal to refuse to allow an animal control
officer to make an inspection or examination during the period of quarantine.
If the animal dies within ten (10) days from the date of the bite, the person
having custody shall immediately notify the animal control officer or
immediately remove and deliver the head to the state health laboratory to be
examined for rabies. If, at the end of the ten (10) day quarantine period, the
animal control officer examines the animal and finds no sign of rabies, the
animal may be released to the owner; or, in the case of a stray, it shall be
disposed of as provided in this chapter.
   D.   In the case of an unvaccinated animal of a species subject to rabies
that is known to have been bitten by a known rabid animal, the bitten or
exposed animal shall be immediately destroyed. If the owner is unwilling to
destroy the bitten or exposed animal, the animal shall be immediately isolated
and quarantined for six (6) months under veterinary supervision, the cost of
such confinement to be paid in advance by the owner. The animal shall be
destroyed if the owner does not comply herewith.
   E.   In the case of a rabies vaccinated animal that is known to have been
bitten by a known rabid animal, the bitten or exposed animal shall be
revaccinated within twenty four (24) hours and quarantined for a period of
thirty (30) days following revaccination. If the animal is not revaccinated
within twenty four (24) hours, the animal shall be isolated and quarantined
under veterinary supervision for six (6) months. The animal shall be destroyed
if the owner does not comply with this subsection.
   F.   It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any quarantined animal
from the place of quarantine without written permission of the animal control
officer. (2004 Code)
ARTICLE E.  IMPOUNDING OF ANIMALS
SECTION:
5-1E-1: Authorized
5-1E-2: Animals To Be Impounded
5-1E-3: Redemption
5-1E-1: AUTHORIZED:
The city, animal control officer or person employed for animal regulation
purposes by the city shall attempt to capture any animal found at large in
violation of this chapter and may destroy an animal at large if, in their
judgment, such action is required for public health and safety. (2004 Code)
5-1E-2: ANIMALS TO BE IMPOUNDED:
The following animals may be taken into custody by an animal control officer
and impounded without the filing of a complaint:
   A.   Any vicious animal not properly confined as required by this chapter.
   B.   Any animal running at large.
   C.   Any unlicensed animal that is required by this chapter to be licensed.
Any animal not wearing a tag shall be presumed to be unlicensed for purposes of
this section, except those dogs specifically exempted.
   D.   Sick and injured animals whose owner cannot be located.
   E.   Any abandoned animal.
   F.   Animals that are not wearing a rabies vaccination tag in accordance
with the requirements of this chapter.
   G.   Any animal to be held for quarantine.
   H.   Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of this
chapter. (2004 Code)
5-1E-3: REDEMPTION:
The owner or custodian of any impounded animal may redeem such animal before
disposition according to the regulations of the animal shelter. Any unlicensed
animal shall be licensed according to this chapter prior to release. (2004
Code)
ARTICLE F.  FEES, CHARGES AND PENALTIES
SECTION:
5-1F-1: Fees And Charges
5-1F-2: Penalty
5-1F-1: FEES AND CHARGES:
The fees and charges that may be imposed under the provisions of this chapter
shall be as determined and established by resolution by the city from time to
time and on file in the office of the city recorder. (2004 Code)
5-1F-2: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class B
misdemeanor, and unless a different penalty shall be provided for such
violation by this chapter, such violation shall be punished as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code. (2004 Code)
CHAPTER 2
CRIMES, OFFENSES AND TRAFFIC REGULATIONS
SECTION:
5-2-1: Criminal And Traffic Code Adopted By Reference; Speed Limit
5-2-2: Public Disturbances
5-2-3: Firearms, Weapons, Explosives, And Fireworks
5-2-4: Truck Routes
5-2-5: Parking Regulations
5-2-6: Designation Of Streets And Highways As Open For Street Legal All-Terrain
Vehicle Use
5-2-1: CRIMINAL AND TRAFFIC CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE; SPEED LIMIT:
   A.   Except as the application thereof is clearly impractical or
inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all
of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and
sections of the Utah Criminal Code, Utah Code Annotated title 76, and the Utah
Traffic Code, Utah Code Annotated title 41, as amended, with a corresponding
penalty of infraction, Class C misdemeanor or Class B misdemeanor, are hereby
adopted by the City. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered
violations of this chapter and each such violation shall be subject to the
penalties as provided in title 1, chapter 4 of this Code. (2004 Code)
   B.   The most recent Utah Criminal and Traffic Code, and setting the speed
limit of twenty five (25) miles per hour in all residential and commercial
zones within the City, unless otherwise posted, is hereby adopted. (Ord. 3-19-
2002A, 3-19-2002; amd. 2004 Code)
5-2-2: PUBLIC DISTURBANCES:
   A.   Prohibited Public Disturbances; Penalty:
      1.   It is unlawful for any person to disturb the peace or quiet of
another by loud or unusual noise or by tumultuous conduct or by threatening or
yelling in a manner likely to incite another to violence.
      2.   It is unlawful for any person to cause noise that constitutes a
public disturbance. It shall also be unlawful for any person in possession of
real property to allow to originate from the property, noise that constitutes a
public disturbance. For purposes of this section, "public disturbance" shall be
any sound that unreasonably disturbs or interferes with the peace, comfort or
repose of owners or possessors of real property, including, but not limited to,
sound that emanates from any of the following sound sources:
         a.   Music, stereo or sound systems.
         b.   Loud arguing or boisterous conduct.
         c.   Construction work in or adjacent to a residential zone between
the hours of nine thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on
weekdays, and between the hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and nine o'clock
(9:00) A.M. on weekends.
         d.   Sports or other entertainment activities in or adjacent to a
residential zone between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. and seven
o'clock (7:00) A.M.
         e.   The use of machinery or motorized or power tools and equipment in
or adjacent to residential zones between the hours of nine thirty o'clock (9:
30) P.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. on weekdays, and between the hours of
nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. on weekends except for
specialized equipment used for seasonal and periodic snow removal.
         f.   The repetitive or continuous starting, testing or operation of a
motor vehicle, including a motorcycle, in a residential zone. (Ord. 8-27-97A,
8-27-1997; amd. 2004 Code)
         g.   The use of engine brakes, also known as jake brakes. (Ord. 2-15-
2005C, 2-15-2005)
   B.   Exemptions To Public Disturbances; Permit Required; Penalty:
      1.   Sounds created by emergency activities or emergency vehicles; sounds
giving warning of emergencies; and sounds associated with emergency work shall
be exempt from the provisions of this section. "Emergency work" shall mean work
made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public
calamity or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent
exposure to danger.
      2.   Sounds created by parades, carnivals, special public social events,
or special construction projects may be exempted from the noise provisions of
this section. An exemption is granted by a permit from the Mayor, which must be
in writing and shall describe:
         a.   The special nature of the exempted event; and
         b.   The time period for which the exemption is in force.
      3.   The permit shall be for one event only. The Mayor may impose
reasonable conditions on the issuance of a permit as necessary to protect the
public peace and welfare. The permit may be withdrawn if the provisions thereof
are violated.
   C.   Use Of Police At Large Parties Or Gatherings Requiring Second Response:
      1.   When a "public disturbance", as defined below, occurs, the person in
charge of the premises and the person responsible for the event, or if either
of those persons is a minor, then the parents or guardians of that minor, will
be held jointly and severally liable to the City for the cost of providing
police personnel or special security assignment over and above the services
normally provided. The costs of such special security assignments may include
minor damages to City property and/or injury to City personnel. The costs
charged will not be in excess of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for a single
incident. The City reserves its legal options to elect other legal remedies.
      2.   A "public disturbance" exists when one or more persons:
         a.   Violate or participate or assist in any conduct that is part of
the violation of any law or ordinance;
         b.   Participate or assist in any conduct that reasonably threatens to
cause a violation of any law or ordinance; or
         c.   Engage in any noncriminal conduct that, based on the standard of
a reasonable person of normal sensitivity, disturbs or unreasonably threatens
to disturb the public peace, health, safety, or general welfare of persons in
the vicinity of the conduct.
   D.   Penalty: Violation of this section is a Class C misdemeanor and, upon
conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 11-16-94A, 11-16-1994; amd. 2004 Code)
5-2-3: FIREARMS, WEAPONS, EXPLOSIVES, AND FIREWORKS 1 :
   A.   Prohibited Discharge Of Firearms, Explosives, Fireworks And Similar
Weapons:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any rifle, pistol
or revolver capable of propelling a projectile more than five hundred feet
(500') anywhere within the limits of the City. (Ord. 9-11-85B, 9-11-1985)
      2.   It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any shotgun or air
gun, including, but not limited to, BB or pellet guns, or any other firearm not
otherwise prohibited by this section within the City, or within six hundred
feet (600') of any dwelling or inhabited structure. (Ord. 9-11-85B, 9-11-1985;
amd. 2004 Code)
      3.   It shall be unlawful to discharge or shoot a bow and arrow, blow
gun, wrist rocket, slingshot, or any other type of instrument designed to
propel or throw missiles capable of doing bodily harm, whether on public or
private property, in such a manner as to endanger persons or property, or to
cause the projectile or missile to pass into the property of another. (Ord. 9-
11-85B, 9-11-1985)
      4.   It shall be unlawful to discharge or ignite an aerial device as
defined by Utah Administrative Code R710-2-3 or any non-stationary firework,
within two hundred feet (200') of any area as identified by the highlighted
areas of the map which by this reference is made a part of this subsection.
(Ord. 04-17-2018A, 4-17-2018)
   B.   Exceptions: The provisions prohibiting the discharge of firearms shall
not apply to peace officers in the performance of their official duties, to
authorized use of established firing ranges, or to any other lawful act.
   C.   Supervision Of Minors; Responsibility For Damages:
      1.   The possession and discharge of firearms by minors shall be properly
supervised. No minor under the age of eighteen (18) shall possess or discharge
a rifle, shotgun, pistol, revolver, air gun or similar firearm unless he has
the permission of his parent or guardian to have said firearm, or is
accompanied by a parent or guardian while he has such firearm in his
possession. In no event shall a minor under the age of fourteen (14) possess or
discharge a firearm unless he is accompanied by a responsible adult. The
provisions of this section relating to supervision shall be applicable to the
possession and discharge of BB and pellet guns. (Ord. 9-11-85B, 9-11-1985)
      2.   The parents, or as applicable the legal guardians having custody of
a minor child, shall be liable for damages sustained to property arising from
the shooting of firearms by minors under their jurisdiction, but not to exceed
the value of the damages.
   D.   Penalty: Violation of this section shall be an infraction and, upon
conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 9-11-85B, 9-11-1985; amd. 2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 4-2-3C5bb(5) of this Code.
5-2-4: TRUCK ROUTES:
   A.   Designation Of Truck Routes; Temporary Routes:
      1.   The following streets are hereby designated as truck routes and the
truck route designations are exclusive:
         a.   Canyon Road (SR 146), City limits to City limits.
         b.   Training School Road (4800 West), City limits to City limits.
      2.   Additional temporary truck routes may, from time to time, be
established subject to the prior authorization of the Mayor.
   B.   Use Of Streets By Large Trucks: All trucks with a rated capacity of one
and one-half (11/2) tons or licensed for eighteen thousand (18,000) pounds'
gross vehicle weight or more shall use only those streets specified as truck
routes by this section, or such additional temporary truck routes as may from
time to time be established pursuant to subsection A of this section. (Ord. 11-
13-85B, 11-13-1985; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Exceptions: The above requirements shall not apply to trucks delivering
merchandise to or from residences or business establishments, or delivering to
or returning from construction sites where it is not possible to use a
designated truck route, or any Municipal vehicle, or any vehicle performing
work for and on behalf of the City of Cedar Hills. (Ord. 11-20-2018A, 11-20-
2018)
   D.   Penalty: Violation of this section shall constitute a Class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 11-13-85B, 11-13-1985; amd. 2004 Code)
5-2-5: PARKING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Definitions: For purposes of this section, the following words and
phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them:
    HARD SURFACE: Concrete, asphalt, road base, gravel, pavers and other
materials approved by the zoning official.
   LOCATION: The area of road that provides frontage for each individual
property.
   STREET: The entire width between property lines of every way or place of
whatever nature when any part of it is open to the public as a matter of right,
for purposes of pedestrian or vehicular traffic.
   VEHICLE: Any of the following:
      1.   Camper Shell Or Camper: An accessory for use in conjunction with a
pickup truck. It is a temporary dwelling used for travel, recreational and
vacation use.
      2.   Commercial Vehicle: Any vehicle, trailer or construction equipment
that is primarily used in a trade or business that bears any logo or other
advertisement of a trade or business, or that is actually being used in a trade
or business.
      3.   Impaired Motor Vehicle: A vehicle that was intended primarily as a
motor vehicle, but is impaired in some manner and not operable.
      4.   Implement Of Husbandry: Every vehicle exclusively used by the owner
in the conduct of agricultural operations.
      5.   Motor Vehicle: Any self-propelled vehicle.
      6.   Motorboat: A self-propelled vehicle intended for use and operation
on the water.
      7.   Motorcycle: A motor vehicle having a saddle for the use of a rider.
      8.   Pickup Truck: A motor vehicle with a motive power manufactured,
remanufactured or materially altered to provide an open cargo area. It also
includes motor vehicles with the open cargo area covered with a camper, camper
shell, tarp, removable top or similar structure.
      9.   Recreational Vehicle: A vehicle designed for recreational use such
as a boat, trailer, camper and other vehicles approved by the zoning official.
      10.   Sailboat: A vehicle that is not self-propelled, but intended for
use and operation on the water.
      11.   Trailer: A vehicle without motive power designed for carrying
persons or property and for being drawn by a motor vehicle.
      12.   Travel Trailer: A trailer designed as a temporary dwelling for
travel, recreational and vacation use. (Ord. 12-4-2001A, 12-4-2001; amd. Ord.
8-5-2008A, 8-5-2008; Ord. 10-20-2009B, 10-20-2009)
   B.   Parking Regulations:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in the same location on a
street or municipal property for a continuous period of time exceeding forty
eight (48) hours 1 . (Ord. 8-5-2008A, 8-5-2008)
      2.   It shall be unlawful to disobey signs erected by the city that
prohibit parking or regulate the hours thereof. It shall also be unlawful to
park in violation of curb markings designated by the city. Red curb markings
shall mean no stopping or parking at any time.
      3.   Where lines are painted on the roadway to indicate the angle at
which a vehicle shall be parked, it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle except
as indicated.
   C.   Obstructing Traffic: No person shall park any vehicle upon a street in
such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than twelve
feet (12') of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic.
   D.   Oversized Vehicles: It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park
or station upon any street any vehicle that:
      1.   Is licensed for more than twelve thousand (12,000) pounds gross; or
      2.   Is defined as a commercial vehicle; or
      3.   Has more than six (6) wheels; or
      4.   Has an overall length, including any trailer, mobile home or any
other object attached thereto, exceeding twenty five feet (25'); or
      5.   Is what is commonly referred to as a "semi", "tractor", "tractor
trailer", or "truck trailer", with or without pup; or
      6.   Is what is commonly referred to as construction equipment, including
backhoes, transport trailers, excavation equipment, etc.
   E.   Abandoned, Wrecked Or Junk Vehicles: It shall be unlawful to park,
store or leave, or to permit the parking, storing or leaving of, any licensed
or unlicensed vehicle of any kind, or parts thereof, which is in a wrecked,
junked, partially dismantled, inoperative or abandoned condition, whether
attended or not, on a street or municipal property for a period of time in
excess of twenty four (24) hours. (Ord. 12-4-2001A, 12-4-2001)
   F.   Parking During Snow/Ice Removal: So as to provide access to snowplows
for snow removal, it is unlawful for any person to park or allow to remain
parked any vehicle upon streets from November 1 to the following March 31 from
one o'clock (1:00) A.M. to seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or during snow/ice
removal. (Ord. 8-5-2008A, 8-5-2008)
   G.   Exceptions: Exceptions to these requirements include the following:
      1.   The temporary parking of vehicles for a reasonably short period of
time, not to exceed twelve (12) hours, to accommodate loading or unloading or
the performance of service.
      2.   Construction, contracting or earthmoving equipment that is otherwise
classified as commercial vehicles may be temporarily parked on streets,
provided the vehicles are actively being used for construction activities on
the specific property where the vehicles are being parked.
      3.   Emergency vehicles. (Ord. 12-4-2001A, 12-4-2001)
   H.   Penalty: Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the
provisions of this section shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon
conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. In addition, any vehicle that is parked in violation of
this section may be removed by the city at the owner's expense. (Ord. 12-4-
2001A, 12-4-2001; amd. 2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection E of this section.
5-2-6: DESIGNATION OF STREETS AND HIGHWAYS AS OPEN FOR STREET LEGAL ALL-TERRAIN
VEHICLE USE:
All public streets and highways within the jurisdictional limits of the City of
Cedar Hills are designated as open for street legal type I and type II all-
terrain vehicles (ATVs) as defined in Utah code.
   A.   Type I all-terrain vehicles (ATVs) are motor propelled off highway
vehicles designed with a seat to be straddled by the operator and type II ATVs
are all-terrain vehicles which are motor propelled off highway vehicles
designed to have side by side seating (also known as "minitrucks", "Kei" trucks
or "side by sides"). To be legally driven on the streets of Cedar Hills each
type II ATV shall meet all state requirements as defined by title 41, Utah
code.
      1.   Unauthorized ATVs are not permitted on any trail, sidewalk or in or
upon any public open space.
         a.   Authorized vehicles include city appropriated ATVs or other
vehicles specifically used for the purpose of law enforcement, public safety or
maintenance of those trails and lands.
         b.   If an OHV/ATV is used only on a farm or ranch or for other
agricultural or irrigation purposes, it may be registered at a Utah division of
motor vehicles office as an implement of husbandry and will be exempt from
these regulations.
   B.   To be a "street legal type I or type II ATV", the following must be
met:
      1.   The operator must meet the same requirements as a motorcycle in
that:
         a.   The vehicle must be driven so as to follow all traffic rules;
         b.   The operator must be at least sixteen (16) years of age and
possess a valid driver's license in accordance with the Utah uniform driver
license act;
         c.   The vehicle must be legally registered and possess a state issued
license plate;
         d.   The owner must pay fees in lieu of property taxes;
         e.   Head protection must be worn in accordance with Utah state code
41-6a-1505.
      2.   The vehicle must meet the following requirements as a motor vehicle,
in that:
         a.   The vehicle must be covered by motor vehicle insurance and proof
thereof must be carried in/on the vehicle;
         b.   The vehicle must pass vehicle emissions inspection;
         c.   The vehicle must pass a safety inspection.
      3.   To be a "street legal ATV" the following equipment is required:
         a.   Headlamps;
         b.   One or more taillamp;
         c.   Light illuminating the license plate;
         d.   Red reflectors to the rear;
         e.   Stop lamps on the rear;
         f.   Amber electric turn signals front and rear;
         g.   A braking system, other than a parking brake;
         h.   A horn or other warning device;
         i.   A muffler and emissions control system (electric drive motor
vehicles exempt);
         j.   Rearview mirrors on both sides of the vehicle;
         k.   A windshield, or eye protection for the driver;
         l.   An illuminated speedometer;
         m.   A footrest and handhold for each passenger; and
         n.   For "side by side" vehicles, a seatbelt for each occupant.
      4.   The operator of a "street legal ATV" may not exceed the posted speed
limit or a maximum speed of forty five (45) miles per hour.
      5.   Street legal all-terrain vehicles are not to be driven upon any
federal highways, state highways, or city streets which have more than one lane
in the same direction. These include, but are not limited to, 4800 West, State
Road 146, State Road 92. (Ord. 9-20-2011C, 9-20-2011)
CHAPTER 3
MINORS; CURFEW
SECTION:
5-3-1: Purpose
5-3-2: Definitions
5-3-3: Sixteen Year Old Curfew
5-3-4: Eighteen Year Old Curfew
5-3-5: Parental Liability
5-3-6: Exceptions
5-3-7: Enforcement
5-3-8: Penalty
5-3-1: PURPOSE:
The city council, in concert with the governing body of Utah County, finds, due
to a seemingly ever increasing incidence of violence and other crime among
juveniles in Utah County, being both drug related and gang related, that such
crimes may be significantly inhibited and reduced by the enactment and
enforcement of local law establishing a curfew prohibiting juveniles from
remaining idly and purposelessly on the public streets late at night. (Ord. 2-
9-94A, 2-9-1994)
5-3-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
CARE AND CUSTODY: The legal authority of a parent or guardian to supervise or
otherwise be responsible for a minor, or the express authority given from such
parent or legal guardian of a minor to a responsible adult to supervise or
otherwise be responsible for the activities and care of the minor.
EMERGENCY ERRAND: Any errand or travel undertaken to directly and immediately
seek to prevent or reduce the consequences of an illness or injury, criminal or
potential criminal activity, or fire or other accident, and shall include the
seeking of aid and assistance from medical or emergency response personnel or
the purchase of medications.
MINOR: An unmarried, unemancipated person who is not a member of the armed
forces of the United States and who is under the age of sixteen (16) years for
the purpose of section
5-3-3 of this chapter, or who is under the age of eighteen (18) years for the
purpose of section
5-3-4 of this chapter.
PUBLIC PLACES: Any place open to the public, whether privately owned,
including, but not limited to, parking lots and the interiors and exteriors of
commercial establishments such as restaurants, stores or places of
entertainment. (Ord. 2-9-94A, 2-9-1994)
5-3-3: SIXTEEN YEAR OLD CURFEW:
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of sixteen (16) to remain or
loiter upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in the city,
between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
the following morning. (Ord. 2-9-94A, 2-9-1994)
5-3-4: EIGHTEEN YEAR OLD CURFEW:
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of eighteen (18) years to
remain or loiter upon any of the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in
the city, between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:
00) A.M. Sunday through Thursday, and between the hours of one o'clock (1:00)
A.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M. Friday through Saturday. (Ord. 2-9-94A, 2-9-
1994)
5-3-5: PARENTAL LIABILITY:
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person having care and
custody of any minor to knowingly allow or permit the minor to violate the
provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2-9-94A, 2-9-1994)
5-3-6: EXCEPTIONS:
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any circumstance in which the
minor is:
   A.   Accompanied by a parent, guardian or other responsible adult having
care and custody of such minor;
   B.   Engaged in a legitimate trade, employment or occupation that requires
the minor's presence in or on the sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places
while working at or traveling to or from such employment;
   C.   Engaged on an emergency errand directed by the minor's parent, guardian
or other responsible person having care and custody of such minor;
   D.   In a motor vehicle engaged in normal interstate travel beginning in,
traveling through, or ending in the city;
   E.   Attending or engaged in traveling between the minor's home or place of
residence and a place where any religious, municipal social, entertainment,
sporting, political, library or school function is occurring; or
   F.   Within the boundaries of the minor's place of residence. (Ord. 2-9-94A,
2-9-1994)
5-3-7: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Any minor who is in violation of the provisions of this chapter is
subject to arrest and citation.
   B.   Upon arrest, the minor shall be returned to the custody of the parent,
guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of the minor.
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian or other person charged
with the care and custody of a minor, who is in violation of this chapter, to
knowingly refuse to appear and take custody of said minor after being ordered
to do so by a peace officer. (Ord. 2-9-94A, 2-9-1994)
5-3-8: PENALTY:
Any person who violates the provisions of this chapter is guilty of a class B
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2-9-94A, 2-9-1994; amd. 2004 Code)
TITLE 6
PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
CHAPTER 1
CONSTRUCTION AND STORAGE ON PUBLIC STREETS
SECTION:
6-1-1: Damaging Streets And Sidewalks
6-1-2: Unsafe Construction Practices
6-1-3: Placing Dirt, Debris And Materials On Public Street
6-1-4: Penalty
6-1-1: DAMAGING STREETS AND SIDEWALKS:
It shall be unlawful to damage or cause to be damaged any street, curb, gutter,
sidewalk or other street improvement in the city without specific authorization
from the city or its authorized representative to do the work on such street,
curb, gutter, sidewalk or improvement. (Ord. 2-2-94A, 2-2-1994)
6-1-2: UNSAFE CONSTRUCTION PRACTICES:
Any contractor or other person performing work upon any public street or
sidewalk shall be responsible for safety in connection with the work. It shall
be unlawful for any person performing work on any street or sidewalk to conduct
the work in an unsafe manner, or to leave the work unfinished or in a dangerous
or unsafe condition without placing appropriate barricades and warning devices
around the work area to avoid damage to vehicles and injury to persons. All
persons working on any street or sidewalk shall also comply with all applicable
federal, state and local safety regulations. (Ord. 2-2-94A, 2-2-1994)
6-1-3: PLACING DIRT, DEBRIS AND MATERIALS ON PUBLIC STREET:
It shall be unlawful to place or spill without immediately cleaning up any
material or debris on a public street or sidewalk. It shall also be unlawful
for the driver of any vehicle to track mud or dirt onto a public street. Upon
notification by the city of any violation of this provision, the violator shall
within twelve (12) hours clean the street or shall be liable to the city for
the costs of doing so. The provision prohibiting the placement of materials on
the public street or sidewalk shall not apply during cleanup periods
established by the city, provided the materials are placed according to any
directions of the city and do not obstruct traffic; nor shall the provision
apply to persons doing work authorized by the city that requires the placing of
materials in the street. (Ord. 2-2-94A, 2-2-1994)
6-1-4: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a class C misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2-2-94A, 2-2-1994; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 2
MAINTENANCE OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS DURING CONSTRUCTION
SECTION:
6-2-1: Intent
6-2-2: Protection Of Public Improvements; Responsibility
6-2-3: Replacement Required When Damaged
6-2-4: Financial Guarantee
6-2-5: Penalty
6-2-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of this chapter to minimize the destruction of city owned
curb, gutter, sidewalk and similar public improvements and to establish the
responsibility for ensuring that said improvements are protected during
construction of structures on adjacent properties and to provide a mechanism
for the repair or replacement of such improvements when damaged. (Ord. 6-25-
80B, 6-25-1980)
6-2-2: PROTECTION OF PUBLIC IMPROVEMENTS; RESPONSIBILITY:
No curb, gutter, sidewalk, street and other public improvements shall be
damaged or destroyed in the course of constructing a structure on any lot or
parcel of land. It shall be the responsibility of the person, firm or
corporation obtaining the building permit to maintain the quality of all such
improvements during the course of construction and to take whatever actions are
necessary to prevent the damage or destruction of said improvements. (Ord. 6-
25-80B, 6-25-1980)
6-2-3: REPLACEMENT REQUIRED WHEN DAMAGED:
Any curb, gutter, sidewalk, street or other public improvements that become
damaged or destroyed during the course of construction on the adjacent lot
shall be replaced prior to occupancy of said structure; provided, that when, in
the opinion of the city council, the damage is minimal and may be
satisfactorily repaired, the city may so authorize such repair in lieu of
replacement. (Ord. 6-25-80B, 6-25-1980)
6-2-4: FINANCIAL GUARANTEE:
   A.   Required: Prior to the issuance of a building permit, a bond, cash
deposit or other financial assurance acceptable to the city shall be submitted
as a guarantee that the quality of said improvements will be maintained. The
type and amount of the guarantee shall be as set forth in city standards. This
shall be in addition to all other fees and charges. (Ord. 6-25-80B, 6-25-1980)
   B.   Release Of Guarantee:
      1.   At the time of final inspection of the structure and after
landscaping is in place per ordinance, and at the request of the permit holder
for a bond release inspection, the building inspector shall inspect the quality
of public improvements appurtenant to said lot. If the quality of said
improvements is found adequate, the building inspector may authorize a release
of the guarantee.
      2.   However, if said improvements show evidence of damages, the building
inspector shall inform the permittee of those facilities or sections that must
be replaced. The city shall withhold the financial guarantee until said
improvements have been replaced or repaired. All repairs shall comply with city
standards. (Ord. 7-17-2007A, 7-17-2007)
   C.   Default: The city shall give notification to the bond poster at the
time the certificate of occupancy is granted of any bond that is outstanding.
If, within nine (9) months after a certificate of occupancy is granted,
replacement or repair has not taken place, or the bond release inspection is
not requested by permittee, the bond shall be declared forfeited. Thirty (30)
days after the adoption of this subsection, any bond that is outstanding that
qualifies for default will be declared forfeited. (Ord. 11-18-2008A, 11-18-
2008)
6-2-5: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 6-25-80B, 6-25-1980; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 3
EXCAVATIONS
SECTION:
6-3-1: Definitions
6-3-2: Permit Required
6-3-3: Emergency Work Without Permit
6-3-4: Fees For Permit
6-3-5: Contents Of Permit; Duration, Extensions
6-3-6: Transfer Or Assignment Of Permit Prohibited
6-3-7: Compliance With Specifications, Standards, Traffic Control Regulations;
Site Permittee Identification
6-3-8: Other Highway Permits
6-3-9: Relocation Of Structures In Public Way
6-3-10: Impact Of Excavation On Existing Improvements
6-3-11: Restoration Of Public Property
6-3-12: Insurance Requirements
6-3-13: Bond; When Required, Conditions, Warranty
6-3-14: Hold Harmless Agreement; Limitations On City Liability
6-3-15: Work Without Permit; Permit Fee
6-3-16: Failure To Comply; Default In Performance
6-3-17: Failure To Conform To Design Standards; Penalty
6-3-18: Appeal Of Suspension, Revocation Or Stop Order
6-3-19: Tampering With Traffic Barricades
6-3-20: Conflict With Governing Provisions
6-3-21: Penalty
6-3-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
APPLICANT: Any person who makes application for a permit.
BUSINESS: Any place in the city in which there is conducted or carried on
principally or exclusively any pursuit or occupation for the purpose of gaining
a livelihood.
CITY: City of Cedar Hills, a municipal corporation of the state of Utah.
CITY ENGINEER: The city engineer, or his/her authorized representative.
CITY PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The city public works director, or his/her
authorized representative.
EMERGENCY: Any unforeseen circumstances or occurrence, the existence of which
constitutes an immediate danger to persons or property, or that causes
interruption of utility or public services.
ENGINEERING REGULATIONS, SPECIFICATIONS AND/OR DESIGN STANDARDS: The latest
version of the engineering regulations, specifications, design standards or
criteria published, adopted, or in practical use by the city.
FAILURE: A work site restoration that fails to meet city specifications, or
that results in a deteriorated or substandard condition within the duration of
the warranty period. Failure may be settlement of surfaces, deterioration of
materials or other surface irregularities. Measurement of failure shall be
further defined in the engineering regulations.
INFRASTRUCTURE PROVIDER: A person providing to another, for the purpose of
providing telecommunication services to customers, all or part of the necessary
system that uses the right of way.
OPERATOR: Any person who provides service over a telecommunications system and
directly or through one or more affiliates owns a controlling interest in such
system, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for the operation of such a
system.
PERMITTEE: Any person that has been issued a permit and thereby has agreed to
fulfill the requirements of this chapter.
PERSON: Means and includes any natural person, partnership, firm, association,
provider, corporation, company, organization or entity of any kind.
PIPE DRIVEWAY: A driveway approach that uses a pipe or other means to bridge
the gutter.
PRIVATE DRAIN LINE: A pipe installed solely for the transmission of water
collected or generated on private property such as drainage, spring or storm
water, or condensate into the public drainage system.
PROPERTY OWNER: Person or persons who have legal title to property and/or
equitable interest in the property, or the ranking official or agent of a
company having legal title to property and/or equitable interest in the
property.
PROVIDER: An operator, infrastructure provider, reseller, system lessee or
public utility company.
PUBLIC UTILITY COMPANY: Any company subject to the jurisdiction of the Utah
state public service commission, or any mutual corporation or governmental
entity providing gas, electricity, water, telephone or other utility product or
services for use by the general public.
PUBLIC WAY: Means and includes all public rights of way and easements, public
footpaths, walkways and sidewalks, public streets, public roads, public
highways, public alleys, and public drainage ways. This includes public utility
easements not within public ways of the city.
RESELLER: Any person that provides service over a system for which a separate
charge is made, where that person does not own or lease the underlying system
used for the transmission and does not install any system in the rights of way.
RESIDENT: The person or persons currently making their home at a particular
dwelling.
STORM DRAIN: A dedicated pipe, conduit, waterway or ditch installed in a right
of way or easement for the transmission of storm and drainage water. This term
does not include private drain lines.
SYSTEM LESSEE: Any person that leases a system or a specific portion of a
system to provide services.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM OR SYSTEM: All conduits, manholes, poles, antennas,
transceivers, amplifiers and all other electronic devices, equipment, wire and
appurtenances owned, leased or used by a provider located in the construction,
ownership, operation, use or maintenance of a telecommunications system.
WORK SITE RESTORATION: Means and includes the restoring of the original ground
or paved hard surface area to comply with engineering regulations, and
includes, but is not limited to, repair, cleanup, backfilling, compaction and
stabilization, paving and other work necessary to place the site in acceptable
condition following the conclusion of the work, or the expiration or revocation
of the permit. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-2: PERMIT REQUIRED:
   A.   Basis For Issuance: Any person desiring to perform work of any kind in
a public way within the city, shall make application for a permit. The decision
by the city to issue a permit shall include, among other factors determined by
the city, the following:
      1.   The capacity of the public way to accommodate the facilities or
structures proposed to be installed in the public way;
      2.   The capacity of the public way to accommodate multiple wire in
addition to cables, conduits, pipes or other facilities or structures of other
users of the public way, such as electrical power, telephone, gas, sewer and
water;
      3.   The damage or disruption, if any, of public or private facilities,
improvements or landscaping previously existing in the public way;
      4.   The public interest in minimizing the cost and disruption of
construction from numerous excavations of the public way.
   B.   Application Requirements:
      1.   Application for a permit shall be filed with the city public works
director on a form or forms to be furnished by the city. Property owners and/or
tenants for whom work is being done shall be responsible for obtaining the
permits, provided, however, contractors may obtain the permit in the
contractor's name.
      2.   A person shall not be eligible to apply for or receive permits to do
work within the public ways of the city, save and except the following:
         a.   Contractors licensed by the state as general contractors;
         b.   Providers;
         c.   Property owners installing, replacing or maintaining less than
five hundred (500) square feet or one hundred ten (110) linear feet of
sidewalk, curb and gutter, or driveway approach, or other work approved by the
city public works director, upon a portion of the public way adjacent to their
residence; or
         d.   Persons offering a service that requires occupation of the public
way, such as scaffold or staging, staging of a crane, installation or
maintenance of electric signs, glass, awnings and painting or cleaning of
buildings or sign boards or other structures.
      3.   The city public works director may deny the issuance of permits to
contractors, utility companies or other permit applicants who have shown by
past performance that in the opinion of the city public works director they
will not consistently conform to the engineering regulations, specifications,
design standards or the requirements of this chapter.
      4.   When necessary, in the judgment of the city public works director,
to fully determine the relationship of the work proposed to existing or
proposed facilities within the public ways, or to determine whether the work
proposed complies with the engineering regulations, construction specifications
and design standards, the city public works director may require the filing of
engineering plans, specifications and sketches showing the proposed work in
sufficient detail to permit determination of such relationship or compliance,
or both, and the application shall be deemed suspended until such plans and
sketches are filed and approved.
      5.   It shall be unlawful for any person to commence work upon any public
way until the city public works director has approved the application and until
a permit has been issued for such work, except as specifically approved to the
contrary in this chapter.
      6.   The disapproval or denial of an application by the city public works
director may be appealed by the applicant to the city council by filing of a
written notice of appeal within ten (10) days of the action of the city public
works director. The city council shall hear such appeal, if written request
therefor be timely filed as soon as practicable, and render their decision
within two (2) weeks following notice of such appeal.
      7.   In approving or disapproving work within any public way, or permits
therefor, in the inspection of such work; in reviewing plans, sketches or
specifications; and generally in the exercise of the authority conferred upon
him/her by this chapter, the city public works director shall act in such
manner as to preserve and protect the public way and the use thereof, but shall
have no authority to govern the actions or inaction of permittees and
applicants or other persons that have no relationship to the use, preservation
or protection of the public way.
      8.   It shall be unlawful for a city, other than the City of Cedar Hills,
county, state, federal or other government employee to perform routine
maintenance work, not involving excavations, without first having obtained a
permit therefor.
      9.   A permit is not required from the city public works director for
hand digging excavations for installation or repair of sprinkler systems and
landscaping within the nonpaved areas of the public way. However, conformance
to all city specifications is required. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-3: EMERGENCY WORK WITHOUT PERMIT:
   A.   Permitted: Any person maintaining pipes, lines or facilities in the
public way may proceed with work upon existing facilities without a permit when
emergency circumstances demand the work to be done immediately; provided a
permit could not reasonably and practicably have been obtained beforehand.
   B.   Notification To City:
      1.   In the event that emergency work is commenced on or within any
public way of the city during regular business hours, the city public works
director shall be notified within one-half (1/2) hour from the time the work is
commenced. The person commencing and conducting such work shall take all
necessary safety precautions for the protection of the public and the direction
and control of traffic, and shall ensure that work is accomplished according to
city engineering regulations, the manual on uniform traffic control devices and
other applicable laws, regulations or generally recognized practices in the
industry.
      2.   Any person commencing emergency work in the public way during other
than business hours without a permit shall immediately thereafter apply for a
permit or give notice during the first hour of the first regular business day
on which city offices are open for business after such work is commenced. A
permit for such emergency work may be issued which shall be retroactive to the
date when the work was begun, at the discretion of the city public works
director. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-4: FEES FOR PERMIT:
   A.   Requirements: The city shall charge and the permittee shall pay upon
issuance of the permit, fees for costs associated with the work performed under
the permit according to the city fee schedule. Such costs could include costs
for reviewing the project and issuing the permit, inspections of the project,
deterioration of the public way or diminution of the useful life of the public
way, and other costs to the city associated with the work to be done under the
permit. All costs shall be assessed in a nondiscriminatory manner. (Ord. 11-4-
98A, 11-4-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Waiver; Conditions: The city public works director may waive permit
fees or penalties or portion thereof provided for in this chapter, when he/she
determines that such permit fee or penalty pertains to an encroachment on the
public way involving a beautification project which furthers specific goals and
objectives set forth in the city strategic plan, master plans or other official
documents, including decorative street lighting, building facade lighting,
flower and planter boxes, and landscaping. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-5: CONTENTS OF PERMIT; DURATION, EXTENSIONS:
   A.   Duration Of Permit; Determining Factors: Each permit application shall
state the starting date and estimated completion date. Work shall be completed
within five (5) days from the starting date or as determined by the city public
works director. Such determination shall be based upon factors reasonably
related to the work to be performed under the permit. Such factors may include,
in addition to other factors related to the work to be performed, the
following:
      1.   The scope of work to be performed under the permit;
      2.   Maintaining the safe and effective flow of pedestrian and vehicular
traffic on the public way affected by the work;
      3.   Protecting the existing improvements to the public way impacted by
the work;
      4.   The season of the year during which the work is to be performed as
well as the current weather and its impact on public safety and the use of the
public way by the public;
      5.   Use of the public way for extraordinary events anticipated by the
city.
   B.   Notification Of Commencement Of Work: The city public works director
shall be notified by the permittee of commencement of the work within twenty
four (24) hours prior to commencing work. The permit shall be valid for the
time period specified in the permit.
   C.   Extension:
      1.   If the work is not completed during such period, prior to the
expiration of the permit, the permittee may apply to the city public works
director for an additional permit or an extension, which may be granted by the
city public works director for good cause shown.
      2.   The length of the extension requested by the permittee shall be
subject to the approval of the city public works director. No extension shall
be made that allows work to be completed in the winter period without payment
of winter fees. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-6: TRANSFER OR ASSIGNMENT OF PERMIT PROHIBITED:
Permits shall not be transferable or assignable, and work shall not be
performed under a permit in any place other than that specified in the permit.
Nothing herein contained shall prevent a permittee from subcontracting the work
to be performed under a permit; provided, however, that the holder of the
permit shall be and remain responsible for the performance of the work under
the permit, and for all bonding, insurance and other requirements of this
chapter and under said permit. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-7: COMPLIANCE WITH SPECIFICATIONS, STANDARDS, TRAFFIC CONTROL REGULATIONS;
SITE PERMITTEE IDENTIFICATION:
   A.   Compliance Required: The work performed in the public way shall conform
to the requirements of the engineering regulations, design standards,
construction specifications and traffic control regulations of the city, copies
of which shall be available from the city public works director, kept on file
in the office of the city recorder and be open to public inspection during
office hours.
   B.   Site Permittee Identification: Where a job site is left unattended,
before completion of the work, signage with minimum two inch (2") high letters
shall be attached to a barricade or otherwise posted at the site, indicating
the permittee's name, or company name, telephone number, and after hours
telephone number.
   C.   Interference; Barricades: All excavations shall be conducted in a
manner resulting in a minimum amount of interference or interruption of street
or pedestrian traffic. Inconvenience to residents and businesses fronting on
the public way shall be minimized. Suitable, adequate and sufficient barricades
and/or other structures will be available and used where necessary to prevent
accidents involving property or persons. Barricades must be in place until all
of the permittee's equipment is removed from the site and the excavation has
been backfilled and proper temporary gravel surface is in place, except where
backfilling and resurfacing is to be done by the city; in which case the
barricades, together with any necessary lights, flares or torches, must remain
in place until the backfill work is actually commenced by the city. From sunset
to sunrise, all barricades and excavations must be clearly outlined by adequate
signal lights, torches, etc. The police department and fire department shall be
notified at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of any planned excavation
requiring street closure or traffic detour. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-8: OTHER HIGHWAY PERMITS:
   A.   City Permit Required: Holders of permits for work on highways owned or
under the jurisdiction of other government entities, but located within the
city limits, shall be required to obtain permits from the city under the
provisions of this chapter. Any city permit shall not be construed to permit or
allow work on a county road on a state highway within the city without an
applicable county or state permit.
   B.   Authority Of City To Regulate: The city public works director, in his
or her discretion, shall have the right and authority to regulate work under
permits issued by other governmental entities with respect to hours and days of
work, and measures required to be taken by the permittee of said governmental
entity for the protection of traffic and safety of persons and property.
Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing in this chapter shall be construed to
impose any duty, implied or express, on the city or its employees, officers,
agents or assigns, relative to the protection of traffic and safety of persons
or property, arising out of the issuance of any permit issued by government
entities other than the city, or arising out of any work performed on any
public way owned or within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-
1998)
6-3-9: RELOCATION OF STRUCTURES IN PUBLIC WAY:
   A.   Authority Of City To Issue Directive: The city public works director
may direct any person owning or maintaining facilities or structures in the
public way to alter, modify or relocate such facilities or structures as the
city public works director may require as set forth herein. Sewers, pipes,
drains, tunnels, conduits, pipe driveways, vaults, trash receptacles and
overhead and underground gas, electric, telephone, telecommunication and
communication facilities shall specifically be subject to such directives. The
person owning or maintaining the facilities or structures shall, at their own
cost and expense and upon reasonable written notice by the city, promptly
protect, or promptly alter or relocate such facilities or structures, or part
thereof, as directed by the city. In the event that such person refuses or
neglects to conform to the directive of the city, the city shall have the right
to break through, remove, alter or relocate such part of the facilities or
structures without liability to such person. Such person shall pay to the city
all costs incurred by the city in connection with such work performed by the
city, including also design, engineering, construction, materials, insurance,
court costs and attorney fees.
   B.   Basis For Directive: Any directive by the city public works director
shall be based upon of the following:
      1.   The facility or structure was installed, erected or is being
maintained contrary to law, or determined by the city public works director to
be structurally unsound or defective;
      2.   The facility or structure constitutes a "nuisance", as defined under
state statute;
      3.   The permit under which the facility or structure was installed has
expired or has been revoked;
      4.   The public way is about to be repaired or improved and such
facilities or structures may pose a hindrance to construction; or
      5.   The grades or lines of the public way are to be altered or changed.
   C.   Police Power: Any directive of the city public works director under
this section shall be under and consistent with the city's police power. Unless
an emergency condition exists, the city public works director shall make a good
faith effort to consult with the person regarding any condition that may result
in a removal or relocation of facilities in the public way to consider possible
avoidance or minimization of removal or relocation requirements and provide the
directive as far enough in advance of the required removal or relocation to
allow the person a reasonable opportunity to plan and minimize cost associated
with the required removal or relocation.
   D.   Private Easements: This obligation does not apply to facilities or
structures originally located on private property pursuant to a private
easement, which property was later incorporated into the public way, if that
prior private easement grants a superior vested right. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-
1998)
   E.   Penalty: Any person owning or maintaining facilities or structures in
the public way who fails to alter, modify or relocate such facilities or
structures upon notice to do so by the city public works director shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. All costs of alteration, modification or relocation shall
be borne by the person owning or maintaining the facilities or structures
involved. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
   F.   Work Performed By City: The city may, at any time, in case of fire,
disaster or other emergency, as determined by the city in its reasonable
discretion, cut or move any parts of the system and appurtenances on, over or
under the public way, in which event the city shall not be liable therefor to a
person. The city shall notify a person in writing prior to, if practicable, but
in any event as soon as possible and in no case later than the next business
day following any action taken under this subsection. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-
1998)
6-3-10: IMPACT OF EXCAVATION ON EXISTING IMPROVEMENTS:
   A.   Temporary Improvements: If any sidewalk or curb ramp is blocked by
excavation work, a temporary sidewalk or curb ramp shall be constructed or
provided. Said temporary improvement shall be safe for travel and convenient
for users, and consistent with city standards for such.
   B.   Temporary Gravel Surface: Where excavations are made in paved areas,
the surface shall be replaced with a temporary gravel surface until such time
as the permanent repairs are completed.
   C.   Restoration Of Real Or Personal Property: At any time a permittee
disturbs the yard, residence or the real or personal property of a private
property owner or the city, such permittee shall ensure that such property is
returned, replaced and/or restored to a condition that is comparable to the
condition that existed prior to the commencement of the work.
   D.   Costs Borne By Permittee; Reimbursement: The costs associated with the
disturbance and the return, replacement and/or restoration shall be borne by
the permittee. Further, a permittee shall reimburse a property owner or the
city, for any actual damage caused by the permittee, its subcontractor, or its
independent contractor, in connection with the disturbance of such property.
However, nothing in this subsection shall require the permittee to pay a
subscriber or private property owner when that subscriber or private property
owner requests that the permittee remove, replace or relocate improvements
associated with the service provided by the permittee to the property owner and
when the permittee exercises due care in the performance of that service, or
when the subscriber or private property owner provided false information to the
permittee on which the permittee relied to its detriment.
   E.   Included Acts Specified: Examples of types of acts specifically
included in this section are the following:
      1.   Removal of sod, lawn, shrubbery, flowers, trees, driveways, or
fences; to install, trench, repair, replace, remove or locate, equipment, cable
or other appurtenances of the permittee;
      2.   Installation or removal of equipment or other appurtenances of the
permittee's system within a private property owner's property or residence that
requires drilling, excavating, plastering, or the like on the part of the
permittee;
      3.   Temporarily relocating or moving a piece of personal property or a
fixture of a private property owner (such as a motor vehicle, fence, air
conditioning, heating unit, or the like), in order to perform some sort of
construction, maintenance or repair by the permittee; or
      4.   Permanently removing a permittee's equipment or other appurtenances
due to the revocation, termination or nonrenewal of the franchise (if
applicable).
   F.   Blockage Of Drainage Channels: Existing drainage channels, such as
gutters or ditches, shall be kept free of dirt or other debris so that natural
flow will not be interrupted. When it is necessary to block or otherwise
interrupt flow of the drainage channel, a method of rerouting the flow must be
submitted for approval by the city public works director prior to the blockage
of the channel.
   G.   Applicability To Subcontractors Or Independent Contractors: The
requirements imposed upon the permittee extend to any subcontractor or
independent contractor that the permittee might employee to perform the tasks
pursuant to the permit.
   H.   Exceptions: The requirements of this section shall not apply to the
removal by a permittee, of a permanent structure placed by a property owner in
a public way, unless such property owner has received prior written permission
from the city granting the property owner the right to install a permanent
structure on a public way, and such written permission has been recorded in the
office of the county recorder. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-11: RESTORATION OF PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   Requirements: The permittee shall, at its own expense, restore the
surface of any public way to its original condition and replace any removed or
damaged pavement with the same type and depth of pavement as that which is
adjoining, including the gravel base material. All restoration shall conform to
the engineering regulations, design standards and specifications promulgated by
the city and shall be accomplished within the time limits set forth in the
permit, unless additional time is granted in writing by the city public works
director.
   B.   City Restoration Upon Request: At its option, the permittee doing the
actual excavation work may request that the city restore the surface to its
original condition. The fee for such resurfacing shall be determined by the
city public works director in accordance with its reasonable costs for such
work and shall be charged to the person, firm or corporation making the
excavation. Payment for said work shall be received by the city prior to the
release of the bond. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-12: INSURANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Requirements: Before a permit is issued, the applicant shall furnish to
the city evidence that such applicant has a comprehensive general liability and
property damage policy that includes contractual liability coverage endorsed
with the following limits and provisions or with such alternative limits and
provisions as may be approved by the city:
      1.   A minimum of one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single
limit per occurrence for bodily injury, personal injury and property damage,
and not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) in the aggregate. The
general aggregate limit shall apply separately to the permit, or the general
aggregate limit shall be two (2) times the required occurrence limit. The
coverage shall be in the nature of broad form commercial general liability
coverage. The city attorney may increase or decrease minimum insurance limits,
depending on the potential liability of any project.
      2.   All policies shall include the city, its employees, officers,
officials, agents, volunteers and assigns, as insureds. Any reference to the
city shall include the city, its employees, officers, officials, agents,
volunteers and assigns.
      3.   The coverage shall be primary insurance as with respect to the city,
its employees, officers, officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns. Any
insurance or self-insurance maintained by the city, its employees, officers,
officials, agents, volunteers, and assigns shall be in excess of the
permittee's insurance and shall not contribute to or with it.
      4.   Any failure to comply with reporting provisions of the policy shall
not effect coverage provided to the city, its employees, officers, officials,
agents, volunteers and assigns.
      5.   Coverage shall state that the permittee's insurance shall apply
separately to each insured against whom claim is made or suit is brought,
except with respect to the limits of the insurer's liability.
      6.   Underwriters shall have no right of recovery or subrogation against
the city, it being the intent of the parties that the insurance policy so
affected shall protect both parties and be primary coverage for any and all
losses covered by the described insurance.
      7.   The insurance companies issuing the policy or policies shall have no
recourse against the city for payment of any premiums due or for any
assessments under any form of any policy.
      8.   Each insurance policy shall be endorsed to state that the coverage
shall not be suspended, voided, canceled or reduced in coverage or in limits,
except after thirty (30) days' prior written notice by certified mail, return
receipt requested sent to the city.
      9.   Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, save harmless and defend
the city and its officers and employees against any claim or loss, damage or
expense sustained on account of damages to persons or property occurring by
reason of permit work done by the permittee, his/her subcontractor or agent,
whether or not the work has been completed and whether or not the right of way
has been opened to public travel.
      10.   Each policy shall be endorsed to indemnify, hold harmless and
defend the city, and its officers and employees against any claim or loss,
damage or expense sustained by any person occurring by reason of doing any work
pursuant to the permit, including, but not limited to, falling objects or
failure to maintain proper barricades and/or lights as required from the time
work begins until the work is completed and right of way is opened for public
use.
   B.   Company Rating: Insurance is to be placed with insurers with an AM Best
rating of no less than an A carrier, with a rating of "A7" or higher.
   C.   Certificates And Endorsements Furnished To City: The permittee shall
furnish the city with certificates of insurance and original endorsements
affecting coverage required by the permit. The certificates and endorsements
for each insurance policy are to be signed by a person authorized by that
insurer to bind coverage on its behalf. The city expressly reserves the right
to require complete, certified copies of all required insurance policies at any
time. Consequently, the permittee shall be prepared to provide such copies
prior to the issuance of the permit.
   D.   Unsatisfactory Policy: If any of the required policies are, or at any
time become, unsatisfactory to the city as to form or substance, or if a
company issuing any such policy is, or at any time becomes, unsatisfactory to
the city, the permittee shall promptly obtain a new policy, submit the same to
the city for approval, and thereafter submit verification of coverage as
required by the city. Upon failure to furnish, deliver and maintain such
insurance as provided herein, the city may declare the permit to be in default
and pursue any and all remedies the city may have at law or in equity,
including those actions outlined in this chapter.
   E.   Subcontractors Included: The permittee shall include all subcontractors
as insured under its policies or shall furnish separate certificates and
endorsements for each subcontractor. All coverages for subcontractors shall be
subject to all of the requirements stated herein.
   F.   Deductibles Or Self-Insured Retentions: Any deductibles or self-insured
retentions shall be declared to and approved by the city. At the option of the
city, either the insurer shall reduce or eliminate such deductibles or self-
insured retentions with respect to the city, its employees, officers,
officials, agents, volunteers or assigns, or the permittee shall procure a
bond, in a form acceptable to the city, guaranteeing payment of losses and
related investigations, claim administration and defense expenses.
   G.   Homeowner's Policy From Property Owner Performing Work: A property
owner performing work adjacent to his/her residence may submit proof of a
homeowner's insurance policy in lieu of the insurance requirements of this
section.
   H.   Relief Of Obligation; Conditions: A provider may be relieved of the
obligation of submitting certificates of insurance under the following
circumstances:
      1.   If such company shall submit satisfactory evidence in advance that:
         a.   It is insured in the amounts set forth in this chapter, or has
complied with state requirements to become self-insured. Public utilities may
submit annually evidence of insurance coverage in lieu of individual
submissions for each permit; and
         b.   Said coverage provides to the city the same scope of coverage
that would otherwise be provided by a separate policy as required by this
chapter; or
      2.   The work to be performed under the permit issued to the applicant is
to be performed by the city, in which case insurance or other risk transfer
issues shall be negotiated between the city and the applicant by separate
agreement. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-13: BOND; WHEN REQUIRED, CONDITIONS, WARRANTY:
   A.   Type And Amount: Except as noted in this chapter, each applicant,
before being issued a permit, shall provide the city with an acceptable
security (this may include a corporate surety bond, cash bond or letter of
credit, as determined by the city) in the amount of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) to guarantee faithful performance of the work authorized by a
permit granted pursuant to this chapter. The amount of the security required
may be increased or decreased at the discretion of the city public works
director whenever it appears that the amount and cost of the work to be
performed, and not satisfactorily completed, may vary from the amount of
security otherwise required under this chapter. The form of the security and
the entity issuing the security shall be subject to the approval of the city
attorney.
   B.   Public Utilities: Public utilities franchised by the city shall not be
required to file any security if such requirement is expressly waived in the
franchise documents.
   C.   Conditions Of Security: The security required by this section shall be
conditioned as follows:
      1.   The permittee shall fully comply with the requirements of the city
ordinances and regulations, specifications and standards promulgated by the
city relative to work in the public way, and respond to the city in damages for
failure to conform therewith;
      2.   After work is commenced, the permittee shall proceed with diligence
and expedition and shall promptly complete such work and restore the public way
to construction specifications, so as not to obstruct the public place or
travel thereon more than is reasonably necessary;
      3.   The permittee shall guarantee the materials and workmanship for a
period of two (2) years from completion of such work, with reasonable wear and
tear excepted; and
      4.   Unless authorized by the city public works director on the permit,
all paving, resurfacing or replacement of street facilities on major or
collector streets shall be done in conformance with the regulations contained
herein within three (3) calendar days, and within seven (7) calendar days from
the time the excavation commences on all other streets, except as provided for
during excavation in winter or during weather conditions that do not allow
paving according to engineering regulations. In winter, a temporary patch must
be provided. In all excavations, restoration or pavement surfaces shall be made
immediately after backfilling is completed or concrete is cured. If work is
expected to exceed the above duration, the permittee shall submit a detailed
construction schedule for approval. The schedule will address means and methods
to minimize traffic disruption and complete the construction as soon as
reasonably possible. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-14: HOLD HARMLESS AGREEMENT; LIMITATIONS ON CITY LIABILITY:
   A.   Hold Harmless: The permittee agrees to save the city, its officers,
employees and agents harmless from any and all costs, damages and liabilities
that may accrue or be claimed to accrue by reason of any work performed under
the permit. The issuance and acceptance of any permit under this chapter shall
constitute such an agreement by the permittee to this section.
   B.   Nonliability: This chapter shall neither be construed as imposing upon
the city, its officers, employees and agents, any liability or responsibility
for damages to any person injured by or by reason of the performance of any
work within the public way, or under a permit issued pursuant to this chapter;
nor shall the city, its officers, officials, employees, agents, volunteers or
assigns thereof be deemed to have assumed any such liability or responsibility
by reason of inspection authorized hereunder, the issuance of any permit, or
the approval of any work. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-15: WORK WITHOUT PERMIT; PERMIT FEE:
   A.   Stop Order: A stop order may be issued by the city public works
director directed to any person or persons doing or causing any work to be done
in the public way without a permit. The abutting property owner shall be
responsible for causing work to be done.
   B.   Permit Fee: Any person found to be doing work in the public way without
having obtained a permit, as provided in this chapter, shall be required to pay
a permit fee equal to two (2) times the normal permit fee. For replacement
work, where a fee is not normally charged, the normal permit fee for new
construction shall apply. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-16: FAILURE TO COMPLY; DEFAULT IN PERFORMANCE:
   A.   Notice Of Revocation, Suspension Or Stop Order: Any permit may be
revoked or suspended and a stop order issued by the city public works director,
after notice to the permittee for:
      1.   Violation of any condition of the permit, the security or of any
provision of this chapter;
      2.   Violation of any provision of any other ordinance of the city or law
relating to the work; or
      3.   Existence of any condition or the doing of any act that does
constitute, may constitute, or cause a condition endangering life or property.
   B.   Immediate Effect: A suspension or revocation by the city public works
director, and a stop order, shall take effect immediately upon entry thereof by
the city public works director and notice to the person performing the work in
the public way. Notice to the person performing the work shall be accomplished
when the city public works director has posted a stop work order at the
location of the work and written notice has been mailed, return receipt
requested, to the address indicated by the permittee on the permit.
   C.   Notice Of Default: Whenever the city public works director finds that a
default has occurred in the performance of any term or condition of the permit,
written notice thereof may be given to the principal and to the surety on the
bond, if there is a surety bond. Such notice shall state the work to be done,
the estimated cost thereof, and the period of time deemed by the city public
works director to be reasonably necessary for the completion of the work.
   D.   Failure To Comply; Performance By City: In the event that the surety
(or principal), within a reasonable time following the giving of such notice
(taking into consideration the exigencies of the situation, the nature of the
work, the requirements of public safety and for the protection of persons and
property), fails either to commence and cause the required work to be performed
with due diligence, or to indemnify the city for the cost of doing the work, as
set forth in the notice, the city may perform the work, at the discretion of
the city public works director, with city forces or contract forces or both,
and suit may be commenced by the city attorney against the contractor and
bonding company and such other persons as may be liable, to recover the entire
amount due to the city, including attorney fees, on account thereof. In the
event that cash has been deposited, the cost of performing the work may be
charged against the amount deposited, and suit brought for the balance due, if
any. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-17: FAILURE TO CONFORM TO DESIGN STANDARDS; PENALTY:
For failure to conform to the design standards and regulations, the city public
works director may:
   A.   Suspend or revoke the permit;
   B.   Issue a stop order;
   C.   Order removal and replacement of faulty work;
   D.   Require an extended warranty period; and/or
   E.   Negotiate a cash settlement to be applied toward future maintenance
costs. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-18: APPEAL OF SUSPENSION, REVOCATION OR STOP ORDER:
Any suspension, revocation or stop order by the city public works director may
be appealed by the permittee to the city council by filing a written notice of
appeal within ten (10) days of the action of the city public works director.
The city council shall hear such appeal, if written request therefor be timely
filed, as soon as practicable, and render his/her decision within a reasonable
time following filing of notice of appeal. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-19: TAMPERING WITH TRAFFIC BARRICADES:
It shall be unlawful for any person to maliciously or wantonly or without
authorization and legal cause, extinguish, remove or diminish any light
illuminating any barricade or excavation, or to tear down, remove or in any
manner alter any rail, fence or barricade protecting any excavation or other
construction site. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-20: CONFLICT WITH GOVERNING PROVISIONS:
Should there be a conflict between the provisions of this chapter and the
provisions of any other ordinance, agreement, franchise or other document
governing the excavation of a public way, the more restrictive provisions of
the aforesaid documents shall apply. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998)
6-3-21: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, a violation of any provision of
this chapter, or failure to comply with an order of suspension, revocation or
stop work, shall be a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day the violation exists shall be a separate offense.
No criminal conviction shall excuse the person from otherwise complying with
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 11-4-98A, 11-4-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 4
STREETSCAPES
SECTION:
6-4-1: Purpose And Intent
6-4-2: Definitions
6-4-3: Applicable Area
6-4-4: Landscape Requirements
6-4-5: Exceptions
6-4-6: Appeals Or Requests For Exceptions
6-4-7: City Repair Of Damages
6-4-8: Penalty
6-4-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
The purpose of this chapter is to create landscaping and maintenance
requirements for landscaping strips, existing in the public right of way,
between the sidewalk and the curb/gutter. (Ord. 5-15-2001A, 5-15-2001)
6-4-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this chapter, unless otherwise apparent from the context,
certain words and phrases used in this chapter are defined as follows:
LANDSCAPING STRIP: That area between the sidewalk and the curb and gutter,
generally meant for the purpose of creating a landscaped buffer between the
street and the sidewalk.
LOT OR PROPERTY: That lot or property that abuts the landscaping strip.
STREET TREE: Those trees that the city has explicitly designated, through this
chapter, as appropriate for planting along and within public rights of way.
(Ord. 5-15-2001A, 5-15-2001)
6-4-3: APPLICABLE AREA:
This chapter shall apply to all subdivisions which: a) are designed with
planter strips between the sidewalk and the curb/gutter; and b) were recorded
in the office of the Utah County recorder after October 15, 2000. (Ord. 5-15-
2001A, 5-15-2001)
6-4-4: LANDSCAPE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Landscaping Required:
      1.   Landscaping Strip: Landscaping shall be required in the landscaping
strip, in accordance with the requirements set forth in this chapter, for any
buildable lot abutting a public right of way that has been designed with a
landscaping strip.
      2.   Bond Posted: In order to ensure that landscaping occurs within this
landscaping planter strip, the owner/builder of any lot abutting said
landscaping strip shall post a cash escrow bond with the city at the same time
as issuance of a building permit is requested for that same lot, in an amount
deemed appropriate by the city to pay for all landscaping improvements within
the landscaping planter strip. The landscaping bond shall be set by city
council resolution, and reviewed and revised as necessary.
      3.   Bond Release: Within thirty (30) days of the landscaping completion,
and inspection/approval by the city, the landscaping bond shall be released by
the city back to the owner/builder of the abutting property.
      4.   Forfeiture Of Bond: If the landscaping is incomplete within sixty
(60) days from receiving final building inspection approvals on the issued
building permit, the owner/builder shall forfeit the bond and the city shall
use the bond to complete the landscaping within the landscaping strip.
      5.   Landscaping Permanent And Public: All landscaping installed in
landscaping planter strips shall be considered open to the public and owned by
the public. No removal of landscaping or any modification shall be made to the
landscaping within the landscaping strips without written authorization from
the city.
      6.   Landscaping In Clear Vision Area: All landscaping shall be planted
in conformance with the "clear vision area" requirements of this code.
   B.   Trees: Trees shall be incorporated into the landscaping within the
landscaping strip in accordance with the following:
      1.   Number Of Trees And Spacing: The minimum number of trees installed
for each property shall be calculated at the rate of one tree for every fifty
feet (50') of frontage, or portion thereof. Spacing of the trees shall be in
accordance with the appropriate spacing shown for each of the tree species
indicated in subsection B2 of this section, with every effort being made to
space the trees as evenly as possible, taking into account neighboring
properties as well.
      2.   Approved Trees And Minimum Spacing: The following list indicates the
trees that are approved for planting in landscaping strips, along with their
minimum spacing requirements:
 
 Minimum Spacing
Norway maple          30 feet
Queen emerald maple   30 feet
Red maple             30 feet
Sugar maple           30 feet
Hedge maple           20 feet
Sycamore maple        20 feet
London plane tree     40 feet
Lindens (all species) 30 feet
Oak (all species)     35 feet
White ash             35 feet
 
   C.   Other Landscaping: A Kentucky bluegrass or equivalent mix shall form
the ground cover for all portions of the landscaping strip. No shrubs, bushes,
ground cover, flower beds, planter areas, rock, or other such landscaping
material shall be allowed within the landscaping strip.
   D.   Irrigation: All portions of the landscaping strip shall be irrigated,
in an amount appropriate for the good health of the landscaping, by a sprinkler
system connected to the abutting property's main irrigation system.
   E.   Time Frame: All landscaping and irrigation shall be installed within
sixty (60) days from the date of final building inspection approval or
occupancy, whichever occurs first.
   F.   Maintenance Required: Property owners of lots abutting landscaping
strips shall cause the landscaping within the landscaping strips to be
maintained in good health. (Ord. 5-15-2001A, 5-15-2001)
6-4-5: EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Street Tree Exceptions On Collector Class Roads: For streets designated
as collector class roads by the city council and listed herein, the required
street tree to be installed shall be the white ash.
 
Collector Class Roads
Ironwood Drive
 
   B.   Exceptions Granted By City Manager: Nothing herein shall be construed
as to limit the city manager, or his/her designee's, ability to grant
exceptions to any and all requirements of this chapter either by direct or
indirect action. (Ord. 5-15-2001A, 5-15-2001)
6-4-6: APPEALS OR REQUESTS FOR EXCEPTIONS:
Appeals or requests for exceptions for any of the requirements listed herein
shall be made, in writing, to the city manager or his/her designee. The city
manager shall hear any request for appeal or exception within forty five (45)
days of receipt of that written request and shall issue a finding to grant or
deny the exception at that time. Appeals to the city manager's decision shall
be made to the city council within ten (10) days of receipt of the city
manager's denial of appeal. (Ord. 5-15-2001A, 5-15-2001)
6-4-7: CITY REPAIR OF DAMAGES:
If any violation of the provisions of this chapter create damage to any
landscaping within the public right of way, including the landscaping strip,
the city shall have the authority to repair or replace damaged landscaping and
the property owner shall be responsible for immediate payment for said
replacement or repair. (Ord. 5-15-2001A, 5-15-2001)
6-4-8: PENALTY:
Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an
infraction and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 5-15-2001A, 5-15-2001)
CHAPTER 5
MOTOR VEHICLE TRESPASS ON PRIVATE AND PUBLIC LANDS
SECTION:
6-5-1: Definitions
6-5-2: Motor Vehicle Trespass
6-5-3: Prohibited Area
6-5-4: Reckless Driving
6-5-5: Scope
6-5-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle having an unladen dry weight of two
thousand (2,000) pounds or less, traveling on three (3) or more tires, and
designed for or capable of travel over unimproved terrain.
ELECTRIC BIKE: A low-speed pedal-assisted electric bicycle is equipped with a
motor that provides assistance only when the rider is pedaling. An electric
bicycle is equipped with fully operable pedals and an electric motor of less
than seven hundred fifty (750) watts, excluding Class 2 electric bicycles.
MOTOR VEHICLE:
   A.   A self-propelled vehicle intended primarily for use and operation on
the highways.
   B.   Does not include an off highway vehicle.
OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES: Any snowmobile, all-terrain type I vehicle, or
motorcycle.
(Ord. 12-12-2007A, 12-12-2007; amd. Ord. 11-19-2019C, 11-19-2019)
6-5-2: MOTOR VEHICLE TRESPASS:
   A.   Incorporation Of State Code: The City of Cedar Hills incorporates by
reference the following sections of chapter 41-22 of the Utah code, 1953 (as
amended), relating to the use of off highway vehicles on public land.
      1.   Utah Code Annotated 41-22-10.1, vehicles operated on posted public
land.
      2.   Utah Code Annotated 41-22-10.5(4), local ordinances - designating
routes - supervision.
      3.   Utah Code Annotated 41-22-10.7, vehicle equipment requirements -
rulemaking - exceptions.
      4.   Utah Code Annotated 41-22-10.8, protective headgear requirements -
owner duty - penalty for violation.
   B.   Permitted Vehicles: This section does not prohibit the use of such
property by the following:
      1.   Emergency vehicles.
      2.   Vehicles in the course of normal business or governmental
operations.
      3.   Vehicles being operated on property when permission for such
operation is implied or expressly given by the person in possession of the
property.
      4.   Off highway vehicles.
      5.   Electric bikes being operated at speeds lower than twenty (20) miles
per hour.
   C.   Nonpermitted Vehicles: Motor vehicles that are not expressly permitted
in subsection B of this section.
(Ord. 12-12-2007A, 12-12-2007; amd. Ord. 11-19-2019C, 11-19-2019)
6-5-3: PROHIBITED AREA:
The use of any nonpermitted motorized vehicles on public park lands or improved
trails within the boundaries of the city shall be prohibited. (Ord. 12-12-
2007A, 12-12-2007)
6-5-4: RECKLESS DRIVING:
   A.   No motorized vehicle, including motorcycles, ATVs, or trucks may drive
in prohibited areas faster than the lower of:
      1.   Twenty five (25) miles per hour, or
      2.   As fast as the vehicle may safely drive under the existing
conditions.
   B.   All motorized vehicles, including motorcycles, ATVs, or authorized cars
or trucks, must remain on existing roads or trails, and shall not drive off the
existing roads or trails under any circumstances.
   C.   Operating a motor vehicle more than one hour before sunrise or more
than one hour after sunset. (Ord. 12-12-2007A, 12-12-2007)
6-5-5: SCOPE:
Nothing in this chapter is meant to restrict or prohibit rights granted under
state law pursuant to Utah Code Annotated 41-22-1 as amended. (Ord. 12-12-
2007A, 12-12-2007)
CHAPTER 6
UTAH COMMUNITY TREE ORDINANCE
SECTION:
6-6-1: Findings Of Fact
6-6-2: Purpose
6-6-3: Applicability
6-6-4: Administration
6-6-5: Tree Board
6-6-6: Trees On Public Property
6-6-7: Trees On Private Property
6-6-8: Standards For Tree Planting, Maintenance, And Removal
6-6-9: Penalties
6-6-1: FINDINGS OF FACT:
   A.   Trees have a positive economic effect on the city by enhancing property
values and making the city a more attractive place to visit and do business.
   B.   Trees have a positive environmental effect on the City of Cedar Hills,
Utah, by reducing air pollution, abating heat, noise and glare, mitigating
drainage and erosion problems, providing shade for streets and parking areas,
providing wildlife habitat, and moderating the local climate.
   C.   Trees generally enhance the quality of life for residents of the city.
(Ord. 10-21-2008A, 10-21-2008)
6-6-2: PURPOSE:
   A.   To provide generally for the protection of trees within the city, to
ensure proper planting and maintenance of trees in the public right of way and
in city parks, and to provide for the abatement of nuisance trees on public and
private property;
   B.   To develop a healthy urban forest and park system of diverse tree
species to protect against potential pest and disease problems;
   C.   To create a community with tree lined streets by requiring tree
planting standards in new developments while upgrading and maintaining street
trees in existing parks, neighborhoods and commercial or industrial areas.
(Ord. 10-21-2008A, 10-21-2008)
6-6-3: APPLICABILITY:
The zoning administrator or designee shall have authority over all trees,
plants and shrubs located within street rights of way, parks, and public places
of the city, and over trees, plants and shrubs located on private property that
constitute a nuisance as described herein. (Ord. 10-21-2008A, 10-21-2008)
6-6-4: ADMINISTRATION:
The zoning administrator or designee is appointed to administer and implement
this chapter. (Ord. 10-21-2008A, 10-21-2008)
6-6-5: TREE BOARD:
The city council has established a tree board, which is officially called the
parks and trails committee. The tree board shall serve in an advisory capacity
to the city council for matters relating to trees within the city. (Ord. 10-21-
2008A, 10-21-2008)
6-6-6: TREES ON PUBLIC PROPERTY:
   A.   Landscaping for any new park development within the city shall be
reviewed by the tree board, and be approved by the city council. For commercial
developments, the planning commission shall ensure the provisions of this
section are followed as part of the land use application process.
   B.   Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful, unless authorized by
the zoning administrator or designee, for any person to top a tree in or upon
the public right of way or other public property within the city. For purposes
of this section, "topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to
stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's crown to such
a degree as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. A tree severely
damaged by storms or other causes, or trees that pose an imminent threat to
property or to public safety such that other pruning practices are impractical
may be exempted from this section at the discretion of the zoning administrator
or designee. No tree on public property shall be removed without permission
from the zoning administrator or designee.
   C.   Whenever any work is being done contrary to the provisions of this
section, the zoning administrator or designee may order the work stopped by
serving written notice on any persons engaged in the doing or causing such work
to be done, and any such persons shall forthwith stop such work until
authorized by the zoning administrator or designee to proceed with the work.
   D.   During the construction of any structure or improvement, it shall be
unlawful for any person to place material, machinery or soil deposits within a
minimum of six feet (6') of any tree on city property. All trees on public
property shall be protected during construction.
   E.   The building department shall require all commercial building permit
applicants to:
      1.   Submit a site plan including location of existing and proposed
street trees, utilities and any tree to be removed in the public right of way.
      2.   Submit a plan showing location, size, and type of all trees to be
planted in the public right of way. Size of an existing tree is to be
established by measuring the diameter of the tree trunk at four feet six inches
(4'6") aboveground and twelve inches (12") above the ground for proposed new
trees.
      3.   Any changes to the landscape plan require an administrative review
by the zoning administrator or designee.
      4.   All trees planted in public rights of way shall be trees listed in
the recommended street tree list approved by the tree board, and may be amended
from time to time.
   F.   The building department shall maintain copies of the tree list. (Ord.
10-21-2008A, 10-21-2008)
6-6-7: TREES ON PRIVATE PROPERTY:
   A.   For purposes of this section, "nuisance trees" are defined as trees
that pose a threat to public safety or adjacent public property, including, but
not limited to, public rights of way, or trees that harbor any destructive or
communicable disease or other pestilence that endangers the well being of other
trees in the city or that are capable of causing an epidemic spread of a
communicable disease or insect infestation.
   B.   The zoning administrator or designee has the authority to enter onto
private property whereon there is located a tree, shrub or plant that is
suspected to be a public nuisance.
   C.   Upon the discovery of a nuisance tree, the zoning administrator or
designee shall cause written notice to be served upon the owner of the property
upon which the tree is located, requiring the owner to eradicate, remove, or
otherwise control the condition within a reasonable time specified in such
notice. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with the
requirements of any notice given pursuant to this section within the time
specified in such notice. If the notice to abate is not complied with within
the required time, the zoning administrator or designee shall follow the city
nuisance ordinance procedure for compliance. (Ord. 10-21-2008A, 10-21-2008)
6-6-8: STANDARDS FOR TREE PLANTING, MAINTENANCE, AND REMOVAL:
   A.   The tree board shall develop and maintain a list of desirable trees for
planting along streets and in parks in three (3) size classes: small, medium,
and large. A list of trees not suitable for planting shall also be maintained.
   B.   No trees other than those species listed as small trees shall be
planted on city property under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead
utility wire. (Ord. 10-21-2008A, 10-21-2008)
6-6-9: PENALTIES:
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter or who fails to comply
with any notice issued pursuant to any provision of this chapter, upon being
found guilty of the violation shall be subject to the penalties, under
nuisance, set forth in the city's fee schedule for each offense. If, as the
result of the violation of any provision of this chapter, the injury,
mutilation or death of a tree, shrub, or other plant located on city property
is caused, the party in violation shall make restitution to the city for the
cost of repair or removal and replacement of such tree, shrub, or other plant,
whichever is necessary in the opinion of the zoning administrator, or designee;
such restriction shall be in addition to any other penalty. The minimum
replacement cost for a tree will equal the cost of a two inch (2") caliper
tree. (Ord. 10-21-2008A, 10-21-2008)
CHAPTER 7
SPECIAL EVENTS
SECTION:
6-7-1: Purpose
6-7-2: Application Of Provisions
6-7-3: Definitions
6-7-4: Permit Required
6-7-5: Exemption From Permit Requirement
6-7-6: Permit; Application Procedures
6-7-7: Permit; Application Processing
6-7-8: Permit; Fees
6-7-9: Permit; Approval And Issuance
6-7-10: Permit; Liability Insurance And Indemnification
6-7-11: Appeal Procedures
6-7-12: City Liability
6-7-13: Violation; Penalty
6-7-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose and intent of this chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform
regulations governing the time, place and manner of holding special events on
city streets and on city property, in order to promote, protect and assure the
safety and convenience of the people in their use of public streets and places.
(Ord. 8-25-2009A, 8-25-2009)
6-7-2: APPLICATION OF PROVISIONS:
This chapter imposes regulatory requirements on certain activities that are
held on city streets and on city property and that are defined as "special
events". The requirements imposed by this chapter do not alter, supersede or
nullify any requirements contained in other statutes, ordinances or regulations
that may also regulate these same activities. These requirements shall be
applied in a content neutral manner and without discrimination as to race,
religion, sex, national origin, political affiliation or other unlawful
discriminatory classification. (Ord. 8-25-2009A, 8-25-2009)
6-7-3: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following
meanings:
ATHLETIC EVENT: An organized competitive or recreational event in which a group
of people collectively engage in a sport or form of physical exercise,
including, but not limited to, running, jogging, walking, bicycling or skating,
on any city street or city property.
ENTERTAINMENT EVENT: An organized event having as its primary purpose the
entertainment or amusement of a group of people, including, but not limited to,
parades, carnivals, fairs, concerts, block parties, or neighborhood gatherings
on any city street or city property.
POLITICAL EVENT: An organized event, not including an athletic or entertainment
event, having as its primary purpose the exercise of expressive activities of a
political nature, including, but not limited to, speechmaking, picketing,
protesting, marching, demonstrating, or debating public issues on any city
street or city property.
SPECIAL EVENT: Any athletic event, entertainment event or political event,
whether held for profit, nonprofit, or charitable purposes. (Ord. 8-25-2009A,
8-25-2009)
6-7-4: PERMIT REQUIRED:
It is unlawful for any person, corporation, partnership, association, or other
entity, public or private, to promote, advertise, or hold a special event
without first obtaining a special event permit and paying the fees as required
in this chapter. (Ord. 8-25-2009A, 8-25-2009)
6-7-5: EXEMPTION FROM PERMIT REQUIREMENT:
The provisions of this chapter shall not be applied to regulate the use of
traditional public forums as alternative channels of communication by the
public, provided such use is for the free exercise of constitutionally
protected activities and does not disrupt or interfere with traffic on public
streets or the use of public places by other members of the public. (Ord. 8-25-
2009A, 8-25-2009)
6-7-6: PERMIT; APPLICATION PROCEDURES:
   A.   Form; Information: All requests for special event permits shall be made
on a special event permit application prescribed by the city and shall include
the following information:
      1.   Type and description of event;
      2.   Name of the sponsoring entity, contact person, address, and
telephone number;
      3.   Name of the promoting entity, contact person, address, and telephone
number;
      4.   Proposed date, together with beginning and ending times;
      5.   Proposed location, including barricade plan and route map;
      6.   Estimated numbers of event staff, participants, and spectators;
      7.   Admission fee, donation, or other consideration to be charged or
requested;
      8.   Signature of applicant; and
      9.   If the event is a block party, applicant must collect and submit
with the application form a list of signatures consenting to the street closure
from all neighbors whose vehicular access to their property is affected by the
street closure.
   B.   Obtain From The City: A special event permit application may be
obtained from the city.
   C.   Submission; Time Limit: Completed applications shall be submitted to
the city at least sixty (60) calendar days before the event is scheduled to
take place, in order to allow sufficient time to process the application and to
allow timely appeal to the city manager in the event the application is denied.
Applications submitted less than sixty (60) calendar days prior to the
scheduled event shall be denied unless the applicant demonstrates to the city
manager that compliance with the sixty (60) day deadline was impractical or
impossible due to the nature of the event.
   D.   Multiple Jurisdictions: Special events that cross or involve multiple
governmental jurisdictions shall be approved only if the applicant also obtains
formal authorization from all respective governing bodies. (Ord. 8-25-2009A, 8-
25-2009)
6-7-7: PERMIT; APPLICATION PROCESSING:
   A.   Approval Of Agencies: Upon receipt of a special event permit
application, the city shall inform the applicant of the agencies for which
approval is required to contact for their special event and for which agencies
the city will ensure approval:
      1.   Utah state tax commission - Utah state special events unit;
      2.   Utah County - county health department;
      3.   The city law enforcement service provider;
      4.   The city fire service provider; and
      5.   Any other city department that is to provide a service in connection
with the special event.
   B.   Considerations: In reviewing an application, the departments involved
shall consider the following:
      1.   The impact of the special event on the traffic, security, health,
and safety of the public;
      2.   A determination of appropriate and reasonable requirements for the
mitigation of traffic, security, health, and safety concerns, and an evaluation
of the measures proposed by the applicant to satisfy those requirements;
      3.   The demonstrated ability of the applicant to comply with
requirements necessary to protect the safety, health, and welfare of the
public;
      4.   The location and duration of the special event and the city's
ability to accommodate the event with the necessary resources; and
      5.   Other previously approved special events that could cause scheduling
conflicts during the same period and cause overextension of the city's
resources.
   C.   Additional Requirements Or Conditions: The agencies or departments
involved in reviewing an application may impose additional requirements or
conditions necessary to protect the public interest by ensuring traffic
management, security of property, or the health and safety of the public. (Ord.
8-25-2009A, 8-25-2009)
6-7-8: PERMIT; FEES:
   A.   Fee: Each initial application for a special event permit shall be
accompanied by a nonrefundable fee as stated in the city's fees, bonds, and
fines schedule to defray the administrative costs of processing the
application.
   B.   Protection Fees: In order to promote, protect, and assure the safety
and convenience of the people in their use of public streets and places, the
city shall coordinate the use of professional peace officers if the special
event requires traffic control or police protection. Additional fees shall be
charged to cover costs incurred by the city or other agencies. The city shall
specify the fee required upon its approval of the special event permit
application, based upon the number of officers and amount of support equipment
required by such factors as: the date and time of the event; the route location
and length; the anticipated traffic and weather conditions; the estimated
number of participants and spectators; the nature, composition, format and
configuration of the event; and the estimated time for the event. The fee
charged for traffic control or police protection shall be paid prior to the
issuing of the special event permit.
   C.   Additional Fees: Additional fees may be charged by the Utah County -
county health department, the city, or other agencies. Such additional fees
shall be specified at the time the city approves the special event permit
application and shall be paid directly to the agency by the applicant and
providing proof of payment prior to the issuing of the special event permit.
   D.   Exempt From Fees: The following special events shall be exempt from the
fees set forth in this section:
      1.   Political events;
      2.   School events in the immediate area of the school;
      3.   Block parties; and
      4.   Approved community events at the discretion of the city manager or
designee such as City of Cedar Hills official events. (Ord. 8-25-2009A, 8-25-
2009)
6-7-9: PERMIT; APPROVAL AND ISSUANCE:
   A.   Approval; Issuance: A special event permit application shall be
approved and a special event permit shall be issued to the applicant by the
city upon approval by all affected departments and compliance with the
requirements of this chapter. The city shall notify the city manager, the city
council, and all affected agencies of all special event permits issued pursuant
to this chapter.
   B.   Reasons For Denial Specified: If a special event permit application is
denied by the city, the reason or reasons for denial shall be provided in
writing to the applicant and the city manager.
   C.   Authority To Deny: The city reserves the right to deny an application
for a proposed special event permit that poses a significant danger or threat
to the public health, welfare, or safety, or that may result in unreasonable
inconvenience or cost to the public. (Ord. 8-25-2009A, 8-25-2009)
6-7-10: PERMIT; LIABILITY INSURANCE AND INDEMNIFICATION:
   A.   Certificate Of Insurance: No special event permit shall be issued
unless and until the applicant has submitted to the city a certificate of
insurance, listing the city as an additional insured, on an occurrence policy
issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in the state, showing
comprehensive general liability and property damage coverage for the event
according to the city's fees, bonds, and fines schedule.
   B.   Exemptions: The following special events shall be exempt from the
insurance requirements set forth in this section:
      1.   Political events;
      2.   School events in the immediate area of the school;
      3.   City of Cedar Hills official events; and
      4.   Block parties.
   C.   Save Harmless Agreement: In consideration for the issuing of a special
event permit and the use of city streets or city property, the applicant shall
sign a save harmless agreement provided by the city. (Ord. 8-25-2009A, 8-25-
2009)
6-7-11: APPEAL PROCEDURES:
Any applicant desiring to appeal an administrative decision of the city
concerning the denial of a special event permit may petition the city manager.
All appeals shall be in writing, shall state the specific grounds for the
appeal, and shall be filed in the city office within seven (7) calendar days
after the date the applicant received notice of the denial. An applicant
aggrieved by the decision of the city manager may appeal to the city council
using the same time frame stated. (Ord. 8-25-2009A, 8-25-2009)
6-7-12: CITY LIABILITY:
By issuing a special event permit, the city makes no guarantees and assumes no
liability for the safety of participants or spectators of a special event.
(Ord. 8-25-2009A, 8-25-2009)
6-7-13: VIOLATION; PENALTY:
A violation of section
6-7-4 of this chapter is subject to a class B misdemeanor. Failure to obtain a
special event permit as required by this chapter may also result in enforcement
action by the city or its designee which, in its discretion, may stop an event
that has not been issued a special event permit and/or may issue citations
where event staff or participants violate other state statutes or city
ordinances, including, but not limited to, traffic rules and regulations,
disturbing the peace, public nuisance, failure to disperse, trespass, or other
health and safety regulations. (Ord. 8-25-2009A, 8-25-2009)
CHAPTER 8
PARKS AND PUBLIC PROPERTIES
SECTION:
6-8-1: Definitions
6-8-2: Vandalism And Nuisances Prohibited
6-8-3: Refusal To Leave
6-8-4: Use Of Parks By Permission; Commercial Sales Prohibited
6-8-5: Concessions
6-8-6: Park Curfew
6-8-7: Parking
6-8-8: Prohibitions
6-8-9: Littering Prohibited
6-8-10: Use Of Radios And Recorders
6-8-11: Park Signage
6-8-12: Penalty
6-8-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
PARK: Any public or city owned park, ball diamond, soccer field, recreation
area or public trail.
SMOKE OR SMOKING: Means and includes possessing, carrying or holding a lighted
pipe, cigar or cigarette of any kind, e-cigarette, or any other lighted smoking
equipment, or the lighting or emitting or exhaling or smoking of a pipe, cigar,
cigarette of any kind, e-cigarette, or of any other lighted or electronic
smoking equipment. (Ord. 07-19-2016C, 7-19-2016)
6-8-2: VANDALISM AND NUISANCES PROHIBITED:
   A.   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to scratch, cut, injure
or deface any of the buildings, fences or structures, or to foul any of the
fountains or streams, or any other improvements, or to cut or injure flowers,
flowerbeds, turf, trees or shrubs within the parks, or to commit any other act
of vandalism to public or private property.
   B.   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to ride any animal or to
permit a dog to be unleashed within the area of a park, or for any individual
or group to do any of the following in a city park:
      1.   To play or practice golf;
      2.   To shoot any firearm or propel arrows, rocks or any projectile;
      3.   To engage in any activity that threatens the safety or well being of
other persons;
      4.   To create a disturbance or a nuisance; or
      5.   To operate, ride or otherwise use any licensed or unlicensed
motorized vehicle, including, but not limited to, all-terrain vehicles (ATV),
motorcycles, dirt bikes, or any wheeled or tracked commercially built or home
built devices, excluding electric bikes and any vehicle used in compliance with
the Americans with disabilities act (section 35.137).
   C.   It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to engage in any act or
activity creating a hazard that threatens the health and welfare of inhabitants
of the park, or any activity that by its perpetuation can reasonably be said to
have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or persons within the
park.
(Ord. 09-17-2013A, 9-17-2013; amd. Ord. 11-19-2019C, 11-19-2019)
6-8-3: REFUSAL TO LEAVE:
It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to leave any park if, after
having violated any law or written rule or regulation of the city concerning
conduct in the parks, he/she has been ordered to leave by an authorized city
employee or by the police department. (Ord. 09-17-2013A, 9-17-2013)
6-8-4: USE OF PARKS BY PERMISSION; COMMERCIAL SALES PROHIBITED:
   A.   Permit Required: Any person, group or organization desiring to use a
park or any portion thereof on an exclusive basis or any person, group or
organization desiring to use the park equipment for public gathering to the
exclusion of other persons for the purpose of holding meetings, either public
or private in nature, shall do so only after obtaining a reservation permit
from the city office and upon payment of an appropriate fee for the privilege
of reserving the area for a given period of time. Said permit shall be granted
only after the person, group or organization applying for the permit can
demonstrate to the city's satisfaction that adequate public restroom facilities
are available, and that such public, private or excessive gatherings, meetings
or activities can be conducted in a matter that will not be the cause of noise,
lighting, parking or other condition, which unreasonably disturbs the adjoining
neighborhood.
   B.   Commercial Activities: It shall be unlawful to sell anything in a city
park or to engage in any commercial activity in a city park, whether for profit
or otherwise, without the prior written consent of the city.
   C.   Overnight Occupancy: Overnight occupancy of the park may be permitted
if the occupants are part of an organized group and the group will have
competent authorized adult supervision. Prior written consent is to be obtained
from the city. (Ord. 09-17-2013A, 9-17-2013)
6-8-5: CONCESSIONS:
   A.   Concessions In City Parks: The operation of any and all concessions to
sell or rent any property (such as equipment, food, etc.) in any park or on any
other property owned by the city shall be governed by the provisions of this
section. All concessions shall comply also with any applicable state or local
law.
   B.   Concession Agreement: The privilege to operate a concession shall be
granted by agreement between the city and the concessionaire. The privilege to
operate a concession shall be determined on a competitive basis with service
clubs being given priority consideration. The concession agreement may be for
such period of time as agreed upon by the city and the concessionaire. The city
shall have the right to review the services provided by the concessionaire at
any time and to revoke the privilege to operate the concession if it is
determined that the concessionaire is not abiding by the terms of the agreement
or is not providing adequate service to the public. The city manager and
recreation director are authorized to receive concession proposals and approve
concession agreements in accordance with the provisions of this section.
   C.   Concessions Structures:
      1.   Permanent concessions structures shall not be allowed on city
property unless they are owned by the city. The city may enter into a long term
lease agreement of a city owned concession structure.
      2.   Temporary concession stands shall be limited to trailer or mobile
units approved by the city. These stands shall be provided and satisfactorily
maintained by the concessionaire.
   D.   Liability Insurance Required: The concessionaire shall file, with the
city recorder, proof of liability insurance in a minimum amount acceptable to
the city. In addition, a waiver which holds the city harmless from any
negligence on the part of the concessionaire will also be filed with the city
recorder.
   E.   Care Of Concessions Area: The concessionaire is to provide regular
service and cleanup of the designated areas as set forth in the concession
agreement.
   F.   Fees For Concessions: The city reserves the right to charge a
percentage of concession revenues as a fee to help offset the costs of city
sponsored recreation programs and building maintenance.
   G.   Penalty: Any person who operates any unauthorized concession in city
parks or facilities is guilty of an infraction and upon conviction, subject to
penalties.
   H.   Property Owners' Rights: The operation of concessions on property
jointly owned by the city together with other property owners shall be on terms
and conditions that are acceptable to all persons having ownership rights in
the property. (Ord. 09-17-2013A, 9-17-2013)
6-8-6: PARK CURFEW:
   A.   Park curfew shall be as follows:
      1.   Park curfew shall be between the hours of ten o'clock (10:00) P.M.
and five o'clock (5:00) A.M.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to perform any activities in a park between the
hours of five o'clock (5:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. that would be
in violation of the noise conditions found in section
3-1B-3A.11. of this code.
      3.   It shall be unlawful for any person other than city employees
performing their duties to loiter in the park when it is closed.
   B.   Amplified Sound: Amplified sound is sound that uses electronic
amplifiers.
      1.   From Labor Day to Memorial Day, amplified sounds shall be prohibited
after eight thirty o'clock (8:30) P.M., Sunday through Thursday, and nine
thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M. Friday and Saturday.
      2.   From Memorial Day to Labor Day, amplified sounds shall be prohibited
after nine thirty o'clock (9:30) P.M., Sunday through Thursday, and ten thirty
o'clock (10:30) P.M. Friday and Saturday. Summer exemptions may be granted
through the city by a special events permit.
(Ord. 10-01-2013B, 10-1-2013; amd. Ord. 10-15-2019A, 10-15-2019; Ord. 07-07-
2020B, 7-7-2020)
6-8-7: PARKING:
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle upon park property in such a way as to
block the roads provided and it shall be unlawful to park any vehicle other
than in the public parking area, other than authorized city and emergency
vehicles. (Ord. 09-17-2013A, 9-17-2013)
6-8-8: PROHIBITIONS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to consume or possess any alcoholic beverage
within a park.
   B.   Smoking is hereby prohibited in city parks. (Ord. 07-19-2016C, 7-19-
2016)
6-8-9: LITTERING PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful to cause or allow any foreign material, papers, bottles,
cans, rags, or discarded articles of any substantial kind or nature to be left
in parks. (Ord. 09-17-2013A, 9-17-2013)
6-8-10: USE OF RADIOS AND RECORDERS:
   A.   It shall be unlawful to operate, play or cause to be operated or played
in a city park or in a motor vehicle located in a city park or parked on a road
adjacent to a city park, any radio, television, or other similar device which
produces, reproduces or amplifies sound in such a manner as to be audible
beyond the boundaries of the park or at a distance of more than twenty five
feet (25') from such radio, television, sound amplifier or similar device.
   B.   Subsection A of this section shall not apply if the device described in
subsection A of this section and the volume of sound therefrom are specifically
authorized by the city manager in conjunction with a scheduled activity. (Ord.
09-17-2013A, 9-17-2013)
6-8-11: PARK SIGNAGE:
   A.   Required: The city shall cause to have made of durable material, use
ADA (Americans with disabilities act) compatible language, erect conspicuously
at each entrance, and thereafter maintain in good order, signage as follows:
      1.   Indicating the approved name of the park;
      2.   Indicating in readily legible, concise, summary form, hours of park
availability to the public and rules of park use, including pertinent
restrictions.
   B.   Single Sign: Signage of subsections A1 and A2 of this section may be
combined on a single sign. (Ord. 09-17-2013A, 9-17-2013)
6-8-12: PENALTY:
Unless otherwise provided, any person violating any of the provisions of this
chapter shall be guilty of up to a class B misdemeanor and upon conviction,
subject to penalty. Each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 09-17-2013A, 9-17-2013)
TITLE 7
UTILITIES
CHAPTER 1
WATER AND SEWER
ARTICLE A.  UTILITY SERVICES
SECTION:
7-1A-1: Unauthorized Use Of Services Prohibited
7-1A-2: Requests For Water And Sewer Service
7-1A-3: User Charges And Connection Fees; Board Of Equalization
7-1A-4: Billing And Payment Of Fees; Collection
7-1A-5: Penalty
7-1A-1: UNAUTHORIZED USE OF SERVICES PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person, his family or agents to open any stopcock
valve or other fixture attached to the water system and/or to use the water
coming through the water mains, or to discharge sewage into the sewage system
without first submitting an application for such service and receiving a permit
to do so, as provided for in this chapter. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988)
7-1A-2: REQUESTS FOR WATER AND SEWER SERVICE:
   A.   Application For Service From Existing Connection; Conditions Of
Approval:
      1.   Any person desiring to obtain water and/or sewer service from the
city using a previously installed connection shall submit to the city:
         a.   An application for service, to be submitted on forms furnished by
the city.
         b.   An executed water/sewer use agreement whereby the applicant
agrees to abide by all rules and regulations governing the use of the water and
sewer system and to pay promptly for the services received as set forth on the
billing notice.
         c.   Payment in full of the required utility setup fee.
      2.   Upon satisfactory completion of the application process, the city
will turn on the valve and/or read the meter and establish the service account
for the user. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Services To Tenants; Responsibility Of Property Owner; Limitations:
      1.   In the event that the application is made by a tenant or person
other than the owner of the premises, the city shall also receive a signed
agreement by said owner, and shall provide that in consideration of granting
the application the owner agrees to pay for all services furnished such tenant
or other person named in the application in case such tenant or person shall
fail to pay for the services provided by the city. (Ord. 12-6-2005A, 12-6-2005)
      2.   Any property owner shall be liable for the payment of such services
and base fees until such time the owner notifies the city that the property has
been sold. (Ord. 9-20-2011A, 9-20-2011)
   C.   Setup Fee Required: Before receiving authorization for water and/or
sewer, each user shall pay a setup fee in an amount as may be fixed by
resolution of the city council.
   D.   Application For Service Using New Connection: Any person desiring to
obtain water and/or sewer service using a new connection shall be authorized to
make such connection and receive service subject to: (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988;
amd. 2004 Code)
      1.   Upon request for the first final building inspection, the owner and/
or builder shall execute an application and agreement form and evidence of
payment of the setup fee in accordance with the provisions of subsection A of
this section. Services will be billed commencing with the date of occupancy or
the date of the occupancy certificate, whichever occurs first. (Ord. 12-6-
2005A, 12-6-2005)
      2.   Receipt of payment of the required connection fee; and
      3.   A determination by the city that there is sufficient capacity in the
system at the address at which the service is being requested.
   E.   Temporary Connections: Any contractor or person engaged in construction
work requiring the use of water may apply and be granted a permit to install a
temporary connection. Any such temporary connection shall be made at the
expense of the contractor and the use of water shall be metered. The city may
require a deposit as a condition for granting a temporary connection. (Ord. 3-
3-88A, 3-3-1988; amd. 2004 Code)
7-1A-3: USER CHARGES AND CONNECTION FEES; BOARD OF EQUALIZATION:
   A.   Rates And Fees Established By City Council: The amount of the setup
fee, rates and charges for use, penalty fees for delinquency in payment, fees
for connection to the water and sewer system and other fees applicable to the
operation shall be fixed from time to time by resolution of the city council
according to the city fee schedule. The city council may also, by resolution,
establish various classes of users, enact rules for levying, billing,
guaranteeing and collecting charges for city utility services. (Ord. 9-20-
2011A, 9-20-2011)
   B.   Special Rates For Sewers Permitted: The city council may from time to
time fix by agreement or resolution special rates and conditions, upon such
terms as they may deem proper, for those users of the sewer service discharging
wastes of unusual characteristics or making use thereof under exceptional
circumstances. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988)
   C.   Board Of Equalization: The city council is hereby constituted as the
board of equalization of city utility rates to hear complaints and make
corrections of any assessments or charges deemed to be illegal, unequal or
unjust. (Ord. 9-20-2011A, 9-20-2011)
7-1A-4: BILLING AND PAYMENT OF FEES; COLLECTION:
   A.   Billing:
      1.   All service charges, costs, fees, and penalties assessed by the City
of Cedar Hills shall be billed for and collected on a single unified bill.
      2.   If the property is vacant and/or there is no utility bill, the base
utility fees (as seen on the city fee schedule), shall be charged to the owner
of the property. The fees shall be deemed a civil debt owed to the city by the
person or entity paying for the city utility services provided to the property.
   B.   Payment Of Fees: Payments on any city utility statement shall be
applied as designated by city policy, although the culinary water fee portion
of the bill shall be paid last. If a customer pays only a portion of the city
utility bill, all penalties shall be paid in full before any amount is applied
to the remaining services.
   C.   Assumption: Residents must notify the City of Cedar Hills in writing of
any billing errors within one hundred eighty (180) days of the statement date
from the bill on which the error or problem appeared or failed to appear. If no
notice of error is received within the one hundred eighty (180) day period, the
bill will be deemed correct and the city will have no recourse for errors.
   D.   Failure To Pay:
      1.   On or before the tenth day of each month, the city shall mail or
otherwise deliver a written or printed statement to each user showing the
amount of water and/or sewer service charges assessed against the user for the
preceding billing period, together with any other outstanding charges.
      2.   Said amount shall be due and payable upon receipt of the statement
and shall be considered past due on the second day of the month following
receipt of the statement (past due date).
      3.   In the event that payment of the utility bill is not received by the
city prior to the past due date, the city may assess a past due fee in an
amount to be set by resolution of the city council according to the city fee
schedule, and in the event that the city shall not have received payment in
full of all past due utility fees that shall have been assessed within fifteen
(15) days after the past due date, the account shall be considered delinquent
and the water service shall be subject to shutoff by the city without further
notification to the user.
   E.   Disconnection Of Water Service For Nonpayment Authorized; Other
Remedies:
      1.   In the event any person shall fail to pay for the water and/or sewer
service furnished or shall use such service in violation of the provisions of
this chapter or the rules and regulations adopted pursuant hereto, the city may
cause the water to be shut off from such premises.
      2.   Before any water service that has been shut off as a result of
nonpayment of service fees shall be restored, all past due service charges,
delinquency fees and such extra charge for turning the water on and off as the
city council may have established by resolution according to the city fee
schedule shall be paid in full.
      3.   The city is authorized and empowered to enforce the payment of all
delinquent service charges by any action at law in the corporate name of the
city.
      4.   To the extent authorized by Utah law, the city may, in addition to
any and all other remedies provided herein, impose a tax lien on the premises
being served to recover all delinquent fees and charges.
   F.   Payment Of Postpetition Services: The city may refuse or discontinue
utility services if a debtor in bankruptcy or a bankruptcy trustee, within
thirty (30) days after the date the bankruptcy petition was filed, does not
provide the city adequate assurance of payment of postpetition services in the
form of a deposit or other security.
   G.   Turning On Water After Being Turned Off Prohibited: It is unlawful for
any person, after the water shall have been turned off for nonpayment of
service charges or other violation of the rules and regulations pertaining to
the water or sewer system, to turn on the water or allow it to be turned on or
used without authorization to do so from the city. (Ord. 9-20-2011A, 9-20-2011)
7-1A-5: PENALTY:
Violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE B.  WATER AND SEWER SYSTEM
SECTION:
7-1B-1: Water And Sewer Department; Public Works Director
7-1B-2: Council To Adopt Rules And Regulations
7-1B-3: Connection To Sewer System Mandatory
7-1B-4: Ownership Of Systems
7-1B-5: Injury To Systems Prohibited
7-1B-6: Water System Operation And Use
7-1B-7: Sewer System Operation And Use
7-1B-8: Installation And Maintenance Of Service Laterals
7-1B-9: Administrative Requirements
7-1B-10: Enforcement; Penalty
7-1B-1: WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT; PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR:
   A.   Establishment Of Department: There is hereby established a water and
sewer department. It shall comprise all of the property, equipment and
personnel necessary to the maintenance and operation of the city culinary and
secondary water and sewage collection and disposal systems. The department
shall administer the operation and maintenance of the city water and sewer
systems. (Ord. 9-20-2011A, 9-20-2011)
   B.   Public Works Director; Appointment; Duties And Powers: There is hereby
created the position of public works director. Said position shall be filled by
appointment of the city manager, with the advice and consent of the city
council. The public works director shall manage and supervise the activities of
the water and sewer systems under the direction of the city council. The city
council, from time to time may, by resolution or otherwise, more fully
prescribe his powers and duties and direct the manner and frequency with which
he shall make reports to the mayor relating to the system. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-
1988; amd. 2004 Code)
7-1B-2: COUNCIL TO ADOPT RULES AND REGULATIONS:
The city council, in addition to the regulatory provisions set forth expressly
in this chapter, shall have the power and right to adopt additional regulations
controlling the manner and circumstances under which the water and sewer
systems may be used. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988)
7-1B-3: CONNECTION TO SEWER SYSTEM MANDATORY:
It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person occupying or having
charge of any building used for human occupancy that is located within five
hundred feet (500') 1  of an available sewer main to dispose of sewage
therefrom by any means other than by use of the city sewer system. The city may
act to require the connection of any such premises to the city sewer system and
utilize any means permitted by law to secure compliance with this requirement.
The cost incurred in making the hookup shall be borne by the owner. (Ord. 3-3-
88A, 3-3-1988; amd. 2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 7-2C-2D of this title.
7-1B-4: OWNERSHIP OF SYSTEMS:
The water system constructed or otherwise acquired by the city to supply the
city with culinary and secondary water, and the sewer system constructed or
otherwise acquired by the city to provide the city with a sanitary municipal
sewage disposal system, are the property of the city and shall be under the
sole and exclusive control and jurisdiction of the city. The city council may,
from time to time, direct the making of needed additions, improvements,
alterations and repairs to said systems, and may also make such rules and
regulations as it deems necessary for the operation and control thereof. (Ord.
9-20-2011A, 9-20-2011)
7-1B-5: INJURY TO SYSTEMS PROHIBITED:
It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface, injure or interfere
with the operation of any part or appurtenance of the water or sewer system.
(Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988)
7-1B-6: WATER SYSTEM OPERATION AND USE:
   A.   Opening Or Closing Of Valves Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person to open or close any water gate valve unless duly authorized by the city
council or their designated representative.
   B.   Water Connections To Be Metered: All structures, dwelling units and
other establishments, using water from the city water system, shall be
connected to said system through a water meter.
   C.   Waste Prohibited; Termination Of Service:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any water user to waste water, or to allow
it to be wasted, by imperfect stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes, or to
allow tanks or water troughs to leak or overflow or to wastefully run water
from hydrants, faucets or stops, or through basins, water closets, urinals,
sinks or other apparatus, or to use water in violation of the rules,
regulations or ordinances for controlling the water supply. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-
1988)
      2.   If, in the judgment of the public works director, a user of city
water engages in practices that result in the needless waste of water and
continues to do so after reasonable notice to discontinue said wastefulness has
been given, the public works director may thereupon authorize the termination
of the right of said individual to use culinary water. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988;
amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Scarcity Of Water: In time of scarcity of water, wherever in the
judgment of the city, it shall be necessary, the mayor shall, by proclamation,
limit the use of water to such extent as may be necessary for public good. It
shall be unlawful for any person by himself, family, or agents, to violate any
proclamation made by the mayor in pursuance of this chapter.
   E.   City Not Liable For Damages: The city shall not be liable for any
damage to a water service user by reason of stoppage or interruption of his
water supply service caused by fires, scarcity of water, accidents to the water
system or its mains, or as the result of maintenance and extension operations,
or from any other unavoidable cause.
   F.   Unauthorized Users: It is unlawful for any water service user to permit
any person from other premises or any unauthorized persons to use or obtain
water services regularly from his premises. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988)
   G.   Fire Hydrants: All public fire hydrants shall be under the control of
and shall be kept in repair by the city, and in case of fire, the fire
department shall have free access to said fire hydrants. It shall be unlawful
for any person to obstruct the approach to a fire hydrant or to open or operate
a fire hydrant or attempt to draw water therefrom without first obtaining
special permission from the public works director. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988;
amd. 2004 Code)
   H.   Water Service Outside Of Corporate Limits: No water or water service
shall be furnished to persons living outside the city corporate limits unless
an agreement is approved by the city council. (Ord. 9-20-2011A, 9-20-2011)
7-1B-7: SEWER SYSTEM OPERATION AND USE:
   A.   Discharge Of Inflammable And Destructive Substances Prohibited:
      1.   It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, break or remove any
part or portion of any sewer appliance or appurtenance, or to discharge into a
sewer any inflammable gas, gasoline or oil, any calcium carbide or residue
therefrom, or any liquid or other materials or substance that will emit an
inflammable gas when in contact with water, sewage or fire. Oil separators
installed in any building where volatile fluids are used must not be connected
directly or indirectly with a sewer.
      2.   It shall be unlawful to discharge any waters containing toxic or
poisonous solids, liquids or gases in sufficient quantity, either singly or in
combination with other wastes, to injure or interfere with any treatment
process, constitute a hazard to humans or animals, create a public nuisance or
produce injury to components to the system.
   B.   Pretreatment Of Wastes Required For Certain Users; Additional Charges
Permitted:
      1.   It shall be unlawful to discharge the waste from water filters, gas
engines, air compressors, dry cleaners, automobile repair and wash racks,
facilities for the stabling or keeping of horses, cows and other animals,
establishments using or processing organic matter and similar establishments
that produce strengths of wastes (i.e., biochemical oxygen demand, chemical
oxygen demand, total suspended solids) or a volume of effluent above the
average residential user into the sewer system unless such effluent is first
discharged into settling tanks properly trapped and vented and/or subjected to
on site pretreatment, as applicable.
      2.   In addition to any pretreatment that may be required, the city may
assess any such contributor a surcharge in the sewer fee in an amount
sufficient to cover the costs of treating the above normal strength or volume
of waste produced by the user.
   C.   Discharge Of Obstructive Materials Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for
any person to discharge into the public sanitary sewer any garbage, refuse or
other similar matter of substance likely to obstruct the sewer.
   D.   Discharge Of Drainage Waters Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any
person to connect with a public sanitary sewer any roof downspouts, foundation
or area drains, the contents of any spring, flowing well, creek, ditch, or any
other sources of surface runoff or groundwater.
   E.   Injury To Sewer Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized
person to wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or
tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment that is part of the city
sanitary sewer facilities or sewage works. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988)
   F.   Sewer Manholes: It shall be unlawful for any person to open any sewer
manhole without permission from the public works director. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-
1988; amd. 2004 Code)
7-1B-8: INSTALLATION AND MAINTENANCE OF SERVICE LATERALS:
   A.   Separate Connection Required For Each Premises: A separate and
independent service lateral shall be provided for each premises for both water
and sewer. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988)
   B.   Installation Of Laterals; Construction Permit Required:
      1.   All sewer and water service are to be installed in accordance with
city standards and under the direction of the public works director or his
authorized representative. Except for the water meter (see subsection C of this
section), the cost of all materials and the installation of the water and/or
sewer lateral shall be borne by the applicant. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988; amd.
2004 Code)
      2.   Prior to commencement of construction activities in connection with
the laying, repairing, altering or connecting any water or sewer service
lateral, the owner of the premises shall make application for and obtain a
permit from the city. All required fees shall be paid prior to the issuance of
the building permit.
   C.   Installation Of Water Meters: Water meters will be furnished, installed
and maintained by the city.
   D.   Ownership Of Water Service Lateral; Responsibility For Maintenance: All
water service lines lying between the meter box and the connection with the
main line, including the meter box and meter setter, shall be owned and
maintained by the city.
   E.   Ownership Of Sewer Service Laterals; Responsibility For Maintenance:
All sewer service laterals lying within the right of way of a city street shall
be owned by the city; provided, however, that all maintenance of said service
lateral and any damage to the building or contents that may arise as a result
of a blockage of said lateral shall be the responsibility of the property owner
and/or occupant.
   F.   Installation Of Service Laterals In New Subdivisions: Water and sewer
service laterals shall be installed from the main line to the outer edge of the
public street as part of the required improvements for a subdivision. Water
service laterals shall include the installation of the meter box and meter
setter.
   G.   Installations In Accordance With City Standards: All materials and
construction used in connection with the installation of a sewer or water
lateral or the extension of the city water or sewer system shall be in
accordance with city standards. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988)
7-1B-9: ADMINISTRATIVE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Qualified Plumbing Necessary: It shall be unlawful for any person to
connect any drain or sewer pipe with the city sewer system or to connect any
water pipe to the water system unless the person is a duly licensed plumber or
unless, in the absence of a duly licensed plumber, any proposed connection to,
alteration of, or change of connection to the water or sewer system shall be
first submitted to the public works director for review and approval. After
such approval, the installation or work done shall be subject to inspection by
the public works director or his agent.
   B.   Permits For Installation: It shall be unlawful for any person to
directly or indirectly engage in the laying, repairing, altering or connecting
of any drain or sewer pipe connected or part of the water or sewer system
without first having received a permit from the office of the public works
director.
   C.   When Permits Shall Not Be Issued: Permits to connect to the city sewer
system shall not be issued unless the plumbing in the house or building to be
connected is in accordance with the provisions of the city building and
plumbing codes.
   D.   Revocation Of Permits: All construction permits for water or sewer
connections or installations shall be issued to the plumber who is to do the
work or to the owner of the property, subject to the supervision and inspection
by the public works director or his agents. The city council or public works
director may at any time revoke a permit because of defective work or because
of undue delay in completing the permitted work.
   E.   Pipes To Be Kept In Good Repair: All users of the sewer services shall
keep their service pipes, connections and other apparatus in good repair and
protected from frost at their own expense. No person, except under the
direction of the public works director, shall be allowed to dig into the street
for the purpose of removing or repairing any service pipe or main.
   F.   Quality Of Service Pipe: All service and other pipes used in
conjunction with the water and sewer services of the city shall be of such
material, quality and specifications as the city council may from time to time
by resolution provide and shall be installed at such distances below ground as
may be specified by regulations relating to the installation of water and sewer
systems. All work, alterations or extensions affecting water and sewer pipes
shall be subject to the acceptance of the public works director.
   G.   Department To Have Free Access: The public works director and his
agents shall, at all ordinary hours, have free access to places supplied with
water or sewer service from the city system for the purpose of determining
whether the water or sewer service is being used and/or that the manner of its
use is consistent with city requirements. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988; amd. 2004
Code)
7-1B-10: ENFORCEMENT; PENALTY:
   A.   Penalty: Violation of the provisions of this article shall be a class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   Termination Of Water Service: In addition to the provisions of
subsection A of this section, and as a means of securing compliance with the
provisions of this article or any rules and regulations adopted pursuant
hereto, the mayor and/or public works director may, after due notice given,
terminate water service to any user found in violation of this article or
rules. (Ord. 3-3-88A, 3-3-1988; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE C.  ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION
SECTION:
7-1C-1: Environmental Quality Code Adopted By Reference
7-1C-2: Citation To Ordinance
7-1C-3: Penalty
7-1C-1: ENVIRONMENTAL QUALITY CODE ADOPTED BY REFERENCE:
The environmental quality code 1  is hereby approved and adopted by the city
for the regulating use of the city sewer system, three (3) copies of which have
been filed in the office of the city recorder for use and examination by the
public. (Ord. 8-10-94A, 8-10-1994; amd. 2004 Code)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA title 19.
7-1C-2: CITATION TO ORDINANCE:
Where a citation or complaint for violation of the ordinance adopted by section
7-1C-1 of this article is issued, it shall be sufficient to use the number of
the section followed by "adopted by the ordinance of the City of Cedar Hills"
to show the provision of the ordinance of the city that has been violated.
(Ord. 8-10-94A, 8-10-1994)
7-1C-3: PENALTY:
Any person violating any of the provisions of this article or the provisions
hereinabove adopted by reference shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, unless the terms of the regulations hereinabove adopted by
reference specify a different penalty. (Ord. 8-10-94A, 8-10-1994; amd. 2004
Code)
ARTICLE D.  DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION
SECTION:
7-1D-1: Short Title And Purpose
7-1D-2: Definitions
7-1D-3: Establishment Of Drinking Water Source Protection Zones
7-1D-4: Permitted Uses
7-1D-5: Prohibited Uses
7-1D-6: Administration
7-1D-1: SHORT TITLE AND PURPOSE:
   A.   This article shall be known as the DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION
ORDINANCE.
   B.   The purpose of this article is to ensure the provision of a safe and
sanitary drinking water supply for the city by establishment of drinking water
source protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells that are the
supply sources for conditions that may be maintained with such zones. (Ord. 6-
20-2006A, 6-20-2006)
7-1D-2: DEFINITIONS:
When used in this article the following words and phrases shall have the
meanings given in this section:
DESIGN STANDARD: Control that is implemented by a potential contamination
source to prevent discharges to the ground water. Spill protection is an
example of a design standard.
LAND MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES: Zoning and nonzoning controls that include, but are
not limited to, the following: zoning and subdivision ordinances, site plan
reviews, design and operating standards, source prohibitions, purchase of
property and development rights, public education programs, ground water
monitoring, household hazardous waste collection programs, water conservation
programs, memoranda of understanding, written contracts and agreements, and so
forth.
POLLUTION SOURCE: Point source discharges of contaminants to ground water or
potential discharges of the liquid forms of "extremely hazardous substances"
that are stored in containers in excess of "applicable threshold planning
quantities" as specified in SARA title III. Examples of possible pollution
sources include, but are not limited to, the following: storage facilities that
store the liquid forms of extremely hazardous substances, septic tanks,
drainfields, class V underground injection wells, landfills, open dumps,
landfilling of sludge and septage, manure piles, salt piles, pit privies, and
animal feeding operations with more than ten (10) animal units. The following
clarify the definition of pollution source:
   A.   Animal Feeding Operation: A lot or facility where the following
conditions are met: animals have been or will be stabled or confined and fed or
maintained for a total of forty five (45) days or more in any twelve (12) month
period, and crops, vegetation forage growth, or postharvest residues are not
sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility.
Two (2) or more animal feeding operations under common ownership are considered
to be a single feeding operation if they adjoin each other, if they use a
common area, or if they use a common system for the disposal of wastes.
   B.   Animal Unit: A unit of measurement for any animal feeding operation
calculated by adding the following numbers: the number of slaughter and feeder
cattle multiplied by 1.0, plus the number of mature dairy cattle multiplied by
1.4, plus the number of swine weighing over fifty five (55) pounds multiplied
by 0.4, plus the number of sheep multiplied by 0.1, plus the number of horses
multiplied by 2.0.
   C.   Extremely Hazardous Substances: Those substances that are identified in
the sec. 302(EHS) column of the "Title III List Of Lists - Consolidated List Of
Chemicals Subject To Reporting Under SARA Title III" (EPA 560/4-91-011).
POTENTIAL CONTAMINATION SOURCE: Any facility or site that employs an activity
or procedure that may potentially contaminate ground water. A pollution source
is also a potential contamination source.
REGULATORY AGENCY: Any governmental agency with jurisdiction over hazardous
waste as defined therein.
SANITARY LANDFILL: A disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible
wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover
thereon.
SEPTIC TANK/DRAINFIELD SYSTEMS: A system that is comprised of a septic tank and
a drainfield that accepts domestic wastewater from buildings or facilities for
subsurface treatment and disposal. By their design, septic tank/drainfield
system discharges cannot be controlled with design standards.
WELLHEAD: The upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals,
valves and other attachments. (Ord. 6-20-2006A, 6-20-2006)
7-1D-3: ESTABLISHMENT OF DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION ZONES:
There is hereby established use districts to be known as zones one, two, three
and four of the drinking water source protection area, identified and described
as follows:
   A.   Zone one: The area within a one hundred foot (100') radius from the
wellhead.
   B.   Zone two: The area within a two hundred fifty (250) day ground water
time of travel to the wellhead, the boundary of the aquifer(s) that supplies
water to the ground water source, or the ground water divide, whichever is
closer.
   C.   Zone three (waiver criteria zone): The area within a three (3) year
ground water time of travel to the wellhead or margin of the collection area,
the boundary of the aquifer(s) that supplies water to the ground water source,
or the ground water divide, whichever is closer.
   D.   Zone four: The area within a fifteen (15) year ground water time of
travel to the wellhead, the boundary of the aquifer(s) that supplies water to
the ground water source, or the ground water divide, whichever is closer. (Ord.
6-20-2006A, 6-20-2006)
7-1D-4: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses shall be permitted within drinking water source protection
zones:
   A.   Any use permitted within existing agricultural, single-family
residential, multi-family residential, and commercial districts so long as uses
conform to the rules and regulations of the regulatory agencies.
   B.   Any other open land use where any building located on the property is
incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. (Ord. 6-20-2006A, 6-20-
2006)
7-1D-5: PROHIBITED USES:
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within
drinking water source protection zones, whether or not such use or condition
may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section
7-1D-4 of this article:
   A.   Zone one: The location of potential contamination sources or pollution
sources as defined herein, unless they are controlled with design standards.
   B.   Zone two: The location of pollution sources as defined herein, unless
their contaminated discharges are controlled with design standards.
   C.   Zones three and four: The location of potential contamination sources
unless they are controlled through land management strategies. (Ord. 6-20-
2006A, 6-20-2006)
7-1D-6: ADMINISTRATION:
The policies and procedures for administration of any source protection zone
established under this article, including, without limitation, those applicable
to nonconforming uses, exception, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same
as provided in title 10, "Zoning Regulations", of this code for the City of
Cedar Hills, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be
amended. (Ord. 6-20-2006A, 6-20-2006)
ARTICLE E.  RESTRICTIONS AND REGULATIONS OVER THE CITY OF CEDAR HILLS WATERSHED
SECTION:
7-1E-1: Purpose And Intent
7-1E-2: Definitions
7-1E-3: Jurisdiction, Ordinances And Regulations
7-1E-4: Pollution Of Water Sources Prohibited
7-1E-5: Sewage Disposal System Permit Required
7-1E-6: Permit Applications For Sewage Disposal Systems
7-1E-7: Minimum Terms And Conditions For Sewage Disposal System Permits
7-1E-8: Permit Exceptions
7-1E-9: Portable Toilet Permit
7-1E-10: Vault Privy Permits
7-1E-11: Septic Tank And Septic Drain Field Permits
7-1E-12: Sewage Disposal System Violations
7-1E-13: Animal Permits
7-1E-14: Animal Enclosure Permits
7-1E-15: Permit Review Generally
7-1E-16: General Sewage And Garbage Disposal Requirements
7-1E-17: Vehicles
7-1E-18: Posting Of Permits
7-1E-19: Penalties
7-1E-20: Remedies
7-1E-21: Appeal
7-1E-22: Severability
7-1E-1: PURPOSE AND INTENT:
It is the purpose of this article to protect the City's water resources and to
improve water quality by restricting and regulating conduct within the
watershed area. It is the intent of the City to assert jurisdiction over the
watershed area, including aquifers and surface waters to the maximum extent
allowed by Federal, State, and County law and consistent with the Utah Drinking
Water Source Protection Rule as adopted and/or amended by the State of Utah
Department of Environmental Quality. (Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-
2018)
7-1E-2: DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases and words will
have the following meanings:
ANIMAL ENCLOSURE: Means a corral, sheep pen, pig pen, chicken coop, stable, or
any offensive or contaminating yard relating to animals.
ANIMALS: Means any cattle, horses, sheep, or pigs, chickens and/or domesticated
animals.
AQUIFER: Means an underground formation that contains and transmits ground
water.
CHEMICAL TOILET: Means a non-flush device wherein the waste is deposited
directly into a receptacle containing a solution of water and chemical housed
in a permanent or portable structure.
CITY: Means the City of Cedar Hills, Utah.
DIRECTOR: Means the Director of the Public Works Department for the City of
Cedar Hills, Utah.
DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION RULE: Means the Utah Drinking Water Source
Protection Rule as adopted by the State of Utah Department of Environmental
Quality, Division of Drinking Water.
DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION ZONE AND WATER PROTECTION ZONE: Means those
areas delineated or established by the City in accordance with standards set by
the Utah Drinking Water Source Protection Rule.
OWNER: Means any person who along, jointly or severally with others:
   A.   Has legal or equitable title to any real property or premises,
including dwellings or dwelling units, with or without accompanying actual
possession thereof; or
   B.   Has charge, care, or control of any real property, premises, dwellings,
or dwelling units, as legal or equitable owner or agent of the owner, or an
executor, administrator, trustee or guardian of the estate of the owner, with
or without possession.
PERMIT: Means a permit that the Director issues pursuant to this article.
POLLUTION: Means those contaminants to ground water identified as a "pollution
source" as defined in the Drinking Water Source Protection Rule.
PORTABLE OR TEMPORARY TOILET: Means an outdoor toilet that can be picked up and
moved and is not connected to a hole in the ground or a septic tank and is not
plumbed into a Municipal system leading to a sewage treatment plant.
PUBLIC WORKS DEPARTMENT: Means the Public Works Department of the City of Cedar
Hills, Utah.
PUTRESCIBLE MATERIAL: Means any organic material subject to biological
decomposition with the production of offensive odors associated with anaerobic
or aerobic conditions, including but not limited to dead animals, garbage,
manure, and vegetable compost matter.
RESERVOIR: Means any natural or artificial lake or pond except a stormwater
detention basin.
SEPTIC DRAIN FIELD OR LEACH FIELD: Means any subsurface wastewater absorption
system or facility used to remove contaminants, pollutants, and/or impurities
from the liquids discharged from a septic tank.
SEPTIC TANK: Means a watertight tank or receptacle that collects or receives
sewage and is designed and constructed to retain solids, digest organic matter
through a period of detention, and allow liquids to discharge into soil outside
of the tank, including but not limited to discharges made through a septic
drain field or leach field.
SEWAGE: Means a combination of liquid or water-carried wastes produced by man,
animal, or fowl from residences, business buildings, institutions, industrial
establishments, agriculture, recreation, and other locations including septic
tanks, privy vaults, and cesspools, together with ground, surface, and storm
water.
SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM: Means any system for the disposal of sewage including,
but not limited to closets, sewers, septic drain fields or leach fields, septic
tanks, vault privies, toilets, and chemical toilets.
SEWAGE HOLDING TANK: Means a watertight receptacle which collects or receives
sewage and retains such wastes until removal and subsequent disposal by
scavenger operation.
UCHD: Means the Utah County Health Department.
VAULT PRIVY: Means any facility wherein the waste is deposited without
flushing, into a vault or receptacle, which is usually installed below ground.
WASTE: Means, for the purpose of this article, domestic waste water or sewage
which is normally deposited in or retained for disposal in sewers, septic
tanks, sewage holding tanks, chemical toilets, or vault privies.
WATERCOURSE: Means all reservoirs, streams, canals, ditches, pipes and drains
used in and necessary for the construction, maintenance, and operation of the
City's waterworks, and over all streams or sources from which the water is
taken within the watershed area.
WATERSHED AREA: Means any area or territory occupied by or tributary to the
City of Cedar Hills's waterworks and all watercourses used in and necessary for
the construction, maintenance and operation of the same and over the stream or
source from which the water is taken for fifteen (15) miles above the point
from which it is taken and for a distance of three hundred feet (300') on each
side of such stream and over highways along such stream or watercourse within
said fifteen (15) miles and said three hundred feet (300'). (Ord. 01-16-2018A,
1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-3: JURISDICTION, ORDINANCES AND REGULATIONS:
In enacting this article, it is the City of Cedar Hills's intent to protect its
watershed and to assert jurisdiction over the watershed area to the maximum
extent allowed by Federal, State, and County laws and regulations, including
but not limited to Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-15, the Utah Drinking Water
Source Protection Rule as adopted and/or amended by the State of Utah
Department of Environmental Quality, and applicable Federal laws and
regulations governing the administration of Federal property within the
watershed area. Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated section 10-8-15, the City is
hereby authorized to prescribe ordinances and regulations for governing all
matters of water quality within the watershed area not contrary to law. (Ord.
01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-4: POLLUTION OF WATER SOURCES PROHIBITED:
It will be unlawful for any person to knowingly cause to be done any of the
things prohibited in this article anywhere within any Drinking Water Source
Protection Zone and the watershed area, provided that no person or entity will
be liable for the actions of any third party. (Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018,
eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-5: SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM PERMIT REQUIRED:
It will be unlawful to construct, use, maintain, or remodel a sewage disposal
system anywhere within the watershed area without first obtaining a permit from
the City in accordance with this article. At the time of adoption of this
article on January 16, 2018, existing sewage disposal systems that have been
fully constructed will be allowed to continue as long as they are not expanded,
become inoperable, or otherwise operated or modified to constitute a threat of
contamination to a Drinking Water Source Protection Zone or the watershed area.
(Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-6: PERMIT APPLICATIONS FOR SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEMS:
All persons or parties seeking to construct, modify, expand, or remodel a
sewage disposal system within the watershed area will submit an application for
a permit to the Director. When submitting applications for a permit, applicants
will provide all relevant information requested by the Director, including but
not limited to a description of the proposed location of the sewage disposal
system, copies of all permits, plans, specifications and drawings required by
any other government authority pursuant to applicable laws or ordinances.
Permits and plan approvals by other government entities, including County,
State, and Federal government entities, will not be considered approval by the
City but will be considered by the City in evaluating every application;
provided that the City will approve or disapprove any applications within a
period of thirty (30) calendar days from the date of submission. (Ord. 01-16-
2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-7: MINIMUM TERMS AND CONDITIONS FOR SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM PERMITS:
   A.   In approving a permit application for a sewage disposal system, the
Director will impose the following minimum terms and conditions on all sewage
disposal systems to prevent or mitigate pollution to a Drinking Water Source
Protection Zone or to the watershed area:
      1.   All permit applicants will comply with Utah Admin. Code R. 317-
4 regarding onsite wastewater systems and any other applicable or successor
Federal, State, County waste disposal system laws, regulations, and permits in
addition to any conditions or requirements that the City may impose pursuant to
this article.
      2.   All approved sewage disposal systems must be emptied completely at
least once each year, where applicable, or at a more frequent interval as the
Director may reasonably require. If reasonably determined to be a health hazard
by the City, owners of such facilities will keep the level of sewage below
sixty percent (60%) of capacity, where applicable, to allow sufficient reserve
for emergencies. The contents removed from any sewage holding tank, vault, or
similar storage facility must be removed by a licensed scavenger operation at
the cost of the owner.
      3.   The owner of the property on which the sewage disposal system is
located must grant the Public Works Department and its authorized agents the
right to enter upon the owner's property to inspect for violations of the terms
and conditions of the permit.
         a.   The City will provide reasonable prior written notice for such
inspections unless in the reasonable opinion of the Director an emergency
exists which might jeopardize a Drinking Water Source Protection Zone or the
watershed area. (Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-8: PERMIT EXCEPTIONS:
City Council may only grant an exception for the permit requirements contained
in this article if it reasonably determines that compliance with this article
is not technically or physically feasible and that the requested exception will
not:
   A.   Pose a health hazard;
   B.   Contaminate or threaten to contaminate any watercourse within the
watershed area; and
   C.   Violate Federal, State or County law. (Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018,
eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-9: PORTABLE TOILET PERMIT:
   A.   In addition to the requirements of this article, permit applications
seeking permission to locate a portable toilet(s) within the watershed area
must include the following information:
      1.   The type and nature of the event requiring the portable toilet;
      2.   The number of portable toilets requested; and
      3.   The beginning and ending dates for when the portable toilets are
needed.
   B.   The Director will issue a permit if the Director reasonably determines
that the portable toilet(s) complies with the minimum requirements of this
article and that the portable toilet(s):
      1.   Will comply with all applicable Federal, State, and local laws,
regulations, and applicable permits, including but not limited to Utah Admin.
Code R. 317-4 and R. 392-400, or any applicable successor statute or
regulation;
      2.   Will be removed within five (5) days after the event ends;
      3.   Toilet paper with a holder should be provided and maintained at all
times; and
      4.   Can be maintained in a sanitary manner pursuant to reasonable terms
and conditions that the Director may reasonably require, including but not
limited to the frequency of inspections and service. (Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-16-
2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-10: VAULT PRIVY PERMITS:
   A.   In addition to the requirements of this article, permit applications to
install a vault privy must provide a copy of the permit the UCHD has issued for
the vault privy pursuant to UCHD health regulation 17-02, or any applicable
successor statute or regulation. The Director will issue a permit for the vault
privy if the Director reasonably determines that the vault privy satisfies the
requirements of this article and will:
      1.   Comply with the terms of the permit issued by the UCHD;
      2.   Not contaminate or threaten to contaminate any watercourse; and
      3.   Comply with all the requirements outlined in Utah Admin. Code R317-
560 or any applicable successor statute or regulation.
As a condition for approving a permit for a vault privy, the Director will
require the applicant to provide toilet paper in the vault privy at all times.
(Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-11: SEPTIC TANK AND SEPTIC DRAIN FIELD PERMITS:
   A.   In addition to the requirements of this article, permit applications to
install a septic tank or septic drain field must include a copy of the permit
the UCHD has issued for the septic tank or septic drain field pursuant to Utah
Admin. Code R. 317-4, or any applicable successor statute or regulation.
   B.   The Director will issue a permit for the septic tank or septic drain
field if the Director reasonably determines that the septic tank or drain field
satisfies the requirements of this article and will:
      1.   Comply with the terms of the permit the UCHD has issued for the
septic tank;
      2.   Service a lot of at least two thousand five hundred (2,500) square
feet; and
      3.   Not discharge to any natural stream. (Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018,
eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-12: SEWAGE DISPOSAL SYSTEM VIOLATIONS:
   A.   When the Director reasonably determines that a sewage disposal system
violates the terms of its permit or otherwise constitutes a threat of
contamination to a Drinking Water Source Protection Zone or the watershed area,
the Director will provide the owners of the sewage disposal system with written
notice of the violation or threat of contamination and will give the owner at
least thirty (30) days to correct the violation or hazard, except for
violations or threats involving a failure to keep sewage levels at the
appropriate level, in which case a seven (7) day written notice will be
provided. If, in the reasonable opinion of the Director, the violation or
threat of contamination constitutes an emergency that might jeopardize a
Drinking Water Source Protection Zone or a watershed area, the Director may
impose a shorter period to correct the violation or hazard. In its discretion,
the Director may also extend the deadline for compliance if the owner of the
sewage disposal system is able to provide a reasonable justification for an
extension. If the owner is unable or unwilling to correct the violation or
hazard, the Director may take the following actions, or a combination thereof:
      1.   Impose civil penalties and remedies pursuant to this article.
      2.   Order that a sewage disposal system be sealed immediately and
prevent its use until the sewage disposal facility conforms to the requirements
of the permit.
      3.   Order the destruction and removal of the sewage disposal system,
with the property owner to bear all costs associated with the destruction and
removal of the sewage disposal system. (Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-
2018)
7-1E-13: ANIMAL PERMITS:
It will be unlawful to keep or maintain any animals within the watershed area
overnight for a period in excess of thirty (30) consecutive days during a
calendar year without first obtaining a written permit from the Public Works
Department. Applicants will inform the City of the number and type of animals
and their proposed method of controlling and maintaining the animals. The
Director will provide notice of any violations of this section in writing and
will give violators at least thirty (30) days to correct the violation, unless
the Director reasonably determines that an emergency exists which might
jeopardize a Drinking Water Source Protection Zone or the watershed area.
Violations of this section will be subject to civil penalties and remedies
pursuant to section
7-1E-19 of this article as well as the removal of the animals from the
watershed area. The division will provide all notices of violation.
Nothing in this article will impact existing and valid grazing permits in
existence at the time of the adoption of this article on January 16, 2018, as
long as such permits are not modified, expanded, or otherwise constitute a
threat of contamination to a Drinking Water Source Protection Zone or the
watershed area. (Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-14: ANIMAL ENCLOSURE PERMITS:
It will be unlawful for any person to construct or maintain an animal enclosure
that will be installed within the watershed area for longer than seven (7) days
without first obtaining a permit from the Public Works Department. Applications
must provide a description of the proposed animal enclosure and its location,
as well as the number of animals that will be kept within the enclosure.
The Director will issue a permit for animal enclosure if the Director
determines that the animal enclosure will not violate established standards or
rules for applicable Drinking Water Source Protection Zones and will not
constitute a threat of contamination to the watershed area.
As a minimum condition for approval, permits issued pursuant to this section
will require that animal enclosures be kept and maintained in a reasonably
clean and sanitary condition at all times and will be subject to inspection by
the City. Permits issued pursuant to this section will set forth the approved
disposal manner for fecal waste generated in the animal enclosure.
The Director will provide notice of any violations of this section in writing
and will give violators at least thirty (30) days to correct the violation,
unless the Director reasonably determines that an emergency exists which might
jeopardize a Drinking Water Source Protection Zone or the watershed area.
Violations of this section will be subject to civil penalties and remedies
pursuant to section
7-1E-19 of this article, as well as the destruction and removal of the animal
enclosure, with the property owner to bear all costs associated with the
destruction and removal of the animal enclosure. At the time of adoption of
this article on January 16, 2018, existing animal enclosures will be allowed to
continue as long as they are not modified, expanded, or otherwise constitute a
threat of contamination to a Drinking Water Source Protection Zone or the
watershed area. (Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-15: PERMIT REVIEW GENERALLY:
   A.   The following provisions will apply to all permits required by this
article:
      1.   Approval or denial of any permit application required by this
article will be under the direct supervision and control of the Director.
      2.   The City will provide application forms for the permits required by
this article.
      3.   The Director will only issue a permit pursuant to this article if
the applicant can demonstrate that the proposed action will not:
         a.   Constitute a threat of contamination to the watershed area; and
         b.   Will not violate established standards or rules for applicable
Drinking Water Source Protection Zones, Utah Admin. Code R. 317-4, the terms of
any applicable permits issued by UCHD, and any other applicable Federal, State,
or local law.
      4.   The Director will have authority to include reasonable conditions in
approved permits to ensure compliance with applicable standards or rules for
Drinking Water Source Protection Zones, Utah Admin. Code R. 317-4, and the
requirements of this article.
      5.   In the event that the Director denies a permit application, the
Director will provide the applicant with a written explanation of the reason
for the denial, and such explanation will be considered a final, appealable
order of the City. (Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-16: GENERAL SEWAGE AND GARBAGE DISPOSAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   It will be unlawful to:
      1.   Throw or break bottles or glass, or deposit garbage, debris, or
other deleterious matter of any kind anywhere within the watershed area, except
into a designated garbage container.
      2.   Damage, vandalize, alter, or destroy any authorized sewage disposal
system in the watershed area, except as provided in this article.
      3.   Deposit any dead animal or any putrescible matter within the
watershed area.
      4.   Pump sewage storage vaults or conduct a scavenger operation except
in accordance with all applicable permit conditions, laws, rules, and
regulations.
      5.   For any person to use or maintain any sewage disposal system that
the City sealed for violating the provisions of this article. (Ord. 01-16-
2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-17: VEHICLES:
It will be unlawful for the purposes of this article for any person to: a)
operate any motor vehicle; b) upon any public property within the watershed
area; and c) in any manner not authorized or otherwise allowed by the
appropriate Federal, State, County, or other appropriate governmental
authority. This provision will not apply to the use of vehicles on real
property primarily devoted to agricultural purposes. In no event will a person
or entity who owns or leases property within the watershed area be responsible
or otherwise liable under this article for the actions of third parties who
operate motor vehicles on said property. (Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-
16-2018)
7-1E-18: POSTING OF PERMITS:
The recipient of any permits issued pursuant to this article must post a copy
of said permit at the site that is subject to the permit at all times. (Ord.
01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-19: PENALTIES:
Any person violating any provision of this article will be guilty of a Class B
misdemeanor. Each day the violation continues will constitute a separate
offense. (Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-20: REMEDIES:
Any person, subdivision, development, and/or land use found to be in violation
of this article will, in addition to other penalties and remedies available in
law or equity, be subject to a civil penalty, action or proceedings to
restrain, correct, or abate the violation; to prevent occupancy of any
applicable building, structure, or land; or to prevent any illegal act,
conduct, business, or use in or about the premises. Civil penalties will be in
the amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) per day for the first violation. If the
same violation occurs on the same property within five (5) years after the
initial violation is remedied, a civil penalty in the amount of one hundred
dollars ($100.00) per day will apply. Each day the violation continues will
constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-21: APPEAL:
A permit required by this article shall be granted as designated by this
article. The Appeal Authority shall be the City Council. (Ord. 01-16-2018A, 1-
16-2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
7-1E-22: SEVERABILITY:
Should any section or provision of this article be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, the declaration will
not affect the validity of this article as a whole or any part thereof that is
not specifically declared to be invalid and unconstitutional. (Ord. 01-16-
2018A, 1-16-2018, eff. 1-16-2018)
CHAPTER 2
INDUSTRIAL TREATMENT AND PRETREATMENT REGULATIONS
ARTICLE A.  ABBREVIATIONS AND DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
7-2A-1: Abbreviations
7-2A-2: Definitions
7-2A-1: ABBREVIATIONS:
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
   BOD - Biochemical oxygen demand
   CFR - Code of federal regulations
   COD - Chemical oxygen demand
   EPA - Environmental protection agency
   l - Liter
   mg - Milligrams
   mg/l - Milligrams per liter
   NPDES - National pollutant discharge elimination system
   POTW - Publicly owned treatment works
   SIC - Standard industrial classification
   SWDA - Solid waste disposal act, 42 USC 6901 et seq.
   TSS - Total suspended solids
   USC - United States code
(Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993)
7-2A-2: DEFINITIONS:
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and
phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings:
ACT: Federal water pollution control act, as amended by the clean water act and
the water quality act of 1987, 33 USC 1251 et seq.
AUTHORIZED REPRESENTATIVE OF INDUSTRIAL USER: A. In the case of a corporation,
a president, secretary, treasurer or vice president of the corporation in
charge of a principal business function;
   B.   In the case of a partnership or proprietorship, a general partner or
proprietor; and
   C.   An authorized representative of the individuals designated above if: 1)
such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities
from which the discharge into the POTW originates; 2) the authorization is in
writing; and 3) the written authorization is submitted to the POTW.
BIOCHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the
biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure for
five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20°C), expressed in terms of weight
and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/l)).
BUILDING DRAIN: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system
that receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside
the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five
feet (5') (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall.
BUILDING SEWER: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or
other place of disposal, also called "house connection".
BYPASS: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of an
industrial user's treatment facility.
CHEMICAL OXYGEN DEMAND: A measure of oxygen consuming capacity of inorganic and
organic matter present in water or wastewater. It is expressed as the amount of
oxygen consumed from a chemical oxidant in a specific test. Results are not
necessarily related to BOD because the chemical oxidant may react to substances
that bacteria do not stabilize.
CITY: The City of Cedar Hills, Utah, or the city council of the City of Cedar
Hills, Utah.
CITY PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The city officer charged with the responsibility to
maintain, repair, supervise and control the city sewer system.
COMBINED SEWER: A sewer to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water.
COMPOSITE SAMPLE: Samples that are flow proportioned and shall, as a minimum,
contain at least four (4) samples collected over the compositing period. Unless
otherwise specified, the time between the collection of the first sample and
last sample shall not be less than six (6) hours nor more than twenty four (24)
hours. Acceptable methods for preparation of composite samples are as follows:
   A.   Constant time interval between samples, sample volume proportional to
flow rate at time of sampling;
   B.   Constant time interval between samples, sample volume proportional to
total flow (volume) since last sample. For the first sample, the flow rate at
the time the sample was collected may be used;
   C.   Constant sample volume, time interval between samples proportional to
flow (i.e., sample taken every "X" gallons of flow); and
   D.   Continuous collection of sample, with sample collection rate
proportional to full rate.
DIRECT DISCHARGE: A discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly to
the waters of the state of Utah.
DISTRICT: The Timpanogos special service district, a special service district.
DISTRICT SUPERINTENDENT: The superintendent of wastewater facilities of the
district or his authorized deputy, agent or representative.
EASEMENT: An acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): The average culinary water usage, expressed
in gallons, of developed single-family residential parcels in the City of Cedar
Hills.
FLOATABLE OIL: Oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will
separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment
facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is
properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection
system.
GARBAGE: The animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling,
preparation, cooking and serving of foods.
GRAB SAMPLE: A sample that is taken from a waste stream on a onetime basis with
no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time.
INDIRECT DISCHARGE: The introduction of pollutants into a POTW from any
nondomestic source regulated under section 307(b), (c) or (d) of the federal
water pollution control act, also known as the clean water act, as amended, 33
USC section 1251 et seq.
INDUSTRIAL USER: Any person who introduces pollutants into a POTW from any
nondomestic source regulated under the act, state law or local ordinance.
INDUSTRIAL WASTES: The wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business,
as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
INTERFERENCE: Any discharge that alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, both:
   A.   Inhibits or disrupts the POTW and any of its process or operations, or
its sludge use or disposal; and
   B.   Therefore is the cause of violation (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation) of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES
permit or federal, state or local sludge standards.
MAY: Is permissive.
NPDES OR STATE DISCHARGE PERMIT: A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the
federal water pollution control act (33 USC 1342).
NATIONAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD, PRETREATMENT STANDARD OR STANDARD: Any
regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in
accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the act (33 USC 1317), which applies
to industrial users. This term includes prohibitive discharge limits
established pursuant to 40 CFR section 403.5, or any revision thereto.
NATURAL OUTLET: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer
overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or
ground water.
NEW SOURCE: Any building, structure, facility or installation of which the
construction commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards
under section 307(c) (33 USC 1317) that will be applicable to such source if
such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section
provided that: a) the construction is a site at which no other source is
located; or b) the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of
pollutants at an existing source is totally replaced; or c) the production or
wastewater generating processes are substantially independent of an existing
source at the same site.
PASS-THROUGH: A discharge that exits the POTW into waters of the state in
quantities or concentrations that, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or
discharges from other sources, causes a violation of any requirement of the
POTW's NPDES permit (including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a
violation).
PERSON: Any individual, partnership, firm, company, corporation, association,
joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal
entity, or their legal representatives, agent or assigns. The masculine gender
shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where
indicated by the context.
pH: The logarithm (base-10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen
ions expressed in grams per liter of solution.
POLLUTANT: Any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage,
garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials,
radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand,
cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, commercial and agricultural waste, or
any other contaminant.
PRETREATMENT: The reduction, elimination or alteration of pollutant properties
to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharge or introduction into a
POTW. This can be accomplished by physical, chemical or biological processes,
process changes, or other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR section 403f
(d).
PROPERLY SHREDDED GARBAGE: The wastes from the preparation, cooking, and
dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles
will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public
sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch (1/2") (1.27 centimeters)
in any dimension.
PUBLIC SEWER: A common sewer controlled by a governmental agency or public
utility.
PUBLICLY OWNED TREATMENT WORKS (POTW): A treatment works as defined by section
212 of the act, including any devices and systems used in the storage,
treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal sewage and industrial waste.
The systems include sewers, pipes and equipment used to convey wastewater to
the treatment facility. The term also includes the "municipality", as defined
in section 502(4) of the act, which has jurisdiction over the indirect
discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment works.
SANITARY SEWER: A sewer that carries liquid and water carried wastes from
residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants and institutions, together
with minor quantities of ground, storm and surface waters that are not admitted
intentionally.
SECONDARY WATER: Nonpotable water used for irrigation.
SEVERE PROPERTY DAMAGE: Substantial physical damage to property, damage to the
treatment facilities that causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and
permanent loss of natural resources that can reasonably be expected to occur in
the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss
caused by delays in production.
SEWAGE: The spent water of a community. The preferred term is wastewater.
SEWER: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
SHALL: Is mandatory.
SIGNIFICANT INDUSTRIAL USER: Any industrial user subject to national
categorical pretreatment standards or any industrial user of the district
wastewater disposal system who: a) has a discharge flow of twenty five thousand
(25,000) gallons or more per average work day; or b) has a flow greater than
five percent (5%) of the flow in the district wastewater treatment system; or
c) has in its wastes "toxic pollutants", as defined pursuant to section 307 of
the federal water pollution control act or state law or regulation; or d) is
found by the POTW or the state to have significant impact, either alone or in
combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment
system, the quality of sludge, the POTW's effluent discharge quality, or the
air emissions generated by the system.
SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE: An industrial user is in significant noncompliance
(SNC) if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
   A.   Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as
those in which sixty six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken
during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit
or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter.
   B.   Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in
which thirty three percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements for each
pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the
product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the
applicable TRC.
   C.   Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or
longer term average) that the control authority determines has caused, alone or
in combination with other discharges, interference or pass-through (including
endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public).
   D.   Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to
human health, welfare or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW's
exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
   E.   Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a
compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction or
attaining final compliance.
   F.   Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date,
required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, ninety (90) day
compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance
with compliance schedules.
   G.   Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
   H.   Any other violation or group of violations that the control authority
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local
pretreatment program.
SLUG: Any discharge of water or wastewater that in concentration of any given
constituent or in quantity of flow exceeds for any period of duration longer
than fifteen (15) minutes more than five (5) times the average twenty four (24)
hour concentration of flows during normal operation and shall adversely affect
the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater treatment works.
STATE: State of Utah.
STORM DRAIN OR STORM SEWER: A drain or sewer for conveying water, groundwater,
subsurface water or unpolluted water from any source.
STORMWATER: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural
precipitation and resulting therefrom.
TOTAL SUSPENDED SOLIDS: The total suspended matter that floats on the surface
of, or is suspended in water, wastewater or other liquids, and that is
removable by laboratory filtering.
TOXIC POLLUTANT: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants identified as toxic
pursuant to section 307(a) of the federal water pollution control act or other
federal statutes or in regulations promulgated by the state under state law.
UNPOLLUTED WATER: Water of quality equal to or better than the effluent
criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water
quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary
sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
WASTEWATER: The liquid and water carried industrial or domestic wastes from
dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities and institutions,
whether treated or untreated.
WATERCOURSE: A natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either
continuously or intermittently.
WATERS OF THE STATE: Includes:
   A.   Both surface and underground waters within the boundaries of this state
subject to its jurisdiction, including all ponds, lakes, rivers, streams,
public ditches, tax ditches, and public drainage systems within this state,
other than those designed and used to collect, convey or dispose of sanitary
sewage; and
   B.   The floodplain of free flowing waters determined by the department of
natural resources on the basis of 100-year flood frequency. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-
28-1993; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 9-20-2011A, 9-20-2011)
ARTICLE B.  INDUSTRIAL TREATMENT AND PRETREATMENT
SECTION:
7-2B-1: General Pretreatment Requirements
7-2B-2: Wastewater Contribution Permit Application
7-2B-3: Wastewater Contribution Permit Requirements
7-2B-4: Fees
7-2B-1: GENERAL PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Purpose: The purposes of this article are to:
      1.   Establish uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors
into the wastewater collection and treatment systems owned and operated by the
city and the district, and to enable the district to comply with applicable
state and federal laws and the general pretreatment regulations (40 CFR part
403);
      2.   Prevent the introduction of pollutants into the city's wastewater
system that will:
         a.   Interfere with the operation of the city and district systems;
         b.   Cause the district treatment plant to violate its NPDES discharge
permit;
         c.   Contaminate the sludge;
         d.   Pass through the systems, inadequately treated, into receiving
waters or the atmosphere;
         e.   Pose a health threat to sewer workers; or
         f.   Be otherwise incompatible with the systems.
      3.   Improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewaters and
sludges from the systems; and
      4.   Provide for equitable distribution of the cost of the wastewater
system.
   B.   General Discharge Prohibitions:
      1.   No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed, directly or
indirectly, to a POTW operated by the district, any pollutant or wastewater
that will pass through or cause interference with the operation or performance
of the POTW.
      2.   No user shall contribute the following substances to any POTW:
         a.   Pollutants that create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW,
including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flashpoint of
less than one hundred forty degrees Fahrenheit (140°F) or sixty degrees
centigrade (60°C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21.
         b.   Solid or viscous substances in amounts that will cause
obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference, such as, but not
limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-half inch (1/2") in
any dimension, or any material that can be disposed of as trash.
         c.   Pollutants that will cause corrosive structural damage to the
POTW, but in no case discharges with pH lower than 5.0 or greater than 9.5,
unless the works is specifically designed to accommodate such discharges.
         d.   Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
         e.   Pollutants that result in the presence of toxic gases, vapor or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and
safety problems.
         f.   Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the district.
         g.   Any wastewater containing a toxic pollutant that may cause
interference with any wastewater treatment process, constitute a hazard to
humans or animals, contaminate the sludge or pass through the POTW and pollute
the waters of the state.
         h.   Any substance that may create a public nuisance, cause hazard to
life or prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance and repair.
         i.   Heat in amounts that will inhibit biological activity in the POTW
resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the
temperature at the POTW treatment plant exceeds forty degrees centigrade (40°C)
(104°F).
         j.   Any pollutant, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.),
released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration that will
cause interference with the POTW, including slug loads. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-
1993)
         k.   Any wastewater having effluent characteristics in excess of the
maximums set forth in appendix B, which is attached to the ordinance codified
herein and on file in the city office, which schedule may be amended from time
to time by resolution. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
         l.   Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes of
such half life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the
district superintendent in compliance with applicable state or federal
regulations.
         m.   Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the
treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable
tanning solutions.
         n.   Any waters or wastes containing odor producing substances that
exceed limits established by the district superintendent.
   C.   Pretreatment Requirements:
      1.   Industrial users shall provide necessary wastewater treatment as
required to comply with this chapter, federal pretreatment standards and permit
conditions, and shall achieve compliance with all national categorical
pretreatment standards within the time limitations as specified by the federal
pretreatment regulations.
      2.   Any facilities required to pretreat wastewater shall be provided,
operated and maintained at the industrial user's expense. Detailed plans
showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted
to the district for review, and shall be approved by the district before
construction of the facility. The review and approval of plans and operating
procedures does not relieve the industrial user from complying with the
provisions off this chapter and permit conditions. Any subsequent changes in
the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and
approved by the district prior to the industrial user's initiation of the
changes.
   D.   Dilution Prohibition: No industrial user shall increase the use of
process water or dilute a discharge as a substitute for adequate treatment to
achieve compliance with this chapter.
   E.   Spill Prevention Plans:
      1.   Industrial users shall provide protection from accidental discharge
of materials that may interfere with the POTW by developing spill prevention
plans. Facilities necessary to implement these plans shall be provided and
maintained at the owner's or industrial user's expense. Spill prevention plans,
including the facilities and the operating procedures, shall be approved by the
district before construction of the facility.
      2.   Industrial users that store hazardous substances shall not
contribute to the POTW after the effective date hereof, unless a spill
prevention plan has been approved by the district. Approval of such plans shall
not relieve the industrial user from complying with all other laws and
regulations governing the use, storage and transportation of hazardous
substances.
   F.   Notification:
      1.   In the case of any discharge in violation of this chapter or permit
conditions, the industrial user shall immediately notify the district of the
discharge by telephone. The notification shall include:
         a.   The date, time, location and duration of the discharge;
         b.   The type of waste, including concentration and volume; and
         c.   Any corrective actions taken by the user.
      2.   Within five (5) days following such a discharge, the user shall
submit a written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures
that will be taken by the user to prevent similar future discharges.
      3.   Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss,
damage or other liability resulting from the discharge, nor shall such
notification relieve the user of any fines, civil penalties or other liability
that may be imposed under this chapter or other applicable state or federal
law.
   G.   Employee Training: The industrial user shall permanently post a notice
in a prominent place advising all employees to call the district, attention
pretreatment coordinator, plant manager or shift foreman in the event of a
dangerous discharge for which notification is required. Employers shall advise
all employees who may cause or be injured by such a discharge of the emergency
notification procedure.
   H.   Records:
      1.   Users shall retain and make available upon request of authorized
representatives of the district, the state or the EPA all records required to
be collected by the user pursuant to this chapter or any permit or order issued
pursuant to this chapter.
      2.   These records shall remain available for a period of at least five
(5) years after their collection.
      3.   This period shall be extended during any litigation concerning
compliance with this chapter or permit conditions.
   I.   Analytical Requirements: All analyses, including sampling techniques,
submitted in support of any application reports, evidence or required by any
permit or order, shall be performed in accordance with the techniques
prescribed in 40 CFR part 136, and amendments thereto, or, if 40 CFR part 136
does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in
question, in accordance with procedures approved by the EPA.
   J.   Costs And Expenses Borne By User: Any costs incident to any inspection,
sampling or analysis required in this article shall be borne by the user.
   K.   Confidential Information:
      1.   Information and data (other than effluent data) about a user
obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and
monitoring programs, and from inspections, shall be available to the public
unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the district that the release of such information would divulge
information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets of the user. Any such request must be asserted at the time of
submission of the information or data. Effluent data shall be available to the
public without restriction.
      2.   When the person furnishing a report satisfies the district that such
person has made the demonstration required by subsection K1 of this section,
the portions of a report that might disclose trade secrets or secret processes
shall not be made available for inspection, except upon written request by the
state or EPA, for uses related to this chapter. Confidential portions of a
report shall be available for use by the state or EPA in judicial review or
enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Effluent
data will not be recognized as confidential information.
   L.   Right Of Entry: Representatives of the district, the state and the EPA,
upon showing proper identification, shall have the right to enter and inspect
the premises of any user who may be subject to the requirements of this
chapter. Industrial users required to obtain wastewater contribution permits
shall allow authorized representatives of the district, state and EPA access to
all premises for the purpose of inspecting, sampling, examining records or
copying records in the performance of their duties. Authorized representatives
of the district, state and EPA shall have the right to place on the user's
property such devises as are necessary to conduct sampling and monitoring.
Where a user has security or safety measures in force that would require
clearance, training or wearing off special protective gear, the user shall make
necessary arrangements, at its own expense, to enable authorized
representatives of the district, state and EPA to enter and inspect the
premises as guaranteed by this subsection. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993)
7-2B-2: WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT APPLICATION:
   A.   Requirements To Apply For A Permit:
      1.   The following industrial users are required to apply for a
wastewater contribution permit:
         a.   Any significant industrial user;
         b.   Any user required by state pretreatment requirements to obtain a
permit;
         c.   Any user providing pretreatment; and
         d.   Any other user directed by the POTW to apply for a permit.
      2.   Existing users required to obtain a permit by subsection A of this
section must apply for a wastewater contribution permit within ninety (90) days
of the effective date hereof.
      3.   New sources required to obtain a permit by subsection A of this
section must apply for and receive a wastewater contribution permit prior to
discharging pollutants into the POTW.
      4.   Any user not required to obtain a permit for existing discharges
must apply for and receive a wastewater contribution permit prior to changing
the user's discharge in such a manner that the resulting discharge would
require a permit. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993)
   B.   Permit Application; Fee; Information Required:
      1.   Users required to apply for a wastewater contribution permit shall
complete and file with the district an application in the form prescribed by
the district and accompanied by a fee of in such amount as established by
resolution of the city council. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and
terms appropriate for evaluations, the following information:
         a.   Name, address and location (if different from the address);
         b.   SIC number according to the standard industrial classification
manual, issued by the executive office of the president, office of management
and budget, 1972;
         c.   Wastewater constituents and characteristics, including, but not
limited to, those mentioned in subsection 7-2B-1B of this article;
         d.   Time and duration of contribution;
         e.   Average daily, maximum daily and thirty (30) minute peak
wastewater flow rates in gallons per day, including daily, monthly and seasonal
variations if any;
         f.   Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, along
with details to show all sewers, sewer connections and appurtenances by the
size, location and elevation;
         g.   Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the
premises, including all materials that are or could be discharged;
         h.   The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration of any pollutants in the discharge that are limited by any
national categorical pretreatment standards or that are described in subsection
7-2B-1B of this article. Both daily maximum and average concentration shall be
reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations. Samples
should be taken immediately downstream of pretreatment facilities if such exist
or immediately downstream from the regulated process if no pretreatment exists.
If other wastewaters are mixed with wastewater regulated by a national
categorical pretreatment standard prior to pretreatment, the user should
measure the flows and concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined
waste stream formula in 40 CFR section 403.6(c) in order to evaluate compliance
with pretreatment standards;
         i.   The shortest schedule by which the user will provide additional
pretreatment or operation and maintenance if required to meet pretreatment
standards. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the
compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. In no
case shall the increments of progress in the schedule exceed nine (9) months;
         j.   Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes and
rate of production;
         k.   A listing of any toxic pollutant that the applicant uses or
manufactures as an intermediate or final product or byproduct.
         l.   Type and amount of raw materials processes (average and maximum
per day);
         m.   Number and type of employees, as well as hours of operation of
plant and proposed or actual hours of operation of pretreatment system;
         n.   Signature of an authorized representative of the user and
certified to by a qualified professional indicating whether pretreatment
standards are being met on a consistent basis and if not, whether additional
operation and maintenance and additional pretreatment is required;
         o.   Any other information deemed by the district to be necessary to
evaluate the permit application. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993)
7-2B-3: WASTEWATER CONTRIBUTION PERMIT REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Permit Required: Within one hundred eighty (180) days of the effective
date hereof, it shall be unlawful for a user subject to a national categorical
pretreatment standard or other significant industrial user or any other user
directed to apply for a permit by the district to discharge wastewater into the
POTW except in accordance with the terms and conditions of a wastewater
contribution permit.
   B.   Permit Contents: Permits may contain the following:
      1.   Requirements to pay fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the
POTW;
      2.   Effluent limitations on the average and maximum wastewater
constituents and characteristics;
      3.   Limitations on the average and maximum rate and time of discharge or
requirements for flow regulation and equalization;
      4.   Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities;
      5.   Requirements and specifications for monitoring programs, including
sampling locations, frequency of sampling number, types and standards for tests
and reporting schedule;
      6.   Compliance schedules, which may not extend compliance date beyond
applicable federal deadlines;
      7.   Requirements for submission of technical reports, discharge reports
or certification statements. These include any reporting requirements contained
in a national categorical standard or pretreatment requirement;
      8.   Requirements for collecting/retaining and providing access to plant
records relating to the user's discharge;
      9.   Requirements for notification of any new introduction of wastewater
constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the
wastewater treatment system;
      10.   Requirements for notification of spills, slug loadings or
violations;
      11.   Requirements for installation, operation and maintenance of
pollution control equipment;
      12.   Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the district to ensure
compliance with this chapter, state and federal pretreatment standards and
requirements;
      13.   Statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation
of permit conditions and requirements.
   C.   Basis For Effluent Limitations: Effluent limitations shall be based
upon the more stringent of the following:
      1.   National categorical pretreatment standards;
      2.   State pretreatment requirements; or
      3.   Local limitations calculated by mass balance or other valid
scientific method necessary to protect the POTW from materials described in
subsection 7-2B-1B of this article.
   D.   Baseline Monitoring Reports (BMRs), Ninety Day Reports And Periodic
Compliance Reports (PCRs): Any user subject to a national categorical
pretreatment standard shall submit to the district a baseline monitoring
report, a ninety (90) day report and semiannual reports that meet federal
pretreatment requirements at 40 CFR 403.12, or any revision thereto, indicating
the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge. Any significant
industrial user or other user required to have a permit shall submit to the
district semiannual reports indicating the nature and concentration of
pollutants in the discharge. The specific standards or the POTW itself may
require this report to be filled more frequently. In addition, this report
shall include a report of all daily flows, which during the reporting period,
exceeded the average daily flow in the permit.
   E.   Duration Of Permits: Permits shall be issued for a specified time
period, not to exceed five (5) years. The user shall apply for permit
reissuance at least one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of
the user's existing permit.
   F.   Permit Modifications:
      1.   Within nine (9) months of the promulgation of a national categorical
pretreatment standard or pretreatment requirement, or such shorter time as
specified within the standard or requirement, the wastewater contribution
permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require
compliance with such standard within the time prescribed by such standard. The
user shall reapply for a wastewater contribution permit within one hundred
eighty (180) days after the promulgation of the pretreatment standard.
      2.   A user must reapply for a permit; a) whenever the mass loading of
pollutants contained in the permitted discharge exceeds the average daily
quantity applied for by greater than ten percent (10%); and/or b) prior to any
new introduction of pollutants or any substantial change in the volume or
character of pollutants introduced into the PDTW.
      3.   A user may reapply for a wastewater contribution permit whenever the
user believes that some of the permit requirements no longer apply.
   G.   Permit Transfer: Wastewater contribution permits are issued to a
specific user for a specific process or operation. A wastewater contribution
permit shall not be reassigned or transferred or sold to a new owner, new user,
different premises, or a new or changed operation without the approval of the
district.
   H.   Monitoring:
      1.   Users shall provide and maintain in safe and proper condition, at
their own expense and in accordance with all applicable construction
requirements, standards and specifications, facilities and equipment to allow
the authorized representatives of the city, district, EPA or the state to
inspect, sample or measure flows from wastewater subject to this chapter. This
may include the installation, at the user's expense, of sampling manholes.
      2.   There shall be ample room in or near such facilities to allow
accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis.
      3.   If locating such facilities on a user's property would be
impractical, the user may apply to the city for a right of way or for
permission to construct on public property.
   I.   Bypass:
      1.   Bypass Not Violating Applicable Pretreatment Standards Or
Requirements: An industrial user may allow any bypass to occur that does not
violate pretreatment standards or requirements, but only if it also is for
essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not
subject to subsections I2 and I3 of this section.
      2.   Notice:
         a.   If an industrial user knows in advance of the need for a bypass,
it shall submit prior notice to the POTW, if possible at least ten (10) days
before the date of the bypass.
         b.   An industrial user shall orally notify the district of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards or
requirements within twenty four (24) hours of becoming aware of the bypass. A
written submission shall also be provided within five (5) days of becoming
aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the
bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact times and
dates, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is
expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and
prevent reoccurrence of the bypass.
      3.   Prohibition Of Bypass:
         a.   Bypass is prohibited and the district may take enforcement action
against an industrial user for a bypass, unless: 1) bypass was unavoidable to
prevent loss of life, personal injury or severe property damage; 2) there were
no feasible alternatives to bypass, such as use of auxiliary treatment
facilities, retention of wastes or maintenance during normal periods of
equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup
equipment should have been installed to prevent bypass that occurred during
normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 3) the
industrial user submitted notices as required by subsection I2 of this section.
         b.   The POTW may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its
adverse effects, if the district determines that it will meet the three (3)
conditions listed in subsection I3a of this section. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993)
7-2B-4: FEES:
   A.   Charges And Fees:
      1.   The district may adopt charges and fees that may include:
         a.   Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the
district pretreatment program;
         b.   Fees for monitoring, inspection and surveillance procedures,
including the cost of reviewing monitoring reports submitted by the IU;
         c.   Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and
construction;
         d.   Fees for permit applications, including the cost of processing
such applications;
         e.   Fees for any hearings or for filing appeals;
         f.   Fees for consistent removal by the district of pollutants
otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards;
         g.   Other fees as the district may deem necessary to carry out the
requirements contained herein. These fees relate solely to the matters covered
by this chapter and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the
district. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993)
      2.   There shall be attached to the ordinance codified herein and on file
in the city office, as appendix C, a schedule setting forth a complete
description of the charges assessed by the district as provided herein, which
schedule may be amended from time to time by resolution. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-
1993; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Termination Of Service For Nonpayment: Should any user fail to pay any
service charges, surcharges, fees or sampling charges imposed by the district
in accordance with this chapter or the ordinances and regulations of the
district, within two (2) months of the due date, the district may disconnect
such user from the public sewer and may require the city to terminate both
culinary water service and wastewater service to the property as to which such
sewer service is provided. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993)
ARTICLE C.  REGULATIONS AND REQUIREMENTS GENERALLY
SECTION:
7-2C-1: Relationship Between City And District
7-2C-2: Use Of Public Sewers Required
7-2C-3: Private Wastewater Disposal
7-2C-4: Sanitary Sewers, Building Sewers And Connections
7-2C-5: Use Regulations Of Public Sewers
7-2C-6: Wastewater Treatment Service Charges
7-2C-1: RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN CITY AND DISTRICT:
   A.   Ownership Of Sewer Collector Lines; Sewage Treatment By District: In
most instances, the City owns the sewer lines and collectors to which sanitary
sewers are connected and the City discharges effluent from City lines and
collectors into sewer outfall lines owned by the district. The City and the
district have entered into a contractual agreement pursuant to which the
district serves as the POTW, treating all sewage collected in the City sewer
lines and collectors and discharged into the district outfall lines.
   B.   District To Charge For Services: The City will pay to the district, in
accordance with the terms of the contractual agreement between the parties, the
fees and charges imposed by the district for treatment of the sewage passing
from the City sewer lines and collectors into the district outfall lines. The
district shall charge directly industrial users for inspections, sampling,
permits and for industrial user surcharges and, at the request of the district,
the City will terminate water service to any industrial user not paying the
fees and charges billed by the district in accordance with its pretreatment
regulations, permit schedules, inspection schedules and surcharge schedules.
   C.   Authority To District Superintendent And Representatives: The City
hereby appoints and empowers the District Superintendent, his agent, deputy or
representative, as inspectors having authority to enter in and inspect all
properties, buildings and facilities discharging sewage into the City sewer
system for treatment by the district at the district facility.
   D.   Applicable To City And Users Who Contract With City: This chapter shall
apply to the City and to persons outside the City who, by contract or agreement
with the City, have connections to City sewer lines or facilities. (Ord. 5-28-
93, 5-28-1993)
7-2C-2: USE OF PUBLIC SEWERS REQUIRED:
   A.   Unlawful To Deposit Waste: It shall be unlawful for any person to
place, deposit or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or
private property within the City or in any area under the jurisdiction of the
City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or other objectionable waste. It
shall be unlawful to discharge sewage except into the sewage system or approved
individual disposal facility.
   B.   Unlawful To Discharge Sewage To Natural Outlets: It shall be unlawful
to discharge to any natural outlet within the City or in any area under the
jurisdiction of the City, any sewage or other polluted waters, except where
suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions
of this chapter.
   C.   Unlawful To Use Private Sewage Systems: Except as hereinafter provided,
it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy vault, septic tank,
cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
(Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993)
   D.   Required To Connect To City Sewer System: The owners of all houses,
buildings or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation or
other purposes situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley or
right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a
public sanitary sewer of the City are hereby required at the owner's expense to
install suitable toilet facilities therein and to connect such facilities
directly with the proper sewer in accordance with the provisions of this
chapter, within sixty (60) days after date of official notice to do so;
provided, that said public sewer is within three hundred feet (300') 1  of the
property line. (Ord. 01-02-2018A, 1-2-2018)
 
Notes
1 1. See also section
  7-1B-3 of this title.
7-2C-3: PRIVATE WASTEWATER DISPOSAL:
   A.   Use Of Private System: Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not
available under the provisions of subsection 7-2C-2D of this article, the
building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system
complying with the provisions of this article.
   B.   Permit Required: Before commencement of construction of a private
wastewater disposal system, the owners shall first obtain a written permit from
the Public Works Director and shall comply with all applicable requirements of
the Utah County Health Department. The application for such permit shall be
made on a form furnished by the City that the applicant shall supplement by any
plans, specifications and other information as are deemed necessary by the
Public Works Director. A permit and inspection fee of in such amount as
established by the City Council according to the City fee schedule shall be
paid to the City at the time the application is filed.
   C.   Inspection: A permit for a private wastewater disposal system shall not
become effective until the installation is completed to the satisfaction of the
Public Works Director. The Public Works Director shall be allowed to inspect
the work at any stage of construction, and, in any event, the applicant for the
permit shall notify the Public Works Director when the work is ready for final
inspection, and before any underground portions are covered. The inspection
shall be made within twenty four (24) hours of the receipt of notice by the
Public Works Director.
   D.   Private System Requirements: The type, capacities, location and layout
of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations
of the Utah County Health Department. No permit shall be issued for any private
wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities
where the area of the lot is less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. No
septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge into any natural
outlet.
   E.   Connect To City Sewer System: At such time as a public sewer becomes
available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as
provided in subsection 7-2C-2D of this article, a direct connection shall be
made to the public sewer within sixty (60) days in compliance with this
article, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private wastewater
disposal facilities steal be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable
material.
   F.   Maintain Private System: The owners shall operate and maintain the
private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times at no
expense to the City. Sludge shall be removed by a licensed operator and
disposed of as required by the Utah County Health Department and City
ordinances.
   G.   Other Requirements: No statement contained in this article shall be
construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by
the Health Officer. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
7-2C-4: SANITARY SEWERS, BUILDING SEWERS AND CONNECTIONS:
   A.   No Opening Of Public Sewer System: No unauthorized persons shall
uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any
public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit
from the Public Works Director.
   B.   Classes Of Permits, Application, Inspection: There shall be two (2)
classes of building sewer permits: 1) for residential and commercial service;
and 2) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either
case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a form furnished by the
City and, in the case of establishments producing industrial wastes, also shall
make application for a discharge permit to the district. The permit application
shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications or other information
considered pertinent in the judgment of the Public Works Director. A permit and
inspection fee in such amount as established by the City Council according to
the City fee schedule shall be paid to the City at the time the application is
filed, together with any permit and inspection fees required by the district.
   C.   Costs Borne By Owner: All cost and expense incidental to the
installation and connection off the building sewer shall be borne by the owner.
The owner shall indemnify the City from any loss or damage that may directly or
indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer.
   D.   Separate Sewers Required: A separate and independent building sewer
shall be provided for every building, except where one building stands at the
rear of another of an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be
constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard or
driveway. The building sewer from the front building may be extended to the
rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does
not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by
or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned.
   E.   Use Of Existing Sewers In New Construction: Old building sewers may be
used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, upon
examination and test by the public works director, to meet all requirements of
this chapter.
   F.   Requirements For Construction: The size, slope, alignment and materials
of construction of all sanitary sewers, including building sewers, and the
methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, joining, testing and
backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building
and plumbing codes, or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In
the absence of suitable code provisions or in amplification thereof, the
materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM
and WPCF manual of practice no. 9 shall apply.
   G.   Elevation: Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to
the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in
which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer,
sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved
means and discharged to the building sewer.
   H.   No Connection Of Surface Water Collection Systems: No person shall make
connection off roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains or other
sources of surface runoff or ground water to a building sewer or building drain
that in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer
unless such connection is approved by the public works director for purposes of
disposal of polluted surface drainage.
   I.   Construction Requirements: The connection of the building sewer into
the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing
codes or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedures
set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF manual of
practice no. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and
verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and
materials must be approved by the public works director before installation.
   J.   Inspection: The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify
the public works director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and
connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under
the supervision of the public works director or his representative.
   K.   Safety, Excavation On City Property: All excavations for building sewer
installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to
protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public
property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner
satisfactory to the city. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
7-2C-5: USE REGULATIONS OF PUBLIC SEWERS:
   A.   No Discharge Of Surface Waters: No person shall discharge or cause to
be discharged any unpolluted waters such as storm water, surface water, ground
water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage or cooling water to any sewer, except
storm water runoff from limited areas, which storm water may be polluted at
times, may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the public
works director.
   B.   Discharge To Storm Sewers: Storm water, other than that exempted under
subsection A of this section, and all other unpolluted drainage shall be
discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to
a natural outlet approved by the public works director and other regulatory
agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be
discharged, on approval of the public works director, to a storm sewer or
natural outlet.
   C.   Substances Unacceptable For Discharge: Subsection 7-2B-1B of this
chapter shall control substances and wastes that may be discharged into the
city sewer system and no person shall discharge into the city sewer system any
prohibited substances or wastes.
   D.   Grease, Oil And Sand Interceptors: Grease, oil and sand interceptors
shall be provided when, in the opinion of the public works director or district
superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes
containing floatable grease in excessive amounts, or any flammable wastes, sand
or other harmful ingredients; except interceptors shall not be required for
private living quarters or dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type
and capacity approved by the district superintendent and the public works
director, and shall be located as to be readily and easily accessible for
cleaning and inspection in locations approved in advance by the district
superintendent. In the maintaining of these interceptors, the owner shall be
responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of the
captivated material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of
disposal, which are subject to review by the public works director or the
district superintendent. Any removal and hauling of the collected materials not
performed by the owner's personnel must be performed by currently licensed
waste disposal firms.
   E.   Right To Reject Discharges:
      1.   If any waters or wastes are discharged, or are proposed to be
discharged, to the city sewer system, which water contains the substances or
possesses the characteristics enumerated in subsection 9-2B-1B of this article
and which in the judgment of either the public works director or the district
superintendent may have a deleterious effect upon the wastewater facilities,
processes equipment or receiving waters, or which otherwise create a hazard to
life or constitutes a public nuisance, either the district superintendent or
the public works director may:
         a.   Reject the wastes;
         b.   Require pretreatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to
the public sewers;
         c.   Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and/
or
         d.   Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating
the wastes not covered by existing sewer charges.
      2.   In no event can the public works director authorize acceptance of
water or wastes that the district superintendent rejects.
   F.   Property Serviced By Building Sewer Carrying Industrial Waste: When
required by the district sewer superintendent, the owner of any property
serviced by a building sewer carrying industrial waste shall install a suitable
structure, together with such necessary meters and other appurtenances in the
building sewer, to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement of the
wastes. Such structure, when required, shall be accessibly and safely located,
and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the
superintendent. The structure shall be installed by the owner at his expense
and shall be maintained by him so as to be safe and accessible at all times.
   G.   Required Information To Be Provided: The public works director or the
district superintendent may require a user of sewer services to provide
information needed to determine compliance with this chapter. These
requirements my include:
      1.   Wastewaters discharge peak rate and volume over a specified time
period.
      2.   Chemical analysis of wastewaters.
      3.   Information on raw materials, processes and products effecting
wastewater volume and quality.
      4.   Quantity and disposition of specific liquid, sludge, oil, solvent or
other materials important to sewer use control.
      5.   A plot plan of sewers of the user's property showing sewer and
pretreatment facility location.
      6.   Details of wastewater pretreatment facilities.
      7.   Details of systems to prevent and control the losses of materials
through spills to the city sewer.
   H.   Testing Methods: All measurements, tests and analysis of the
characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made in this chapter
shall be determined in accordance with the latest edition of "standard methods
for the examination of water and wastewater", published by the American public
health association. Sampling methods, location, times, durations and
frequencies are to be determined on an individual basis, subject to approval by
the district superintendent.
   I.   Costs And Expenses: Any costs incident to any inspection and sampling
provided in this article shall be borne by the user.
   J.   No Vandalism To City Sewer Facilities: No person shall maliciously,
wilfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface or tamper with
any structure, appurtenance or equipment that is a part of the city or district
wastewater facilities.
   K.   District May Accept Industrial Waste: No statement contained in this
article shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement
between the district and any industrial user whereby industrial waste of
unusual strength or character may be accepted by the district for treatment in
accordance with the industrial pretreatment provisions of article B of this
chapter.
   L.   Hearing Board:
      1.   A hearing board shall be appointed by the city council as needed for
arbitration of differences between the public works director and sewer users on
matters concerning interpretation and execution of the provisions of this
chapter by the public works director.
      2.   The hearing board shall consist of five (5) members that shall
include a registered professional engineer, a practicing sanitary engineer, a
representative of industry or manufacturing enterprise, a lawyer, and a member
selected at large for his or her interest in accomplishing the objectives of
this chapter.
      3.   The cost of arbitration will be divided equally between the city and
the user or applicant. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
7-2C-6: WASTEWATER TREATMENT SERVICE CHARGES:
   A.   Distribution Of Cost Of Operation Of City Sewer System: The costs of
operation and maintenance of the city sewer system shall be distributed to all
users of the wastewater system in proportion to each user's contribution to the
total loading of the treatment works. Factors such as strength (BOD and TSS),
volume, and delivery flow rate characteristics shall be considered and included
as the basis for the user's contribution to ensure a proportional distribution
of operation and maintenance costs to each user or user class.
   B.   Determining Total Annual Cost Of Operation And Maintenance: The city
shall determine the total annual costs of operation and maintenance of the
wastewater system that are necessary to maintain the capacity and performance,
during the service life of the collection system, for which such system was
designated and constructed. The total annual cost of operation and maintenance
shall include, but need not be limited to, labor, repairs, equipment
replacement, maintenance, necessary modifications, power, sampling, laboratory
tests, and a reasonable contingency fund. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993)
   C.   Determining Each User's Wastewater Contribution Percentage: The city
shall determine the average monthly sewer use for each connection, that, for
residential users, shall be based on the five (5) month water use from November
to March (the "winter months"), and for nonresidential users shall be based
upon the five (5) month water use or such other factors as the city shall
determine that shall reasonably reflect actual discharge into the city sewer
system. The city or the district shall determine each sewage strength of BOD
and TSS for those users who discharge sewage of greater strength than
residential strength.
   D.   Surcharge Above Normal Strength: The city or the district will
determine the TSS, BOD, COD and oil and grease daily loadings for the average
residential user or, in lieu of such determination, will consider the average
residential strength waste to be two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250
mg/l) BOD and two hundred fifty milligrams per liter (250 mg/l) TSS. The city
or the district will assess a surcharge rate for all nonresidential users
discharging waste with BOD, TSS, COD or oil and grease strengths greater than
the average residential user. The surcharge will be sufficient to cover the
cost of treating such above normal strength waste. The billing for such
surcharge will be issued directly by the district to such nonresidential users.
The amount of such surcharges will be as set forth in the rate schedule
attached to the ordinance codified herein as appendix A and on file in the city
office, as such rate schedule may be amended from time to time by resolution.
   E.   User Charge Rates: Fees shall be according to the city fee schedule.
The fee schedule shall divide users into the following classes and the charges
shall be based on the following factors:
      1.   Residential users are considered to be one class of users and are
assessed a fixed monthly charge plus a charge based upon one thousand (1,000)
gallons of water used per winter month (November through March).
      2.   Multiple-dwelling units, including motels, are to be considered one
class of users and are assessed a fixed monthly charge per unit plus a charge
based upon one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used per winter month
(November through March).
      3.   Commercial and industrial users are to be considered one class of
users and are assessed a fixed monthly charge per equivalent residential unit
(ERU) plus a charge based upon one thousand (1,000) gallons of water used per
winter month (November through March).
      4.   Other nonresidential users (e.g., schools and churches) are
considered one class of users and are assessed a fixed monthly charge per
equivalent residential unit (ERU) plus a charge based upon one thousand (1,000)
gallons of water used per winter month (November through March). (Ord. 9-20-
2011A, 9-20-2011)
   F.   Review Of Each User's Wastewater Service Charge: The city council shall
review the total annual cost of operation and maintenance, including the city's
payments to the district, and will revise the service charges as necessary to
assure equity of the service charge system established herein and to assure
that sufficient funds are obtained to adequately operate and maintain the
wastewater treatment works.
   G.   Notification: The user's wastewater service charge may be included in a
periodic (at least annually) wastewater utility bill or with the monthly water
utility bill. The city shall notify the user, in conjunction with a regular
bill, of the rate and that portion of the user charges that are attributable to
wastewater treatment services.
   H.   Interest And Disconnection Of Water Service:
      1.   If the payment for wastewater service is not received by the city,
the city shall charge past due utility charges in accordance with the
provisions of section
7-1A-4 of this title.
      2.   Should any user fail to pay any wastewater service charge provided
herein or fail to pay to the district any service charges, surcharges, fees or
sampling charges imposed by the district in accordance with this chapter or the
ordinances and regulations of the district, within two (2) months of the due
date, the city may terminate both culinary water service and wastewater service
to the property as to which such sewer service is provided. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-
28-1993)
ARTICLE D.  ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
7-2D-1: Powers And Authority Of Inspectors
7-2D-2: Enforcement
7-2D-3: Penalty
7-2D-1: POWERS AND AUTHORITY OF INSPECTORS:
   A.   Right Of Inspectors To Enter And Inspect: The public works director,
the district superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city and
district bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to
enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement,
sampling, testing and obtaining information pertinent to discharge to the city
sewer system in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
   B.   Inspectors Observe Safety Rules: While performing the necessary work on
private properties referred to in subsection A of this section, the public
works director, the district superintendent or duly authorized employees of the
city or district shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises
established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury
or death to city or district employees, and the city or district shall
indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by city or
district employees, and against liability claims and demands for personal
injury or property damages asserted against the company growing out of the
gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or
failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required by subsection 7-
2B-3H of this chapter.
   C.   Entry On Easements: The public works director, the district
superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city or district
bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all
private properties through which the city or district holds a duly negotiated
easement for the purposes of, but not limited to, inspection, observation,
measurement, sampling, repair and maintenance of any portion of the wastewater
facilities lying within said easement. All entry and subsequent work, if any,
on said easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the duly
negotiated easement pertaining to the private property involved. (Ord. 5-28-93,
5-28-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
7-2D-2: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Emergency Response Plan: The district may establish an emergency
response plan to provide a system for enforcement of this chapter. That plan
may include all of the remedies set forth in this section. The text of the plan
shall be attached to the ordinance codified herein as appendix D and on file in
the city office, which plan may be amended from time to time by resolution.
(Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Permit Suspension:
      1.   The POTW may suspend the wastewater treatment service or a
wastewater contribution permit or cut off the sewer connection when such
suspension or cutoff is necessary, in the opinion of the district, in order to
stop an actual or threatened discharge that:
         a.   Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the health or welfare of persons;
         b.   Presents or may present an imminent or substantial endangerment
to the environment;
         c.   May cause or actually causes interference to the POTW; or
         d.   Causes the district to violate any condition of its NPDES or
state discharge permit.
      2.   The district may reinstate the wastewater contribution permit or the
wastewater treatment service upon proof of the elimination of the noncomplying
discharge.
      3.   In the event of a suspension or cutoff under this section, within
fifteen (15) days, the user shall submit a written report describing the event
that caused the suspension and the measures taken to prevent any recurrence.
   C.   Revocation Of Permit: The district may revoke any wastewater
contribution permit if the district finds:
      1.   A user has falsified information or records submitted or retained in
accordance with this chapter or in connection with any permit issued pursuant
to this chapter;
      2.   A user has violated the conditions of a wastewater contribution
permit;
      3.   A user has refused right of entry guaranteed by subsection 7-2B-1L
of this chapter;
      4.   A user has failed to reapply for a permit or request a required
permit modification;
      5.   A user has discharged into the district in violation of this
chapter; or
      6.   Changed circumstances require a temporary or permanent reduction or
elimination of the permitted discharge.
   D.   Complaint:
      1.   Issuance: The district may issue a written complaint if there are
reasonable grounds to believe that the person whom the complaint is directed
has violated:
         a.   This chapter;
         b.   Any rule or regulation adopted under this chapter; or
         c.   Any order or permit issued under this chapter.
      2.   Contents: A complaint issued under this section shall:
         a.   Specify the provision that allegedly has been violated; and
         b.   State the alleged facts that constitute the violation.
   E.   Issuance Of Notice Or Order:
      1.   In General: After or concurrently with service of a complaint under
this chapter, the district may:
         a.   Issue an order that requires the person to whom the order is
directed to take corrective action within a time set in the order;
         b.   Send a written notice that requires the person to whom the notice
is directed to file a written report about the alleged violation; or
         c.   Send a written notice that requires the person to whom the notice
is directed:
            (1)   To appeal at a hearing at a time and place scheduled in order
to answer the charges in the complaint; or
            (2)   To file a written report and also appear at a hearing at a
time and place set to answer the charges in the complaint.
      2.   Effective Date Of Order: Any order issued under this chapter is
effective immediately, according to its terms, when it is served.
   F.   Hearings:
      1.   Hearing On Order: Within ten (10) days after being served with an
order, the person served may request a hearing by writing to the district,
attention plant manager.
      2.   Subpoenas; Witnesses:
         a.   In connection with any hearing under this subsection, the
district may:
            (1)   Subpoena any person or evidence; and
            (2)   Order a witness to give evidence.
         b.   A subpoenaed witness shall receive the same fees and mileage
reimbursement as if the hearing were part of a civil action.
   G.   Final Corrective Orders:
      1.   Orders:
         a.   Unless the person served with an order makes a timely request for
a hearing, the order is a final order.
         b.   If the person with an order under this chapter makes a timely
request for a hearing, the order becomes a final corrective order when the
district renders its decision following the hearing.
      2.   Other Action Permitted: This section does not prevent the district
or the attorney general from taking action against a violator before the
expiration of the time limitations or schedules in the order.
   H.   Injunctive Relief:
      1.   In General: The district may bring an action for an injunction
against any person who violates any provision of this chapter or any rule,
regulation, order or permit adopted or issued under this chapter.
      2.   Findings: In any action for an injunction under this subsection, any
finding of the district after hearing is prima facie evidence of each fact the
district determines.
      3.   Grounds: Upon a showing that any person is violating or is about to
violate this chapter or any rule, regulation, order or permit adopted or issued
by the district, the court shall grant an injunction without requiring a
showing of a lack of an adequate remedy at law.
      4.   Emergency: If an emergency arises due to imminent danger to the
public health or welfare, or imminent danger to the environment, the district
may sue for an immediate injunction to stop any pollution or other activity
that is causing the danger.
   I.   Civil Penalties: In addition to being subject to an injunctive action
under this section, a person who violates any provision of this chapter or of
any rule, regulation, order or permit adopted or issued under this chapter is
liable for a civil penalty not exceeding twenty five thousand dollars
($25,000.00) per violation per day, to be collected in a civil action. (Ord. 5-
28-93, 5-28-1993)
   J.   Criminal Penalties:
      1.   Violating Ordinances, Rules, Regulations, Orders Or Permits:
         a.   A person who violates any provision of or fails to perform any
duty imposed by this chapter, or who violates any provision of or fails to
perform any duty imposed by a rule, regulation, order or permit adopted or
issued under such articles of this chapter, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor
and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, per violation per day.
         b.   In addition to any criminal penalties imposed on a person
convicted under this subjection, the person may be enjoined from continuing the
violations.
         c.   Each day on which a violation occurs is a separate violation
under this subsection.
      2.   False Statements In Required Documents: A person is guilty of a
class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in
section
1-4-1 of this code per violation per day if the person: (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-
1993; amd. 2004 Code)
         a.   Knowingly makes any false statement, representation or
certification in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed
or required to be maintained under this chapter, or any rule, regulation, order
or permit adopted or issued under this chapter; or
         b.   Falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any
monitoring device or method required to be maintained under this chapter, or
any rule, regulation, order or permit adopted or issued under this chapter.
(Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993)
7-2D-3: PENALTY:
   A.   Corrective Action Required: Any person found to be violating any
provision of this chapter shall be served by the city with a written notice
stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for
the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of
time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-
28-1993)
   B.   Misdemeanor: Any person who shall continue any violation beyond the
time limit provided for in this title relating to utility services, shall be
guilty of a class B misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be subject
to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day in which any such violation shall continue shall
be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Liability For Damages: Any person violating any of the provisions of
this chapter shall become liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage
occasioned the city by reason of such violation. (Ord. 5-28-93, 5-28-1993)
CHAPTER 3
STORM SEWER UTILITY
SECTION:
7-3-1: Findings
7-3-2: Purpose
7-3-3: Definitions
7-3-4: Storm Sewer Utility
7-3-5: Storm Sewer Utility Fee
7-3-6: Billing
7-3-1: FINDINGS:
The city council makes the following findings regarding stormwater runoff and
the city storm sewer system:
   A.   The city's existing storm sewer system consists of a network of manmade
and natural facilities, structures and conduits, including groundwater and
aquifers, that collect and route stormwater runoff.
   B.   The city's existing storm sewer system does not adequately handle the
stormwater runoff generated in the city.
   C.   The city's anticipated growth will place increased demands on the
already inadequate storm sewer system.
   D.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater runoff causes
erosion, property damage and unsafe conditions.
   E.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater runoff may hinder
the city's ability to provide emergency services to its residents.
   F.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater runoff impedes the
regular flow of traffic in the city.
   G.   Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled stormwater runoff may pose
health hazards to the citizens of the community.
   H.   All developed properties in the city contribute to the need for the
storm sewer system by converting natural ground cover into impervious surfaces.
   I.   All developed properties in the city make use of or benefit from the
city's operation and maintenance of the storm sewer system.
   J.   Absent effective maintenance, operation, regulation and control,
existing stormwater drainage conditions in the city constitute a potential
hazard to the health, safety and general welfare of the city, its residents,
and its businesses.
   K.   A storm sewer utility is the most equitable and efficient method of
managing stormwater in the city and ensuring that each property in the city
pays its fair share of the amount that the property contributes to, benefits
from, and otherwise uses the storm sewer system. (Ord. 10-6-98A, 10-6-1998)
7-3-2: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to protect the health, safety and general
welfare of the city and its inhabitants by improving the city's storm sewer
system, managing and controlling stormwater runoff, protecting property,
preventing polluted waters from entering the city water supply and other
receiving waters, and establishing a viable and fair method of financing the
construction, operation and maintenance of the storm sewer system. (Ord. 10-6-
98A, 10-6-1998)
7-3-3: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:
DEVELOPED PARCEL: Any parcel that has been altered from its natural condition
by grading, filling or the construction of improvements or other impervious
surfaces.
EQUIVALENT RESIDENTIAL UNIT (ERU): The average amount of impervious surface,
expressed in square feet, on developed single-family residential parcels in the
City of Cedar Hills.
IMPERVIOUS SURFACE: Any hard surface, other than the natural surface, that
prevents or retards the absorption of water into the soil, or that causes water
to run off the surface in greater quantities or at a greater rate of flow than
the natural surface. (Ord. 10-6-98A, 10-6-1998; amd. Ord. 9-20-2011A, 9-20-
2011)
7-3-4: STORM SEWER UTILITY:
   A.   Creation: The city council hereby creates and establishes a storm sewer
utility as part of the city's overall sewer system. The storm sewer utility
shall plan, design, construct, maintain, administer and operate the city storm
sewer system.
   B.   Enterprise Fund: The city council hereby establishes and adds a storm
sewer utility enterprise to the water/sewer enterprise fund to handle all
income, expenses and other financial transactions related to the storm sewer
utility. All storm sewer utility service charges shall be deposited in the
enterprise fund. The enterprise fund shall be operated according to state law
and city policy.
   C.   Facilities And Assets: The storm sewer utility shall operate
independently of city operations funded by the general fund. The storm sewer
utility shall have the same relationship to the city as the other city
utilities, such as the water utility and the sanitary sewer (wastewater)
utility. Upon creation of the utility, all of the city storm sewer facilities
and assets (other than streets and other facilities and assets designated by
the city), shall be transferred to the storm sewer utility in consideration for
the storm sewer utility's agreement to take primary responsibility for
planning, designing, constructing, maintaining, administering and operating the
city storm sewer system. (Ord. 10-6-98A, 10-6-1998)
   D.   Administration: The storm sewer utility shall be administered by and
under the direction of the public works director. (Ord. 10-6-98A, 10-6-1998;
amd. 2004 Code)
7-3-5: STORM SEWER UTILITY FEE:
   A.   Imposed: Each developed parcel of real property in the city shall be
charged a monthly storm sewer utility fee. (Ord. 10-6-98A, 10-6-1998; amd. 2004
Code)
   B.   Equivalent Residential Unit (ERU): The storm sewer utility fee shall be
based on the number of ERUs contained on the parcel. The city council finds
that the ERU is the most accurate measurement for determining the amount that
each parcel contributes to, benefits from, and otherwise uses the storm sewer
utility. Based upon a random survey of approximately one hundred (100) building
permits for single-family residential homes in the city, the city council finds
and establishes that one ERU equals two thousand nine hundred (2,900) square
feet of impervious surface area.
   C.   Calculation: The city council finds that each single-family residential
parcel contributes approximately the same amount of stormwater runoff;
therefore, each developed single-family residential parcel shall pay a base
rate of one ERU. All nonsingle-family residential parcels shall pay a multiple
of this base rate, expressed in ERUs according to the measured impervious area
on the parcel. The city council may adopt separate rates for planned
residential developments (PRDs), condominiums and other uses that are not
easily handled under the standard rate schedule.
   D.   Charge Per ERU: The amount charged for each ERU shall be established by
resolution of the city council according to the city fee schedule. (Ord. 9-20-
2011A, 9-20-2011)
   E.   Exemptions And Credits: The city council may establish exemptions and
credits to the storm sewer utility fee by resolution.
   F.   Policies: The public works director may adopt policies, consistent with
this chapter and any resolutions passed by the city council, to assist in the
application, administration and interpretation of this chapter and any
resolutions related to the storm sewer utility. (Ord. 10-6-98A, 10-6-1998; amd.
2004 Code)
   G.   Appeals:
      1.   Any person or entity that believes that this chapter, or any storm
sewer utility rate resolution, was interpreted or applied erroneously, may
appeal to the city manager. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state any
facts supporting the appeal, and shall be submitted to the city manager within
three (3) months of the decision, action or bill being appealed. (Ord. 9-20-
2011A, 9-20-2011)
      2.   The city manager may elect to hold a hearing on the appeal.
      3.   The city manager shall decide and issue a written memorandum
decision on the appeal within fifteen (15) working days of when the appeal is
filed, unless a hearing is held, in which case the decision shall be issued
within ten (10) working days after the date of said hearing, or within fifteen
(15) working days of when the appeal is filed, whichever is later. The
memorandum of decision shall include the reasons or grounds for the decision.
      4.   If the person or entity is not satisfied with the city manager's
decision, a further appeal may be made to the city council. The appeal to the
city council shall be made in writing, shall include a copy of the original
appeal filed with the city and the city manager's memorandum of decision
thereon, and shall be filed with the city recorder within ten (10) days after
the date of said memorandum of decision. The city council shall hear the appeal
at the next regularly scheduled council meeting, in accordance with the
applicable noticing provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 52-4-1 et seq.
The city council's decision on the appeal shall be final and binding on all
parties. (Ord. 10-6-98A, 10-6-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
7-3-6: BILLING:
The city council finds that the city storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system,
culinary water system, secondary water system, and solid waste collection
system are interrelated services that are part of a unified city plan to
provide for the health, safety and general welfare of the city and its
residents in an environmentally responsible manner. Therefore, the storm sewer
utility fee shall be included on the city's regular monthly utility bill for
any given property. All properties shall be charged the fee. Failure to pay any
portion of the utility bill may result in termination of water service, in
addition to any other legal or equitable remedies that may be available to the
city to enforce this chapter. (Ord. 9-20-2011A, 9-20-2011)
ARTICLE A.  STORM DRAINAGE
SECTION:
7-3A-1: Definitions
7-3A-2: Obstructions
7-3A-3: Dumping
7-3A-4: Penalty
7-3A-1: DEFINITIONS:
For the purpose of this article, the following terms, phrases, words and their
derivations shall have the meaning given herein:
CATCH BASIN: A basin combined with a storm drain inlet to trap solids.
DEBRIS: Any dirt, rock, sand, tree, litter or other rubbish, etc.
DETENTION BASIN: A temporary storage facility for excess storm runoff, designed
with an inlet and outlet, for the purpose of: a) attenuating and detaining
excess storm runoff; and b) regulating the flow of such excess storm runoff so
as to reduce storm water related damage downstream; and c) enhancing the water
quality of such excess storm runoff by providing filtration, sedimentation and
oil removing apparatus.
DRAIN INLET: A point of entry into a sump, detention basin, retention basin or
storm drain system.
RETENTION BASIN: A temporary storage facility for excess storm runoff, designed
with an inlet only and with the intent of containing excess storm drainage and
allowing excess drainage to either evaporate or percolate.
STORM DRAIN: A conduit for conducting storm water that has been collected by
inlets or collected by other means.
STORM WATER: Precipitation such as rain, snow, hail or other natural
occurrence.
STORM WATER RUNOFF: Any runoff other than storm water.
SUMP: A formalized structure underground, surrounded by drain rock, that acts
as a detention basin to allow the slow release of water into the surrounding
subsoil. Sumps usually receive storm water runoff from paved areas such as
streets, parking lots, building roofs, etc. (Ord. 10-6-98A, 10-6-1998)
7-3A-2: OBSTRUCTIONS:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to obstruct or contribute to the
obstruction of the flow of storm water runoff or nonstorm water runoff into any
sump, detention basin, storm drain, curb and gutter, drain inlet, or other
associated structural controls that convey storm water and/or nonstorm water
runoff.
   B.   It is unlawful for any person to cause any obstruction that inhibits
the normal flow of storm water and/or nonstorm water runoff in any curb and
gutter, unless the obstruction is associated with a street and/or storm
drainage improvement project and is authorized by the city engineer or his
appointee and granted with the issuance of a permit signed by the city engineer
or his appointee.
   C.   It is unlawful for any person to cover over any drain inlet for any
reason or purpose. (Ord. 10-6-98A, 10-6-1998)
7-3A-3: DUMPING:
   A.   It is unlawful for any person to dump, or allow to be dumped, into any
sump, detention basin, storm drain, curb and gutter, drain inlet, or other
storm drainage structure that conveys storm water and/or nonstorm water, any
type of debris, petroleum product, chemical, paint, pesticide, herbicide, heavy
metal, acid or base product, solid or liquid waste product, hazardous waste
product, and/or human or animal waste.
   B.   The restrictions set forth in subsection A of this section shall not
apply to the normal runoff of nonstorm water related to domestic home uses
(e.g., lawn watering, washing cars, etc.). (Ord. 10-6-98A, 10-6-1998)
7-3A-4: PENALTY:
   A.   The violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be a class
C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a
separate offense. (Ord. 10-6-98A, 10-6-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   If, as a result of the violation of any provision of this article, the
city or any other party suffers damages and is required to make repairs and/or
replace any materials, the cost of repair or replacement shall be borne by the
party in violation, in addition to any criminal fines and/or penalties provided
herein. (Ord. 10-6-98A, 10-6-1998)
CHAPTER 4
LANDSCAPE WATERING SCHEDULE
SECTION:
7-4-1: Definitions
7-4-2: Irrigation Regulations
7-4-3: Penalty
7-4-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
MAJOR WATER USERS: Municipalities, schools, churches and commercial or
industrial type businesses.
PRIVATE LANDSCAPE: A parcel of land owned by a private entity upon which grass
and plants require irrigation.
PUBLIC LANDSCAPE: A parcel of land owned by public entities upon which grass
and plants require irrigation.
SPRINKLER IRRIGATION: The application of water to land and plants by
distributing water under pressure through spray or rotary heads. (Ord. 7-9-
2002A, 7-9-2002; amd. 2004 Code)
7-4-2: IRRIGATION REGULATIONS:
As a conservation method, public and private landscapes may be required to
water according to a city prescribed schedule approved by the city council.
Schools, churches, homeowners' associations, parks, and golf courses must have
a watering schedule approved by the city. The provisions of this chapter shall
apply to all landscapes within the city, with the following exceptions:
   A.   New lawns that require frequent irrigation for establishment purposes
within thirty (30) days of planting.
   B.   Short cycles required for testing, inspecting and maintaining
irrigation systems, or attended hand spot watering.
   C.   Agricultural farming entities. (Ord. 8-19-2008A, 8-19-2008)
7-4-3: PENALTY:
Any public or private entity violating any of the provisions of this chapter
shall receive a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as
provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 7-9-2002A, 7-9-2002; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 5
CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL
SECTION:
7-5-1: Purpose
7-5-2: Definitions
7-5-3: Responsibility
7-5-4: Requirements
7-5-1: PURPOSE:
The purpose of this chapter is to:
   A.   Protect the public drinking water supply of the city from the
possibility of contamination or pollution by requiring compliance with the
state rules for public drinking water systems and the adopted codes that
require a cross connection control protection of all public drinking water
systems in the state. Compliance with these minimum safety codes will be
considered reasonable diligence for the prevention of contaminants or
pollutants that could backflow into the public drinking water system; and (Ord.
6-17-2003B, 6-17-2003; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Promote the reasonable elimination or control of cross connections in
the plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems of the consumer, as
required by the state and plumbing regulations to assure water system safety;
and
   C.   Provide for the administration of a continuing program of backflow
prevention that will systematically examine risk and effectively prevent the
contamination or pollution of the drinking water system. (Ord. 6-17-2003B, 6-
17-2003)
7-5-2: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
APPROVED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY: An assembly accepted by the Utah state department
of environmental quality, division of drinking water, as meeting an applicable
specification or as suitable for the proposed use.
AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other
than the purveyor's public water supply will be considered as an auxiliary
water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's
public potable water supply or any natural source, such as a well, spring,
river, stream, etc., or "used waters" or "industrial fluids". These waters may
be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an
unacceptable water source over which the public works director does not have
authority for sanitary control.
BACK PRESSURE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances from
a region of high pressure to a region of low pressure into the water
distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other than
the intended source.
BACK SIPHONAGE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
under vacuum conditions into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply
system from any source other than the intended source, caused by the reduction
of pressure in the potable water system.
BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back
pressure or back siphonage.
BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An assembly or means designated to prevent
backflow. Specifications for backflow prevention assemblies are contained
within the adopted codes, and in the cross connection control program for Utah
maintained by the division of drinking water.
CONTAMINATION: A degradation of the quality of the potable water supply by
sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials that
may create a health hazard.
CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures
that may allow nonpotable water or industrial fluids or other material of
questionable quality to come into contact with potable water inside a water
distribution system. This would include temporary conditions, such as swing
connections, removable sections, four-way plug valves, spools, dummy sections
of pipe, swivel or changeover devices or sliding multiport tubes or other
plumbing arrangements.
CROSS CONNECTION, CONTAINED: The installation of an approved backflow assembly
at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is
physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or
control all actual or potential cross connections within the customer's water
distribution system; or, it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow
prevention assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a
customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross connections
that cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross
connection (isolation).
CROSS CONNECTION, CONTROLLED: A connection between a potable water system and a
nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly
installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection
commensurate with the degree of hazard.
PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The person designated to be in charge of the water
department of the city, is vested with the authority and responsibility for the
implementation of an effective cross connection control program and for the
enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 6-17-2003B, 6-17-2003)
7-5-3: RESPONSIBILITY:
   A.   Public Works Director:
      1.   The city shall be responsible for the protection of the drinking
water distribution system from the foreseeable conditions leading to the
possible contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to the
backflow of contaminants or pollutants into the drinking water supply.
      2.   Drinking water system surveys/inspections of the consumer's water
distribution system shall be conducted or caused to be conducted by individuals
deemed qualified by the city. Survey records shall indicate compliance with
state regulations. All such records will be maintained by the city.
      3.   The city shall schedule and notify in writing all consumers with an
approved backflow prevention assembly of the need for the periodic system
survey to ensure compliance with existing applicable minimum health and safety
standards.
      4.   Selection of an approved backflow prevention assembly for
containment control required at the service entrance shall be determined from
the results of the system survey. (Ord. 5-5-2009A, 5-5-2009)
   B.   Consumer:
      1.   To comply with this chapter as a term and condition of water supply
and consumer's acceptance of service is admittance of his awareness of his
responsibilities as a water system user.
      2.   It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to purchase, install
and arrange testing and maintenance of any backflow prevention device/assembly
required to comply with this chapter. Failure to comply with this chapter shall
constitute grounds for discontinuation of service.
   C.   Chief Building Official:
      1.   The chief building official's responsibility to enforce the
applicable sections of the plumbing code begins at the point of service
(downstream or consumer side of the meter) and continues throughout the length
of the consumer's water system.
      2.   The chief building official will review all plans to ensure that
unprotected cross connections are not an integral part of the consumer's water
system. If a cross connection cannot be eliminated, it must be protected by the
installation of an air gap or an approved backflow prevention device/assembly,
in accordance with the adopted codes.
   D.   Certified Backflow Technician, Public Works Technician Or Repair
Person: Whether employed by the consumer or a utility to survey, test, repair
or maintain backflow prevention assemblies, the certified backflow technician,
public works technician, or repair person will have the following
responsibilities:
      1.   Ensuring that acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used
for testing, repairing or overhauling backflow prevention assemblies.
      2.   Making reports of such testing and/or repairs to the consumer and
the public works director on forms approved for such use by the public works
director within time frames as described by the division of drinking water.
      3.   Including the list of materials or replacement parts being used on
the reports.
      4.   Ensuring that replacement parts are equal in quality to parts
originally supplied by the manufacturer of the assembly being repaired.
      5.   Not changing the design, material or operational characteristics of
the assembly during testing, repair or maintenance.
      6.   Performing all tests of the mechanical devices/assemblies, and shall
be responsible for the competence and accuracy of all tests and reports.
      7.   Ensuring that his license is current, the testing equipment being
used is acceptable to the state and is in proper operating condition.
      8.   Being equipped with, and competent to use, all necessary tools,
gauges and other equipment necessary to properly test, and maintain backflow
prevention assemblies.
      9.   Tagging each double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced
pressure backflow assembly and high hazard air gap, showing the serial number,
date and by whom. The certified technician's license number must also be on the
tag.
   E.   Repair Of Backflow Assemblies: In the case of a consumer requiring an
assembly to be tested, any currently certified backflow technician is
authorized to make the test and report the results to the consumer and the
public works director. If any commercially tested assembly is in need of
repair, the construction trade license act, Utah Code Annotated section 58-55-
301, requires a licensed plumber to make actual repairs on any assembly within
a building. (Ord. 6-17-2003B, 6-17-2003)
7-5-4: REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Policy:
      1.   No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or
maintained by the public works director unless the water supply is protected as
required by state laws, regulations, codes and this chapter. Service of water
to a consumer found to be in violation of this chapter shall be discontinued by
the public works director after due process of written notification of
violation and an appropriate time suspense for voluntary compliance, if:
         a.   A backflow prevention assembly required by this chapter for the
control of backflow and cross connections is not installed, tested and
maintained, or
         b.   If it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been
removed or bypassed, or
         c.   If an unprotected cross connection exist on the premises, or
         d.   If the periodic system survey has not been conducted.
Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
      2.   The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable
times to authorized representatives of the public works director to determine
whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including
violation of this chapter, exist and to audit the results of the required
survey (Utah administrative code section 8309-102-5).
      3.   Whenever the public works director deems a service connection's
water usage contributes a sufficient hazard to the water supply, an approved
backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on the service line of the
identified consumer's water system, at or near the property line or immediately
inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch
line leading off the service line.
      4.   The type of protective assembly required under subsection A3 of this
section, shall depend upon the degree of hazard that exists at the point of
cross connection (whether direct or indirect), applicable to local and state
requirements or resulting from the required survey.
      5.   All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies that do not
meet the requirements of this chapter but were approved assemblies for the
purposes described herein at the time of installation and that have been
properly maintained shall, except for the inspection and maintenance
requirements under subsection A6 of this section, be excluded from the
requirements of these rules so long as the public works director is assured
that they will satisfactorily protect the public water system. Whenever the
existing assembly is moved from the present location or, requires more than
minimum maintenance or, when the public works director finds that the operation
of this assembly constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by
an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting all local and state
requirements.
      6.   It shall be the responsibility of the consumer at any premises where
backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified surveys/
inspections, and operational test made at least once per year at the consumer's
expense. In those instances where the public works director deems the hazard to
be great, he may require certified surveys/inspections and tests at a more
frequent interval. It shall be the duty of the public works director to see
that these tests are made according to the standards set forth by the state
department of environmental quality, division of drinking water.
      7.   All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested within ten (10)
working days of initial installation.
      8.   No backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so as to create
a safety hazard. Example: Installed over an electrical panel, steam pipes,
boilers or ceiling level. (Ord. 6-17-2003B, 6-17-2003)
      9.   Backflow prevention assemblies shall not constitute separation of an
auxiliary water supply including secondary irrigation water to the public
culinary water system or consumer culinary water service lateral and shall thus
not be permitted or installed for such purpose. (Ord. 5-5-2009A, 5-5-2009)
   B.   Violations: If violations of this chapter exist or if there has not
been any corrective action taken by the consumer within ten (10) days of the
written notification of the deficiencies noted with the survey or test results,
then the public works director shall deny or immediately discontinue service to
the premises by providing a physical break in the service line until the
customer has corrected the condition in conformance with all state and local
regulations and statutes relating to plumbing, safe drinking water suppliers
and this chapter. (Ord. 6-17-2003B, 6-17-2003)
TITLE 8
BUILDING CODES AND CONSTRUCTION
CHAPTER 1
CODES ADOPTED AND REGULATIONS
SECTION:
8-1-1: Chief Building Official
8-1-2: Adoption Of Codes
8-1-3: Fees
8-1-4: Enforcement
8-1-5: Penalty
8-1-1: CHIEF BUILDING OFFICIAL:
   A.   Appointed: There is hereby created the position of chief building
official. The city manager, by and with the consent of the city council, may
appoint an individual to serve in the position of chief building official.
   B.   Powers And Duties: The chief building official shall have the following
duties and powers:
      1.   To review building permit applications for conformance with the
adopted codes and to refuse to issue such permits where plans do not comply.
Also, wherever violations occur, to consult with the city attorney and to issue
stop orders and citations and/or to give testimony, prepare exhibits, and
provide other data that may be needed in the enforcement of said codes.
      2.   To inspect residences where an application has been made for
building permits, as directed by the city council.
      3.   To perform such other duties as are from time to time assigned to
him by the city council or city manager. (Ord. 4-13-94A, 4-13-1994; amd. 2004
Code)
8-1-2: ADOPTION OF CODES:
Pursuant to the authorization set forth under Utah Code Annotated, as amended,
the city council does hereby adopt building, construction and fire codes as
mandated by the state. (Ord. 10-1-2002A, 10-1-2002)
8-1-3: FEES:
The amount of permit and inspection fees relating to the construction
activities covered by the codes adopted under section
8-1-2 of this chapter shall correspond with the amounts set forth in those
codes and as set forth by resolution. The assessment and collection thereof
shall be by the designated chief building official. (Ord. 2-3-98A, 2-3-1998;
amd. 2004 Code)
8-1-4: ENFORCEMENT:
   A.   Responsibility For Enforcement: The chief building official shall
enforce the provisions of this chapter and the codes adopted pursuant hereto.
   B.   Permits Required; Exceptions: It shall be unlawful for any person, firm
or corporation, or other entity, to commence or perform any work within the
city regulated or controlled by this chapter, or the codes adopted pursuant
hereto, except such minor work as is hereinafter excepted therefrom, without
first having applied to and been granted a permit to do so by the chief
building official or other authorized officer and paying, in advance, all
permit and inspection fees; provided, that permits shall not be required for
the following minor work activities:
      1.   Building Code: The incidental improvement of any existing structure
where the retail cost of the materials used is less than one hundred dollars
($100.00); provided, that this exemption shall not apply where the construction
or alteration results in an enlarged structure or includes modification of any
essential structural component (i.e., bearing wall, truss, footing, foundation)
of the building or structure.
      2.   Plumbing Code: Minor repairs to the existing system located within
the owner's property involving the clearance of stoppages, the repair of leaks
or the replacement of defective faucets, valves, P-traps and similar elements
of the system.
      3.   Electrical Code: Minor repair work such as repairing flush and snap
switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping bare
joints, repairing wiring for appliances and devices operating at less than
twenty five (25) volts, and all work done on the property of a city or public
utility company.
   C.   Plans And Specifications: No permit shall be issued for any work
regulated or controlled in any way by the provisions of this chapter unless the
application is accompanied by all plats, plans, drawings, specifications and
other information required by the various codes adopted hereby. (Ord. 4-13-94A,
4-13-1994; amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Recorded Plat Required: No building permit may be issued for any
structure not located in a recorded plat. Any building permit issued, whether
in error or through misrepresentation, shall be void, regardless of the date of
issuance. (Ord. 12-31-77B, 12-31-1977)
   E.   Related Regulations: All work done under any permit issued pursuant to
the chapter shall be in full compliance with the planning and zoning
regulations, water and sewer regulations, fire code, regulations pertaining to
streets and walks, and all other provisions of this code and all conditions of
approval of any subdivision or planned development.
   F.   Stop Order: Whenever any work is being done in violation of the
provisions of this chapter or of any code adopted hereby, or at variance with
the provisions of any permit issued for such work, the chief building official
may order all work on the job stopped until such violation or variance is
eliminated and any work or installation made in violation of such provisions
corrected. Such stop order, if oral, shall be followed by a written stop order
within one hour. Such written stop order may be served by the chief building
official or any police officer. It shall be unlawful for any person to do or
perform any work in violation of such stop order, except as may be necessary to
prevent injury or damage to persons or property. Any stop order may be revoked
by the chief building official, mayor or city council.
   G.   Interpretation: Whenever, in the codes adopted by this chapter, it is
provided that anything must be done to the approval or subject to the direction
of the chief building official, or any other officer of the city, such officer
shall have only the discretion of determining whether the rules and standards
established by ordinance or resolution of the city council have been complied
with; and no such provision shall be construed as giving any officer
discretionary powers as to what regulations or standards shall be, or power to
require conditions not prescribed by ordinance or resolution, or to enforce any
provisions in an arbitrary or discriminatory manner. (Ord. 4-13-94A, 4-13-1994)
8-1-5: PENALTY:
It shall be a class C misdemeanor for any violation of the provisions of this
chapter or codes adopted pursuant hereto; provided, that any person who
receives payment or anything of value for work done in violation of said
ordinance or codes shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor. Upon conviction,
the violator shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 4-13-94A, 4-13-1994; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL PLANNING
ARTICLE A.  CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
9-1A-1: Scope
9-1A-2: Appointments
9-1A-3: General Plan
9-1A-4: Zoning Regulations
9-1A-5: Subdivision Regulations
9-1A-6: Condominium Projects
9-1A-7: Enforcement Of Regulations
9-1A-1: SCOPE:
The city council shall have the following duties, powers and authorities
relating to the municipal planning function within the city. (Ord. 2-1-2000C,
2-1-2000)
9-1A-2: APPOINTMENTS:
   A.   Planning Commission: The number of members, terms of office, mode of
appointment and other details relating to the organization and procedure of the
commission shall be as set forth under the provisions of article B of this
chapter. The city council may also fix per diem compensation for members of the
planning commission based on necessary and reasonable expenses and meetings
actually attended.
   B.   Board Of Adjustment: The number of members, terms of office, and other
details relating to powers and duties of said board shall be as set forth under
the provisions of article C of this chapter. The city council may also fix per
diem compensation for members of the board of adjustment based on necessary and
reasonable expenses and meetings actually attended.
   C.   Zoning Administrator: The city council may appoint and fix compensation
for a zoning administrator. The powers and duties of said administrator shall
be as set forth under the provisions of article D of this chapter. (Ord. 4-1-
2008A, 4-1-2008)
9-1A-3: GENERAL PLAN:
The city council may adopt a general plan of the city or any part thereof.
   A.   Effect Of Adoption: After the city council shall have adopted a general
plan or any amendments to the general plan, no street, park or other public
way, ground, place or space, nor publicly owned building or structure, and no
public utility, whether publicly or privately owned, may be constructed or
authorized until and unless: 1) it conforms to the plan; or 2) it has been
considered by the planning commission and, after receiving the advice of the
planning commission, approved by the city council as an amendment to the
general plan.
   B.   Proposals Submitted To Planning Commission For Review: Before
accepting, widening, removing, extending, relocating, narrowing, vacating,
abandoning, changing the use, acquiring land for, or selling or leasing any
street or other public way, ground, place, property or structure, the city
council shall submit the proposal to the planning commission for its review and
recommendations.
   C.   Amendment To Plan: If the city council approves any of the items
contained in subsection B of this section, it shall also amend the general
plan. (Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000)
9-1A-4: ZONING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Adoption: The city council, after receiving the recommendation of the
planning commission, may enact and enforce a zoning ordinance establishing
regulations for land use and development within the city, and may divide the
territory over which it has jurisdiction into zoning districts of a number,
shape and area that it considers appropriate to carry out the purposes set
forth under Utah Code Annotated section 10-9-102, as amended.
   B.   Scope Of Regulations: Within those zoning districts, the city council
may regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair or use of buildings and structures, and the use of land.
   C.   Uniform Regulations: The city council shall ensure that the regulations
are uniform for each class or kind of buildings throughout each district, but
the regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts.
   D.   Included Regulations: The zoning ordinance may include such regulations
as the city considers necessary for governing the use and development of land
within the city, including land use, density, open space, structures,
buildings, energy efficiency, light and air, air quality, transportation,
infrastructure, public facilities, vegetation and trees, and landscaping,
unless such regulations are specifically prohibited by law. (Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-
1-2000)
9-1A-5: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS:
The city council, after receiving the recommendation of the planning
commission, may enact and enforce a subdivision ordinance requiring that a
subdivision plat comply with the provisions of the subdivision ordinance and be
approved in accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth therein.
(Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000)
9-1A-6: CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS:
   A.   Adoption Of Regulations: Upon receipt of proposed condominium
regulations, as prepared by the planning commission, the city council may adopt
such regulations by ordinance.
   B.   Approval Prior To Recording: No condominium project or any record of
survey map, declaration or other required material shall be recorded until it
shall have been submitted to and approved by the city council. The approval by
the city council 1  shall be in addition to the approval required by the
planning commission. (Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 57-8-35.
9-1A-7: ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS:
The city council shall have the authority and responsibility for ensuring
compliance with the adopted zoning, subdivision and condominium ordinances, and
in carrying out such responsibility may:
   A.   Withhold Issuance Of Permit: Withhold the issuance of building permits
when the proposed development is not in conformance with the adopted
regulations.
   B.   Prosecute Criminal Or Civil Penalty: Prosecute any violation of such
regulations as a class C misdemeanor or seek imposition of and appropriate
civil penalty.
   C.   Other Remedies: Institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other
appropriate action to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove any unlawful building,
use or act. (Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000)
CHAPTER 2
IMPACT FEES
ARTICLE A.  SEWER TREATMENT FACILITIES IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
8-2A-1: Impact Fee Imposed
8-2A-2: Service Area
8-2A-3: Adjustments
8-2A-4: Accounting Procedures
8-2A-5: Expenditures
8-2A-6: Refunds
8-2A-7: Challenges
8-2A-1: IMPACT FEE IMPOSED:
An impact fee (the "impact fee") is hereby imposed as a condition to receiving
a building permit granted by the city. The amount of the impact fee shall be
set by resolution and applied to each equivalent residential connection to the
sewer system of the city that will result from the construction authorized by
the building permit and for each equivalent residential connection to the sewer
system of the city associated with an existing structure previously serviced by
a septic facility. The impact fee does not exceed the amount justified in the
analysis of TSSD. (Ord. 10-25-95B, 10-25-1995; amd. 2004 Code)
8-2A-2: SERVICE AREA:
The entire area of the city and all areas outside of the city serviced by the
city sewage collection system are within the service area of the Timpanogos
special service district (TSSD) and within the service area of the city, and
the impact fee shall be applied throughout the city and to all properties that
connect to the city sewage collection system. (Ord. 10-25-95B, 10-25-1995)
8-2A-3: ADJUSTMENTS:
   A.   The city may adjust the impact fee at the time the fee is charged to
respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases and may adjust the impact
fee if necessary to ensure that the impact fee is imposed fairly as may be
provided in Utah Code Annotated section 11-36-201 et seq., as amended.
   B.   The amount of the impact fee imposed on a particular development may be
adjusted based upon studies and data submitted by the developer requesting a
building permit as may be provided in Utah Code Annotated section 11-36-201 et
seq., as amended. (Ord. 10-25-95B, 10-25-1995)
8-2A-4: ACCOUNTING PROCEDURES:
The staff of the city shall establish accounting procedures for the impact fees
in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section 11-36-301, as amended. (Ord. 10-
25-95B, 10-25-1995)
8-2A-5: EXPENDITURES:
The impact fees may be expended only for payment of the capital facilities
charges imposed by TSSD and shall be remitted to TSSD for that purpose in
accordance with the treatment services contract and all amendments and/or
supplements thereto. (Ord. 10-25-95B, 10-25-1995)
8-2A-6: REFUNDS:
The impact fee shall be refunded to a developer, with interest, in accordance
with Utah Code Annotated section 11-36-303, as amended. No refund shall be made
unless the requirements of that section are met. (Ord. 10-25-95B, 10-25-1995)
8-2A-7: CHALLENGES:
The impact fee may be challenged in accordance with Utah Code Annotated section
11-36-401, as amended, and the procedures set forth therein. (Ord. 10-25-95B,
10-25-1995)
ARTICLE B.  CEDAR HILLS IMPACT FEES
SECTION:
8-2B-1: Short Title
8-2B-2: Intent And Purpose
8-2B-3: Rules Of Construction
8-2B-4: Definitions
8-2B-5: Imposition Of Impact Fee
8-2B-6: Computation Of Amount Of Impact Fee
8-2B-7: Payment Of Fee
8-2B-8: Roadway Facilities Impact Fee Districts
8-2B-9: Impact Fee Trust Funds Established
8-2B-10: Use Of Funds
8-2B-11: Refund Of Fees Paid
8-2B-12: Exemptions And Credits
8-2B-13: Review Of Fee Schedule
8-2B-14: Challenges And Appeals
8-2B-15: Penalty
8-2B-1: SHORT TITLE:
This article shall be known and may be cited as the CITY OF CEDAR HILLS IMPACT
FEE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 11-05-2014A, 11-5-2014)
8-2B-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
   A.   This article is intended to assist in the implementation of the city
general plan.
   B.   The purpose of this article is to regulate the use and development of
land so as to assure that new development bears a proportionate share of the
cost of capital expenditures necessary for public facility improvements in the
city. (Ord. 11-05-2014A, 11-5-2014)
8-2B-3: RULES OF CONSTRUCTION:
   A.   The provisions of this article shall be liberally construed so as to
effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety
and welfare.
   B.   For the purpose of administration and enforcement, unless otherwise
stated in this article, the following rules of construction shall apply to the
text of this article:
      1.   In case of any difference of meaning or implication between the text
of this article and any caption, illustration, summary table or illustrative
table, the text shall control.
      2.   The word "shall" is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word
"may" is permissive.
      3.   Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used
in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless
the context clearly indicates the contrary.
      4.   The phrase "used for" includes "arranged for", "designed for",
"maintained for" or "occupied for".
      5.   The word "person" includes an individual, a corporation, a
partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.
      6.   Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a
regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions or events
connected by the conjunction "and", "or" or "either...or", the conjunction
shall be interpreted as follows:
         a.   "And" indicates that all the connected terms, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply.
         b.   "Or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions
or events may apply singly or in any combination.
         c.   "Either...or" indicates that the connected items, conditions,
provisions or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
      7.   The word "includes" shall not limit a term to the specific example,
but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances
of like kind or character.
      8.   "Mayor" means the mayor or the city officials he/she may designate
to carry out the administration of this article. (Ord. 11-05-2014A, 11-5-2014)
8-2B-4: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this article shall have the following
meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears in the context:
CAPITAL IMPROVEMENT: Includes public facility planning and engineering, land
acquisition, site improvements, buildings and equipment, but excludes
maintenance and operation.
DEVELOPMENT ORDER: A regulatory approval by the City of Cedar Hills.
FEE PAYER: A person applying for the issuance of a building permit.
PRIVATE RECREATIONAL FACILITY: Any recreational facility that is not owned by
or dedicated to any governmental entity.
WATER STORAGE, TREATMENT AND DISTRIBUTION FACILITIES: Includes any system of
tanks, water treatment facilities, distribution and transmission lines, and
pump stations whether for culinary or pressurized irrigation purposes.
Additionally, for purposes of this article, the term "water improvements" also
includes any system of tanks, water treatment facilities, distribution and
transmission lines, and pump stations whether for culinary or pressurized
irrigation purposes. (Ord. 11-05-2014A, 11-5-2014)
8-2B-5: IMPOSITION OF IMPACT FEE:
   A.   Any person who, after the effective date hereof, seeks to develop land
within the city, by applying for a land use permit or building permit for a
building, is hereby required to pay an impact fee in a manner and amount set
forth in this article.
   B.   No new building permit for any activity requiring payment of an impact
fee pursuant to section
8-2B-7 of this article shall be issued unless and until the impact fee hereby
required has been paid.
   C.   No extension of a building permit issued prior to the effective date
hereof for any activity requiring payment of an impact fee pursuant to section
8-2B-7 of this article shall be granted unless and until the impact fee hereby
required has been paid. (Ord. 11-05-2014A, 11-5-2014)
8-2B-6: COMPUTATION OF AMOUNT OF IMPACT FEE:
   A.   Formula: For the formula for the computation methodology of impact fees
see the most recently adopted impact fee study.
      1.   If a land use application or building permit is requested for mixed
uses, then the fee shall be determined using the study by apportioning the
space committed to uses specified on the study.
      2.   If the type of development activity that a land use application or
building permit is applied for is not specified according to the most recently
adopted impact fee study, the mayor shall use the fee applicable to the most
comparable type of land use according to the most recently adopted impact fee
study. The mayor shall be guided in the selection of a comparable type by the
city general plan, supporting documents of the city general plan, and the city
zoning ordinance. If the mayor determines that there is no comparable type of
land use according to the most recently adopted impact fee study, then the
mayor shall determine the appropriately discounted fee by considering
demographic or other documentation which is available from state, local and
regional authorities.
      3.   In the case of change of use, redevelopment or expansion or
modification of an existing use that required the issuance of a land use
application or building permit, the impact fee shall be based upon the net
positive increase in the impact fee for the new use as compared to the previous
use.
   B.   Independent Fee Calculation Study: If a fee payer opts not to have the
impact fee determined according to subsection A of this section, then the fee
payer shall prepare and submit to the mayor an independent fee calculation
study for the land development activity for which a land use application or
building permit is sought. The documentation submitted shall show the basis
upon which the independent fee calculation was made. The mayor shall consider
the documentation submitted by the fee payer but is not required to accept such
documentation as he/she shall reasonably deem to be inaccurate or not reliable
and may, in the alternative, require the fee payer to submit additional or
different documentation for consideration. If an acceptable independent fee
calculation study is not presented, the fee payer shall pay impact fees
according to the most recently adopted impact fee study. If an acceptable
independent fee calculation study is presented, the mayor may adjust the fee to
that appropriate to the particular development. Determinations made by the
mayor pursuant to this subsection may be appealed to the city council by filing
a written appeal request with the mayor within ten (10) days of the mayor's
determination. (Ord. 11-05-2014A, 11-5-2014)
8-2B-7: PAYMENT OF FEE:
   A.   The fee payer shall pay the impact fees required by this article to the
city prior to the issuance of a land use permit or building permit.
   B.   All funds collected shall be properly identified by impact fee type and
district and promptly transferred for deposit in the appropriate impact fee
trust fund to be held in separate accounts as determined by section
8-2B-9 of this article and used solely for the purposes specified in this
article. (Ord. 11-05-2014A, 11-5-2014)
8-2B-8: ROADWAY FACILITIES IMPACT FEE DISTRICTS:
There are hereby established impact fee districts shown in the written analysis
as adopted by resolution of the city council and incorporated herein by
reference. (Ord. 11-05-2014A, 11-5-2014)
8-2B-9: IMPACT FEE TRUST FUNDS ESTABLISHED:
   A.   There are hereby established separate impact fee trust funds, one for
each public facility type established by the written analysis and district as
established in section
8-2B-8 of this article.
   B.   Funds withdrawn from these accounts must be used in accordance with the
provisions of section
8-2B-10 of this article. (Ord. 11-05-2014A, 11-5-2014)
8-2B-10: USE OF FUNDS:
   A.   Funds collected from impact fees shall be used solely for the purpose
of acquiring and/or making capital improvements and their related costs to
public facilities under the jurisdiction of the city.
   B.   Funds shall be used exclusively for acquisitions, expansions or capital
improvements within the impact fee districts as identified in the written
analysis, from which the funds were collected or for projects in other impact
fee districts that are of benefit to the impact fee district from which the
funds were collected. Funds shall be expended in the order in which they are
collected.
   C.   In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for
advanced provision of capital facilities for which impact fees may be expended,
impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt
instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type
described in subsection A of this section and are located within the
appropriate impact fee districts created by section
8-2B-8 of this article or as provided in subsection B of this section.
   D.   At least once each fiscal period the mayor shall present to the city
council a proposed capital improvements program for public facilities,
assigning funds, including any accrued interest, from the several impact fee
trust funds to specific public improvement projects and related expenses.
Monies, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall
be retained in the same impact fee trust funds until the next fiscal period,
except as provided by the refund provisions of this article.
   E.   Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in section
8-2B-11 of this article.
   F.   The city shall be entitled to retain not more than twenty percent (20%)
of the funds collected as compensation for the expense of collecting the fee
and administering this article. (Ord. 11-05-2014A, 11-5-2014)
8-2B-11: REFUND OF FEES PAID:
   A.   If a land use permit or building permit expires without commencement of
construction, the fees have not been spent or encumbered, and no impact has
resulted, then the fee payer shall be entitled to a refund, with interest at
the rate of six percent (6%) per annum, of the impact fee paid as a condition
for its issuance; except that the city shall retain ten percent (10%) of the
fee to offset a portion of the cost of collection and refund. The fee payer
must submit an application for such a refund to the mayor within thirty (30)
days of the expiration of the permit.
   B.   Except as provided in Utah Code Annotated section 11-36a-302, any funds
not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar quarter immediately
following six (6) years from the date the impact fee was paid shall, upon
application of the then current landowner, be returned to such landowner with
interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum; provided, that the
landowner submits an application for a refund to the mayor within one hundred
eighty (180) days of the expiration of the six (6) year period. (Ord. 11-05-
2014A, 11-5-2014)
8-2B-12: EXEMPTIONS AND CREDITS:
   A.   Exemptions:
      1.   Specified: The following may be exempted from payment of the impact
fee:
         a.   Alterations or expansion of an existing building where no
additional residential units are created and where the use is not changed.
         b.   The construction of accessory buildings or structures where no
additional residential units or equivalent residential units are created and
where the use is not changed.
         c.   The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or
structure with a new building or structure of the same size and use.
         d.   The installation of a replacement mobile home on a lot or other
such site when an impact fee for such mobile home site has previously been paid
pursuant to this article or where a mobile home legally existed on such site on
or prior to the effective date hereof.
         e.   The construction of buildings by a government agency or other
development activities with a broad public purpose as determined by the mayor.
In the event that an exemption is granted, the city council shall establish the
source of funding to pay for the impact of the development activity.
      2.   Time Limit For Filing Claim: Any claim of exemption must be made no
later than the time of application for a building permit. Any claim not so made
shall be deemed waived.
   B.   Credits:
      1.   Public capital improvements may be offered by the fee payer as total
or partial payment of the required impact fee. The offer must specifically
request or provide for an impact fee credit. If the mayor accepts such an
offer, whether the acceptance is before or after the effective date hereof, the
credit shall be determined and provided in the following manner:
         a.   Credit for the dedication of land shall be valued at one hundred
percent (100%) of the most recent assessed value by the Utah County property
appraiser; by such other appropriate method as the city council may have
accepted prior to the effective date hereof for particular public improvements;
or by fair market value established by private appraisers acceptable to the
city. Credit for the dedication of park land shall be provided when the
property has been conveyed at no charge to, and accepted by, the city in a
manner satisfactory to the city council.
         b.   Applicants for credit for construction of public improvements
shall submit acceptable engineering drawings and specifications, and
construction cost estimates to the mayor. The mayor shall determine credit for
construction based upon either these cost estimates or upon alternative
engineering criteria and construction cost estimates if the mayor determines
that such estimates submitted by the applicant are either unreliable or
inaccurate. The mayor shall provide the applicant with a letter or certificate
setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the reason for the credit, and
the legal description or other adequate description of the project or
development to which the credit may be applied. The applicant must sign and
date a duplicate copy of such letter or certificate indicating his agreement to
the terms of the letter or certificate and return such signed document to the
mayor before credit will be given. The failure of the applicant to sign, date
and return such document within sixty (60) days shall nullify the credit.
         c.   Except as provided in subsection B1d of this section, credit
against impact fees otherwise due will not be provided until:
            (1)   The construction is completed and accepted by the city;
            (2)   A suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and
approved by the mayor, when applicable.
         d.   Credit may be provided before completion of specified public
improvements if adequate assurances are given by the applicant that the
standards set out in subsection B1c of this section will be met and if the fee
payer posts security as provided below for the costs of such construction.
Security in the form of a cash escrow agreement shall be posted with an
approval by the mayor at one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the amount
determined by the city engineer. Twenty five percent (25%) of the cash escrow
account shall remain for two (2) years after completion of the project, as a
guarantee of the work, pursuant to the city cash bond escrow agreement. If the
public improvement construction project will not be constructed within one year
of the acceptance of the offer by the mayor, the amount of the security shall
be increased by ten percent (10%) compounded for each year of the life of the
security. The security shall be reviewed and approved by the mayor prior to
acceptance of the security by the city council. If the public improvement
construction project is not to be completed within five (5) years of the date
of the fee payer's offer, the city council must approve the public improvement
construction project and its scheduled completion date prior to the acceptance
of the offer by the mayor.
      2.   Any claim for credit must be made no later than the time of
application for a land use permit or building permit. Any claim not so made
shall be deemed waived.
      3.   Credits shall not be transferable from one project or development to
another without the approval of the city council and may only be transferred to
a development within a different impact fee district upon a finding by the city
council that the dedication for which the credit was given benefits such
different impact fee district.
      4.   Determinations made by the mayor pursuant to this section may be
appealed to the city council by filing a written appeal with the mayor within
ten (10) days of the mayor's determination. (Ord. 11-05-2014A, 11-5-2014)
8-2B-13: REVIEW OF FEE SCHEDULE:
The most recently adopted impact fee study shall be reviewed by the city
council at least once each fiscal biennium (i.e., every 2 years). (Ord. 11-05-
2014A, 11-5-2014)
8-2B-14: CHALLENGES AND APPEALS:
Any challenges or appeals of this impact fee must comply with Utah Code
Annotated section 11-36a-701. (Ord. 11-05-2014A, 11-5-2014)
8-2B-15: PENALTY:
Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a class C
misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code; however, in addition to or in lieu of any criminal
prosecution, the city shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce the
provisions of this article. (Ord. 11-05-2014A, 11-5-2014)
TITLE 9
MUNICIPAL PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT
CHAPTER 1
MUNICIPAL PLANNING
ARTICLE A.  CITY COUNCIL
SECTION:
9-1A-1: Scope
9-1A-2: Appointments
9-1A-3: General Plan
9-1A-4: Zoning Regulations
9-1A-5: Subdivision Regulations
9-1A-6: Condominium Projects
9-1A-7: Enforcement Of Regulations
9-1A-1: SCOPE:
The city council shall have the following duties, powers and authorities
relating to the municipal planning function within the city. (Ord. 2-1-2000C,
2-1-2000)
9-1A-2: APPOINTMENTS:
   A.   Planning Commission: The number of members, terms of office, mode of
appointment and other details relating to the organization and procedure of the
commission shall be as set forth under the provisions of article B of this
chapter. The city council may also fix per diem compensation for members of the
planning commission based on necessary and reasonable expenses and meetings
actually attended.
   B.   Board Of Adjustment: The number of members, terms of office, and other
details relating to powers and duties of said board shall be as set forth under
the provisions of article C of this chapter. The city council may also fix per
diem compensation for members of the board of adjustment based on necessary and
reasonable expenses and meetings actually attended.
   C.   Zoning Administrator: The city council may appoint and fix compensation
for a zoning administrator. The powers and duties of said administrator shall
be as set forth under the provisions of article D of this chapter. (Ord. 4-1-
2008A, 4-1-2008)
9-1A-3: GENERAL PLAN:
The city council may adopt a general plan of the city or any part thereof.
   A.   Effect Of Adoption: After the city council shall have adopted a general
plan or any amendments to the general plan, no street, park or other public
way, ground, place or space, nor publicly owned building or structure, and no
public utility, whether publicly or privately owned, may be constructed or
authorized until and unless: 1) it conforms to the plan; or 2) it has been
considered by the planning commission and, after receiving the advice of the
planning commission, approved by the city council as an amendment to the
general plan.
   B.   Proposals Submitted To Planning Commission For Review: Before
accepting, widening, removing, extending, relocating, narrowing, vacating,
abandoning, changing the use, acquiring land for, or selling or leasing any
street or other public way, ground, place, property or structure, the city
council shall submit the proposal to the planning commission for its review and
recommendations.
   C.   Amendment To Plan: If the city council approves any of the items
contained in subsection B of this section, it shall also amend the general
plan. (Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000)
9-1A-4: ZONING REGULATIONS:
   A.   Adoption: The city council, after receiving the recommendation of the
planning commission, may enact and enforce a zoning ordinance establishing
regulations for land use and development within the city, and may divide the
territory over which it has jurisdiction into zoning districts of a number,
shape and area that it considers appropriate to carry out the purposes set
forth under Utah Code Annotated section 10-9-102, as amended.
   B.   Scope Of Regulations: Within those zoning districts, the city council
may regulate and restrict the erection, construction, reconstruction,
alteration, repair or use of buildings and structures, and the use of land.
   C.   Uniform Regulations: The city council shall ensure that the regulations
are uniform for each class or kind of buildings throughout each district, but
the regulations in one district may differ from those in other districts.
   D.   Included Regulations: The zoning ordinance may include such regulations
as the city considers necessary for governing the use and development of land
within the city, including land use, density, open space, structures,
buildings, energy efficiency, light and air, air quality, transportation,
infrastructure, public facilities, vegetation and trees, and landscaping,
unless such regulations are specifically prohibited by law. (Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-
1-2000)
9-1A-5: SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS:
The city council, after receiving the recommendation of the planning
commission, may enact and enforce a subdivision ordinance requiring that a
subdivision plat comply with the provisions of the subdivision ordinance and be
approved in accordance with the requirements and procedures set forth therein.
(Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000)
9-1A-6: CONDOMINIUM PROJECTS:
   A.   Adoption Of Regulations: Upon receipt of proposed condominium
regulations, as prepared by the planning commission, the city council may adopt
such regulations by ordinance.
   B.   Approval Prior To Recording: No condominium project or any record of
survey map, declaration or other required material shall be recorded until it
shall have been submitted to and approved by the city council. The approval by
the city council 1  shall be in addition to the approval required by the
planning commission. (Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA § 57-8-35.
9-1A-7: ENFORCEMENT OF REGULATIONS:
The city council shall have the authority and responsibility for ensuring
compliance with the adopted zoning, subdivision and condominium ordinances, and
in carrying out such responsibility may:
   A.   Withhold Issuance Of Permit: Withhold the issuance of building permits
when the proposed development is not in conformance with the adopted
regulations.
   B.   Prosecute Criminal Or Civil Penalty: Prosecute any violation of such
regulations as a class C misdemeanor or seek imposition of and appropriate
civil penalty.
   C.   Other Remedies: Institute injunction, mandamus, abatement or any other
appropriate action to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove any unlawful building,
use or act. (Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000)
ARTICLE B.  PLANNING COMMISSION
SECTION:
9-1B-1: Established; Membership; Selection Of Members; Compensation
9-1B-2: Term Of Office; Mode Of Appointment; Vacancies; Removal Of Members
9-1B-3: Election Of Chair; Duties Of Chair; Adoption Of Rules
9-1B-4: Quorum; Voting
9-1B-5: Powers And Duties
9-1B-1: ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP; SELECTION OF MEMBERS; COMPENSATION:
   A.   Established: Pursuant to authority granted in Utah Code Annotated
section 10-9a-301, as amended, the city council hereby creates a planning
commission within and for the city to be known as the Cedar Hills planning
commission. Members currently serving at the time of the adoption hereof are
hereby appointed to their current position and term. (Ord. 3-4-2008A, 3-4-2008)
   B.   Membership: The planning commission shall consist of five (5) regular
members, three (3) alternate members and one ex officio member. (Ord. 9-18-
2012B, 9-18-2012)
   C.   Selection Of Members: The members shall be appointed without respect to
political affiliations.
   D.   Compensation: Members shall serve for such per diem compensation, if
any, as may be fixed by the city council, which compensation shall be based on
necessary and reasonable expenses incurred and on meetings actually attended by
said members. (Ord. 3-4-2008A, 3-4-2008)
9-1B-2: TERM OF OFFICE; MODE OF APPOINTMENT; VACANCIES; REMOVAL OF MEMBERS:
   A.   Term Of Office:
      1.   Regular Members: The term of appointment for regular members shall
be three (3) years. Terms shall expire on December 31 of the final year of
appointment. (Ord. 3-4-2008A, 3-4-2008)
      2.   Alternate Members: The term of appointment of alternate members
shall be for a period of up to one year. The terms of each alternate member
shall expire on December 31 of the year in which they are appointed. Alternate
members shall be designated as first, second and third alternate, in accordance
with their respective time of appointment. (Ord. 3-4-2008A, 3-4-2008; amd. Ord.
9-18-2012B, 9-18-2012)
      3.   Ex Officio Member: The term of the ex officio member shall be as
determined by action of the city council.
   B.   Mode Of Appointment:
      1.   Ex Officio Member: The ex officio member shall be appointed by the
city council, from its own members and shall be the council representative to
the planning commission and shall serve without authority to vote on matters
coming before the commission.
      2.   Reappointment Of A Regular Member Or Alternate Member: Within thirty
(30) days prior to the term expiration of a regular or alternate member, the
mayor shall make a recommendation to the city council on whether to reappoint
the member to another term or not. The mayor will send written notification to
the member thirty (30) days prior to the term expiration notifying him of the
decision. The city council will then vote on whether to reappoint the member or
not. If the member is not reappointed by a vote of the city council, then a
vacancy shall be declared.
      3.   Appointment Of New Regular Or Alternate Members: Within thirty (30)
days of the declaration of a vacancy on the commission, the mayor shall make a
recommendation to the city council on appointments to the commission. If the
council does not confirm the mayor's recommendation within forty five (45) days
of the vacancy, then the council may vote to appoint a new regular or alternate
member. (Ord. 3-4-2008A, 3-4-2008)
   C.   Vacancies: Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of
terms shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by the first
alternate member. At the time the first alternate member fills a vacancy, the
second alternate member shall become the first alternate member and the third
alternate member shall become the new second alternate member. (Ord. 3-4-2008A,
3-4-2008; amd. Ord. 9-18-2012B, 9-18-2012)
   D.   Removal Of Members: Regular and alternate members may be removed for
cause, following a public hearing on the matter, if requested by the member, by
a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of the entire city council. (Ord. 3-4-2008A,
3-4-2008)
9-1B-3: ELECTION OF CHAIR; DUTIES OF CHAIR; ADOPTION OF RULES:
   A.   Election Of Chair: The planning commission shall elect from its
membership a chair in accordance with the bylaws of the commission. Election of
the chair shall be conducted at the next following meeting of the commission
after completion of the term of the prior chair or at such other time as is
considered practicable by the members of the commission.
   B.   Duties Of Chair: It shall be the duty of the chair to preside over and
conduct all meetings of the commission. The chair, with the consent of the
commission, shall make such assignments and delegations to the members of the
commission and the staff and consultants as are deemed necessary or desirable
for the carrying out of the commission's business.
   C.   Adoption Of Rules: The commission may adopt rules for its own
organization and for the transaction of its business not in conflict with this
chapter or other ordinances, and shall keep an accurate record of the
disposition of all matters coming before it. (Ord. 3-4-2008A, 3-4-2008)
9-1B-4: QUORUM; VOTING:
   A.   Quorum: A minimum of three (3) regular and/or alternate members in
attendance at a meeting of the planning commission is required to constitute a
quorum. The minimum number of "yes" votes necessary to carry an action shall be
a majority of the members of the quorum in attendance, but not less than three
(3).
   B.   Voting:
      1.   Regular members in attendance at a meeting shall be entitled to vote
on all matters coming before the commission. Alternate members in attendance at
a meeting shall be designated to sit as a voting member of the commission at
any time one or more regular members is absent from the meeting. The
designation of the alternate member to voting status shall be made by the chair
at the commencement of the meeting or at such other time as the number of
regular members is less than five (5), in accordance with the seniority of the
alternate members in attendance at the time and shall be so noted in the
minutes.
      2.   Once designated to voting status, an alternate member shall serve as
a voting member of the commission until the conclusion of the meeting. If
during the course of the meeting a regular member, not in attendance at the
time the alternate member was designated to sit as a voting member, shall
arrive, and the combined total of the regular members and the alternate member
designated to voting status exceeds five (5), the membership of the commission
shall, until the conclusion of the meeting, be expanded to the number of
regular members and designated alternate members in attendance. (Ord. 3-4-
2008A, 3-4-2008)
9-1B-5: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The planning commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it
to perform its functions and promote municipal planning, as follows:
   A.   General Plan: Prepare and recommend a general plan and amendments to
the general plan to the city council as provided under the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated.
   B.   Zoning Ordinances And Maps: Recommend zoning ordinances and maps, and
amendments to zoning ordinances and maps, to the city council as provided under
the provisions of Utah Code Annotated.
   C.   Subdivision Regulations: Recommend subdivision regulations and
amendments to those regulations to the city council as provided under the
provisions of Utah Code Annotated.
   D.   Subdivision Applications: Recommend approval or denial of subdivision
applications as provided under the provisions of Utah Code Annotated and in
accordance with the rules and procedures set forth under the terms of title 11,
"Subdivision Regulations", of this code.
   E.   Condominium Projects:
      1.   Recommend regulations governing the approval, construction and
maintenance of condominium projects, or amendments to such regulations and
shall submit said regulations to the city council for adoption.
      2.   Recommend approval or denial of applications for approval of
condominium projects in accordance with the rules and procedures set forth
under the terms of the condominium regulations.
   F.   Advise City Council: Advise the city council on matters as the city
council directs.
   G.   Matters Delegated: Hear or decide any matters that the city council
designates, including the approval or denial of, or recommendations to approve
or deny, conditional use permits.
   H.   Other Powers: Exercise any other powers:
      1.   That are necessary to enable it to perform its function; or
      2.   Delegated to it by the terms of title 10, "Zoning Regulations";
title 11, "Subdivision Regulations"; or other development regulations of this
code, or by action of the city council. (Ord. 3-4-2008A, 3-4-2008)
ARTICLE C.  HEARING OFFICER
SECTION:
9-1C-1: Established; Terms; Mode Of Appointment; Removal
9-1C-2: Organization; Meetings; Records; Decisions
9-1C-3: Powers And Duties
9-1C-4: Appeals From Hearing Officer Decisions
9-1C-5: Provisions Of State Code Applicable
9-1C-1: ESTABLISHED; TERMS; MODE OF APPOINTMENT; REMOVAL:
   A.   Established: Pursuant to authority granted in Utah Code Annotated
section 10-9a-701, as amended, the city council hereby creates a land use
hearing officer (hereinafter the "hearing officer") within and for the city.
The hearing officer shall replace in all respects the previous duties of the
city's board of adjustment.
   B.   Terms: The hearing officer shall serve at the will of the city council
until he or she is terminated or the hearing officer resigns. A hearing officer
may be terminated for any reason.
   C.   Appointment; Qualifications; Vacancy:
      1.   Appointment: Each hearing officer shall be appointed by the mayor
with the advice and consent of the city council. The mayor may appoint more
than one hearing officer, but only one hearing officer shall consider and
decide any matter properly presented for hearing officer review. A hearing
officer shall not be appointed to a matter to which he or she has a conflict of
interest.
      2.   Qualifications: The hearing officer shall have legal training and
experience, with qualifications to conduct administrative or quasi-judicial
hearings regarding land use, land development, and land use regulatory codes.
      3.   Vacancy: In the case of a vacancy in the hearing officer position, a
replacement shall be promptly appointed. This appointment shall be made in the
same manner and with the same qualifications as stated above.
   D.   Removal: A hearing officer may be removed by the mayor, with the advice
and consent of the city council.
(Ord. 4-1-2008A, 4-1-2008; amd. Ord. 10-20-2015D, 10-20-2015; Ord. 07-07-2020A,
7-7-2020)
9-1C-2: ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS; RECORDS; DECISIONS:
   A.   Rules Adopted: The hearing officer shall organize and implement the
powers and duties of the position as follows:
      1.   The hearing officer shall adopt reasonable policies and procedures
in accordance with city ordinances and state law to govern the functioning of
the position and the conduct of meetings. Such policies and procedures shall be
approved by the city council.
   B.   Meetings: Hearing officer meetings shall be scheduled on an as-needed
basis, following certification of submission of a complete application for
hearing officer review.
   C.   Oaths Administered; Compelling Witnesses: The hearing officer may
administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses.
   D.   Open And Public Meetings: All meetings of the hearing officer shall
comply with the requirements of Utah Code Annotated title 52, chapter 4, Open
and Public Meetings.
   E.   Records:
      1.   The hearing officer shall file his or her records in the office of
the city recorder.
      2.   All records of the hearing officer are public records.
   F.   Due Process: The hearing officer shall act in a quasi-judicial manner
and respect due process from all parties.
   G.   When Decisions Effective:
      1.   A decision of the hearing officer takes effect on the date when the
appeal authority issues a written decision, or as otherwise provided by
ordinance.
      2.   A written decision, or other event as provided by ordinance,
constitutes a final decision.
   H.   Compensation: The hearing officer shall be compensated for their
services on a reasonable, uniform basis applicable to all the city's hearing
officers. The basis and rate of compensation shall be determined by the mayor
in consultation with the city manager and city attorney.
(Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000; amd. Ord. 4-1-2008A, 4-1-2008; Ord. 10-20-2015D, 10-
20-2015; Ord. 07-07-2020A, 7-7-2020)
9-1C-3: POWERS AND DUTIES 1 :
The hearing officer shall have the following powers and duties:
   A.   Appeals: To hear and decide appeals from zoning decisions applying the
zoning ordinance, subject to the following:
      1.   The applicant or any other person or entity adversely affected by a
decision administering or interpreting a zoning ordinance may appeal that
decision applying the zoning ordinance by alleging that there is error in any
order, requirement, decision or determination made by an official in the
administration or interpretation of the zoning ordinance; provided, that any
such appeal shall be received at the office of the city recorder within forty
five (45) days from the date of action on the matter for which the appeal is
requested.
      2.   Any officer, department, board or bureau of a city affected by the
grant or refusal of a building permit or by any other decisions of the zoning
administrator in the administration or interpretation of the zoning ordinance
may appeal any decision to the hearing officer.
      3.   The hearing officer shall hear and decide appeals from planning
commission decisions regarding conditional use permits, unless the zoning
ordinance designates another body to hear conditional use permit appeals.
      4.   The person or entity making the appeal has the burden of proving
that an error has been made.
      5.   Only zoning decisions applying the zoning ordinance may be appealed
to the hearing officer. A person may not appeal, and the hearing officer may
not consider, any zoning ordinance amendments.
      6.   Appeals may not be used to waive or modify the terms or requirements
of the zoning ordinance.
   B.   Special Exceptions: To hear and decide special exceptions to the terms
of the zoning ordinance, but only if authorized to do so by the zoning
ordinance and based only on the standards contained in the zoning ordinance.
   C.   Variances: To hear and decide variances to the requirements of the
zoning ordinance, subject to the following:
      1.   Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of the
requirements of the zoning ordinance as applied to a parcel of property that he
owns, leases, or in which he holds some other beneficial interest, may apply to
the hearing officer for a variance from the terms of the zoning ordinance.
      2.   The hearing officer may grant a variance only if:
         a.   Literal enforcement of the zoning ordinance would cause an
unreasonable hardship for the applicant that is: 1) not necessary to carry out
the general purpose of the zoning ordinance; and 2) consistent with the
criteria set forth under subsections C3 and C4 of this section;
         b.   There are special circumstances attached to the property that do
not generally apply to other properties in the same district and which are
consistent with the criteria set forth under subsection C5 of this section;
         c.   Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a
substantial property right possessed by other property in the same district;
         d.   The variance will not substantially affect the general plan and
will not be contrary to the public interest; and
         e.   The spirit of the zoning ordinance is observed and substantial
justice done.
      3.   In determining whether or not enforcement of the zoning ordinance
would cause unreasonable hardship under subsection C2a of this section, the
hearing officer may not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged
hardship:
         a.   Is located on or associated with the property for which the
variance is sought; and
         b.   Comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from
conditions that are general to the neighborhood.
      4.   In determining whether or not enforcement of the zoning ordinance
would cause unreasonable hardship under subsection C2a of this section, the
hearing officer may not find an unreasonable hardship if the hardship is self-
imposed or economic.
      5.   In determining whether or not there are special circumstances
attached to the property under subsection C2b of this section, the hearing
officer may find that special circumstances exist only if the special
circumstances:
         a.   Relate to the hardship complained of; and
         b.   Deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in
the same district.
      6.   The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the
conditions justifying a variance have been met.
      7.   Variances run with the land.
      8.   The hearing officer and any other body may not grant use variances.
      9.   In granting a variance, the hearing officer may impose additional
requirements on the applicant that will:
         a.   Mitigate any harmful affects of the variance; or
         b.   Serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived
or modified.
   D.   Modifications To Nonconforming Uses: The hearing officer may make
determinations regarding the existence, expansion or modification of
nonconforming uses, but only if that authority is delegated to them by the city
council.
(Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 07-07-2020A, 7-7-2020)
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 10-3-3D of this code.
9-1C-4: APPEALS FROM HEARING OFFICER DECISIONS:
   A.   Authority: Any person adversely affected by any decision of a hearing
officer may petition the district court for a review of the decision.
   B.   Allegations Permitted: In the petition, the plaintiff may only allege
that the hearing officer's decision was arbitrary, capricious or illegal.
   C.   Time Limit For Filing Petition: The petition is barred unless it is
filed within thirty (30) days after the hearing officer's decision is final.
   D.   Transmittal Of Proceedings: The hearing officer shall transmit to the
reviewing court the record of its proceedings, including its minutes, findings,
orders and, if available, a true and correct transcript of its proceedings. If
the proceeding was tape recorded, a transcript of that tape recording is a true
and correct transcript for purposes of this subsection.
      1.   If there is a record:
         a.   The district court's review is limited to the record provided by
the hearing officer.
         b.   The court may not accept or consider any evidence outside the
hearing officer's record unless that evidence was offered to the hearing
officer and the court determines that it was improperly excluded by the hearing
officer.
      2.   If there is no record, the court may call witnesses and take
evidence.
   E.   Evidence Justifying Affirmation: The court shall affirm the decision of
the hearing officer if the decision is supported by substantial evidence in the
record.
   F.   Stay Of Proceedings: The filing of a petition does not stay the
decision of the hearing officer.
      1.   Before filing the petition, the aggrieved party may petition the
hearing officer to stay its decision.
      2.   Upon receipt of a petition to stay, the hearing officer may order
its decision stayed pending district court review if the hearing officer finds
it to be in the best interest of the city.
      3.   After the petition is filed, the petitioner may seek an injunction
staying the hearing officer's decision.
(Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000; amd. Ord. 07-07-2020A, 7-7-2020)
9-1C-5: PROVISIONS OF STATE CODE APPLICABLE:
Any provisions of Utah Code Annotated section 10-9-700 et seq., as amended,
relating to decisions by the hearing officer, not specifically addressed in
this article, shall be considered as part of this article, and shall be
considered and adhered to in making any determination upon any matter upon
which the board is required to act.
(Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000; amd. Ord. 07-07-2020A, 7-7-2020)
ARTICLE D.  ZONING ADMINISTRATOR
SECTION:
9-1D-1: Appointment
9-1D-2: Powers And Duties
9-1D-1: APPOINTMENT:
There is hereby created the office of zoning administrator. The chief building
official is hereby appointed as the zoning administrator. Said official is
hereby charged with the administration and enforcement of the zoning
regulations and other duties as set forth in section
9-1D-2 of this article. (Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000; amd. 2004 Code)
9-1D-2: POWERS AND DUTIES:
It shall be the duty of the zoning administrator:
   A.   To review all applications for installation permits and certificates of
zoning compliance.
   B.   To refuse to issue any installation permit unless the plans of and for
the proposed erection, construction or use fully conform to all regulations in
effect within the city.
   C.   To enforce the provisions of the zoning regulations and, wherever
violations occur, to consult with the city attorney, to post or issue
citations, to prepare exhibits, testimony and other data that may be needed in
such enforcement.
   D.   To render administrative decisions on those certain routine and
uncontested matters as are delegated to him by the city council or board of
adjustment, and pursuant to established guidelines relating thereto. (Ord. 2-1-
2000C, 2-1-2000; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE E.  SITE PLAN REVIEW COMMITTEE
SECTION:
9-1E-1: Purpose
9-1E-2: Established; Membership
9-1E-3: Organization; Meetings
9-1E-4: Powers And Duties
9-1E-1: PURPOSE:
The site plan review committee is established as a standing committee of the
city for the purpose of assisting the planning commission, city council, public
works director, zoning administrator and others having responsibility for some
aspect of the physical development of the city to carry out and coordinate
their respective responsibilities more effectively and efficiently. (Ord. 2-1-
2000C, 2-1-2000)
9-1E-2: ESTABLISHED; MEMBERSHIP:
There is hereby created a permanent standing site plan review committee within
and for the city. The committee shall consist of the following individuals or
designated representatives:
   A.   The chairman of the planning commission or a member of the commission
designated as is representative.
   B.   The city manager.
   C.   The city engineer.
   D.   The chief building official.
   E.   The city recorder.
   F.   A city council representative.
   G.   The fire chief, or his designated representative.
   H.   The city planner.
   I.   Any other appropriate agency or individual determined by the city
manager. (i.e., utility representatives). (Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000; amd. 2004
Code)
9-1E-3: ORGANIZATION; MEETINGS:
The city engineer shall act as chair of the committee. Meeting times and the
agenda of the committee shall be as determined by the chair. All meetings shall
be open to the public. (Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000; amd. 2004 Code)
9-1E-4: POWERS AND DUTIES:
The committee shall have the following duties, functions and powers:
   A.   To review all applications for zone change; requests for approval of
subdivision, planned residential developments, planned commercial developments,
condominium projects, and similar project plans; requests for annexation,
requests for amendment of the general plan; amendments to the development
standards and similar matters directed or required to be acted on by the
planning commission. The purpose and extent of the review shall be:
      1.   To convey to the applicant information pertaining to the procedures,
requirements, standards and policies applicable to the proposed application and
aid the applicant in the preparation of required plans and documents.
      2.   To evaluate each application and attendant documentation for
compliance with city ordinances and standards.
      3.   To provide an opportunity for the early review of development
proposals by the city planning, public works, engineering and public safety
officials and a forum for discussion and presentation of required and suggested
changes to such proposals.
   B.   To evaluate the readiness of applications for consideration by the
planning commission; to place on next available planning commission agenda
those applications deemed ready or conditionally ready for consideration by the
commission; and to remove from the agenda any applications not satisfying
attached conditions.
   C.   To report the results of the review and submit a summary of the
recommendations from the several members of the committee to the full
membership of the commission.
   D.   The meeting shall be advisory only. In no way shall the meeting be
construed to constitute approval of any plan proposal nor shall acceptance of
the application for review by the committee or the responses from the members
be deemed to substitute for or relieve the applicant from compliance with
applicable provisions of law. (Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000)
ARTICLE F.  PENALTY
SECTION:
9-1F-1: Penalty
9-1F-1: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a class C misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 2-1-2000C, 2-1-2000; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 2
PERFORMANCE GUARANTEES
SECTION:
9-2-1: Application
9-2-2: Types Of Guarantee
9-2-3: Performance Guarantee (Bond)
9-2-4: Durability Guarantee
9-2-5: Default
9-2-6: Penalty
9-2-1: APPLICATION:
The provisions of this chapter shall be applicable wherever the terms of the
city subdivision ordinance, zoning ordinance or other development ordinance
require the posting of a performance guarantee or bond in order to ensure the
construction of public and common improvements within a subdivision, planned
development, commercial project or similar development project, in a timely
manner and/or in accordance with city standards or the terms of approval for
such project, as applicable. Performance guarantees shall include the
following, and shall be submitted and administered in accordance with the terms
of this chapter:
   A.   Construction Guarantee (Bond): A performance guarantee intended to
secure the initial construction of public and common improvements in a timely
manner and in accordance with city standards and good engineering practice.
   B.   Durability Retainer: A performance guarantee intended to secure the
durability of said improvements following construction thereof. (Ord. 2-17-98B,
2-17-1998)
9-2-2: TYPES OF GUARANTEE:
The type of performance guarantee acceptable to the city shall be limited to
the following, at the discretion of the city:
   A.   Cash Bond: A deposit of cash in a joint account (city and applicant)
with a financial institution acceptable to the city. Any interest derived from
the account shall inure to the benefit of the applicant (developer).
   B.   Escrow Bond Account: Establishment of an escrow account by a financial
institution acceptable to the city. Said account shall require a written
agreement between the city and the financial institution containing provisions
that require: 1) the advance written consent of the city prior to any release
of funds; 2) accountability of payments to ensure proper payment to vendors and
subcontractors; and 3) authorization for direct payment to the city, upon
receipt of a request therefrom, in the event of default. Any interest derived
from the account shall inure to the benefit of the applicant (developer).
   C.   Surety Bond: Establishment of a corporate surety performance bond ("the
bond") in favor of the city as obligee, with a surety acceptable to the city.
The city shall have the following options and rights, which shall be set forth
in the bond: 1) the advance written consent of the city shall be obtained prior
to any release of bond or reduction in bond amount; 2) the city may require the
surety to complete the work; and 3) the city may complete the work and call
upon the surety for reimbursement. (Ord. 3-4-2003C, 3-4-2003)
9-2-3: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE (BOND):
   A.   Amount Of Guarantee; Tasks To Be Included Under Guarantee Amount: The
amount of the construction guarantee shall be not less than one hundred twenty
five percent (125%) of the estimated cost for construction of all required
improvements for a project, both on site and off site, as determined by the
city engineer. The specific tasks to be included in determining the guarantee
amount shall include: 1) the estimated current cost of materials and labor for
the installation of required improvements in accordance with city standards (in
the event the city is required to assume responsibility for construction); 2)
the estimated cost for cleanup of site following completion of construction; 3)
the amount of charges, if any, required to reimburse the cost of improvements
installed by previous developers; and 4) the estimated cost of inspection,
administration, enforcement and any legal fees incurred by the city and their
agents, all as established by the city engineer. (Ord. 2-17-98B, 2-17-1998;
amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   Duration Of Guarantee Period: The duration of the construction
guarantee shall be for a period of twelve (12) months, or such period of time
specified for completion of required improvements for the respective type of
development, if other than twelve (12) months, and any extensions to such
period as may be approved by the City Council. The guarantee period shall be
deemed to commence on the date of recording of any final plat, at the Office of
the County Recorder, where such recording is required (subdivision projects) or
acceptance of the guarantee documents by the City Council, where no recording
of a plat is required. The guarantee period shall continue until the passage of
time hereinabove specified and until the City Council shall have issued a
notice of acceptance of said improvements and release of guarantee. With the
mutual consent of all parties, the length of the guarantee period may be
shortened.
   C.   Partial Releases Authorized; Conditions And Procedures: Where a
construction guarantee is provided for the purpose of ensuring the timely
installation of required improvements, the City may authorize a partial release
of the guarantee. The amount of any partial release shall be in an amount
commensurate with the estimated proportionate share of improvements completed
as of the date of the request, as determined by the City Engineer; provided,
however, the cumulative total of all partial releases shall not exceed an
amount greater than eighty percent (80%) of the estimated cost for constructing
the improvements (not the total guarantee amount). All partial releases shall
be authorized in writing by the Mayor, subject to the prior certification of
the City Engineer that the materials and work conform to minimum City standards
and good engineering practice.
   D.   Final Disposition And Release:
      1.   At such time as the work on any required improvement is completed
and all outstanding fees and charges due the City have been paid, the applicant
may request a final release of the construction guarantee relating thereto. An
applicant desiring final release of the guarantee shall submit to the City one
(1) copy of a written "notice of completion and a request for release" and also
a copy of lien releases or other documentation from all suppliers of materials
and subcontractors that the costs thereof have been fully satisfied.
      2.   Following receipt of the notice and request, the City Engineer shall
submit a report to the City Council setting forth the condition of said
improvements. If the condition of said improvements is found to be
satisfactory; all liens have been released; all outstanding fees, costs of
administration and enforcement are paid; and project cleanup is satisfactory;
the City Council shall act to accept the improvements and authorize release of
the remainder of the construction guarantee, except such portion of said
guarantee intended to be applied as part of the durability guarantee required
pursuant to the terms of section
9-2-4 of this chapter.
      3.   If the condition of material or workmanship shows unusual
depreciation or does not comply with acceptable standards of durability, or if
there are any outstanding liens, or any unreimbursed City costs (i.e.,
inspection, administrative, enforcement, legal fees), or if any other terms of
the guarantee have not been satisfied, the matter shall be referred to the City
Council and, in accordance with the provisions of section
9-2-5 of this chapter, the City Council may declare the developer in default
and take such actions as are determined necessary to secure performance.
      4.   The City may initiate the final release and acceptance for some or
all of the required improvements prior to the end of the construction guarantee
period and without receipt of a request from the applicant, subject to finding
by the City Council that construction of the improvements have been completed
in accordance to City standards; that early activation of the improvement is
necessary to provide access, circulation and/or utility or fire service to
adjacent properties; and that no durability guarantee will be required. Upon
issuance of notice of acceptance and release of the construction guarantee
relating thereto, the City shall be deemed to have assumed title to the
improvements and shall be responsible for their operation and maintenance.
(Ord. 2-17-98B, 2-17-1998)
9-2-4: DURABILITY GUARANTEE:
   A.   Durability Guarantee Required; Amount: Concurrently with the final
release of the construction and performance guarantee and acceptance of the
improvements by the City, a durability guarantee shall be established. The
amount of the durability guarantee ("durability retainage") shall be not less
than ten percent (10%) of the total amount of the construction guarantee.
   B.   Length Of Guarantee Period; Purpose: The length of the durability
guarantee period ("durability testing period") shall be not less than one (1)
year following the date of final acceptance of the improvements by the City.
The date of beginning of the durability testing period shall be the date of
acceptance of the improvement by the City Council. The durability retainage
amount, required pursuant to subsection A of this section, shall serve to
ensure the durability of said improvements during the durability testing
period. If during the durability testing period, the durability of said
improvements is found to be satisfactory, said retainage may be released in
accordance with the procedure outlined under subsection C of this section. If
however, during said period, the condition or material or workmanship of the
improvement or improvements fails or shows unusual depreciation, or if it
becomes evident that certain work was not completed, or that said improvements
do not otherwise comply with accepted standards of durability, said condition
shall be corrected by the person giving the guarantee. If the corrections are
not made within a reasonable time, the City Council, in accordance with section
9-2-5 of this chapter, may declare such person in default and use the retainage
to defray the cost of any required work.
   C.   Release Of Durability Retainage; Partial Releases Authorized:
      1.   At the conclusion of the durability testing period, the City Council
may authorize the release of the durability retainage amount, subject to the
prior recommendation of the City Engineer and upon a finding by the City
Council that the quality of construction and materials for the improvements
have endured without evidence of unusual depreciation, nonconformance with City
standards or need for remedial action.
      2.   The City Council may authorize a partial release of up to fifty
percent (50%) of the total durability retainer amount after the conclusion of
the first year of the durability testing period, subject to the same findings
and conditions set forth under subsection C1 of this section. (Ord. 05-02-
2017C, 5-2-2017)
9-2-5: DEFAULT:
Where, in the opinion of the City Council: a) a developer fails or neglects to
satisfactorily install the required improvements within the required time frame
or make required corrections thereto; b) fails to pay all liens in connection
with said improvements or make payment to the City of reimbursement charges for
previously installed improvements installed by others and/or for inspections,
administrative expenses and any enforcement and legal costs incurred by the
City; or c) otherwise fails in carrying out the activity for which the
construction guarantee or durability retainer was required, the City Council
may, after a public hearing with due notice on the matter, declare the
guarantee forfeited. Upon issuance of a declaration of forfeiture, the City
shall proceed to install or repair, or cause to be installed or repaired, the
required but uncompleted or unsatisfactory improvement and/or secure
reimbursement of the costs incurred by the City in performing inspections,
administrative activities, enforcement or legal proceedings relating to the
project using the remainder of the remaining guarantee proceeds; provided,
however, that the City shall not be responsible for work beyond the limits of
the guarantee amount. Any funds remaining after completion of the required
improvements will be returned to the developer. (Ord. 2-17-98B, 2-17-1998)
9-2-6: PENALTY:
Violation of this chapter shall be punishable as a Class C misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 2-17-98B, 2-17-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
TITLE 10
ZONING REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
10-1-1: Title
10-1-2: Intent And Purpose
10-1-3: Declaration
10-1-4: Application
10-1-5: Interpretation
10-1-6: Illegal Uses Prohibited
10-1-7: Amendments To Ordinance And Map
10-1-8: Nonconforming Buildings And Uses
10-1-9: Reclassification Of Territory
10-1-10: Permits Granted Prior To Passage
10-1-11: Uses Prohibited In Zones Unless Expressly Permitted
10-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be known as and shall be entitled the ZONING ORDINANCE OF THE
CITY OF CEDAR HILLS, UTAH, and may be so cited and pleaded. The zoning
ordinance of the City of Cedar Hills, Utah (zoning ordinance), together with
the official zoning map, (zone map) adopted as a part thereof, as may be
amended from time to time, shall constitute a portion of the land use
ordinances of the City of Cedar Hills, Utah, as referred to and authorized
pursuant to the provisions of section 10-9a-501 Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as
amended. (Ord. 2-21-2006A, 2-21-2006)
10-1-2: INTENT AND PURPOSE:
It is the intent and purpose of the city council to avail itself of the powers
granted under Utah Code Annotated section 10-9-101 et seq., and Utah Code
Annotated section 57-8-35, as amended, in a manner that will promote the
health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of
the present and future inhabitants of the city and to this end to:
   A.   Encourage and facilitate orderly growth and development in the city.
   B.   Secure economy in municipal expenditures and to facilitate adequate
provision for transportation, water, sewerage, parks, schools and other public
requirements.
   C.   Lessen congestion in the streets, prevent the overcrowding of land, and
provide adequate light and air.
   D.   Secure safety from fires, floods, traffic hazards and other dangers.
   E.   Stabilize and improve property values.
   F.   Protect the tax base.
   G.   Promote the development of a more attractive and wholesome and
serviceable city.
   H.   Create conditions favorable to prosperity, civic activities and
recreational, educational and cultural opportunities. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-
1978)
10-1-3: DECLARATION:
In establishing the zones, the boundaries thereof, and other regulations and
restrictions applying within each of the zones, due and careful consideration
was given, among other things, to the suitability of the land for particular
uses, and to the character of the zone, with a view to conserving the value of
buildings and encouraging the most appropriate use of land throughout the city.
(Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978)
10-1-4: APPLICATION:
The regulations and restrictions as set forth in this title shall be so
interpreted and construed as to further the objectives and purposes thereof.
(Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978)
10-1-5: INTERPRETATION:
In interpreting and applying this title, the provisions thereof shall be held
to be the minimum requirements needed to promote the public health, safety,
morals, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare of the present and
future inhabitants of the city. It is not intended by the adoption of the
ordinance codified herein to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or
interfere with any existing ordinance, codes, regulations, standards or other
provisions of law, except those that are specifically repealed under the terms
of the ordinance codified herein. Nor is it intended by the ordinance codified
herein to interfere with or abrogate or annul any easement, covenant or other
agreement between parties; provided, however, that where this title imposes a
greater restriction than is required by any ordinance, code, regulation,
standard or other provision of law or by any easement, covenant or private
agreement, the provisions of this title shall govern. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-
1978)
10-1-6: ILLEGAL USES PROHIBITED:
Any building or use of land, or any construction thereon, that was not
authorized by or under the temporary zoning ordinance as passed by the city
council, shall remain unauthorized and illegal unless expressly authorized or
permitted in the provisions of this title. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978)
10-1-7: AMENDMENTS TO ORDINANCE AND MAP:
This title, including the zone map, may be amended, but all proposed amendments
must first be submitted to the planning commission for its recommendation.
   A.   Intent With Respect To Amendments: All amendments to this title shall
be made in accordance with the comprehensive plan of land use. It is hereby
declared to be public policy that this title shall not be amended unless it can
be shown that change or changing conditions make the proposed amendment
reasonably necessary to the promotion of the purposes of this title.
   B.   Amendment Process: The procedure to be followed in amending the zoning
ordinance and zone map shall be as set forth below:
      1.   Written Petition Required; City Initiated Amendments Permitted: Any
person seeking an amendment to this title or zone map shall submit to the
planning commission a written petition designating the change desired and the
reasons therefor, and shall pay a filing fee to the city in such amount as
established by resolution of the city council. Amendments may also be initiated
by action of the planning commission or upon request of the city council.
      2.   Planning Commission To Make Recommendations: Upon receipt of the
petition, the planning commission shall consider the request and, subject to
completion of a public hearing on the matter before the planning commission
with public notice given in accordance with the provisions of subsection B3 of
this section, shall submit its recommendations with respect thereto to the city
council.
      3.   Planning Commission To Conduct Public Hearing Before Recommending
Amendments; Notice Of Hearing To Be Provided: No ordinance approving an
amendment to the zone map or text of the zoning ordinance, or approving a large
scale development project may be enacted by the city council unless and until a
public hearing relating to the proposed ordinance shall have been conducted by
the planning commission. Notice of the date, time and place of the first public
hearing regarding a proposed amendment to the zone map, text of the zoning
ordinance or ordinance of approval of a large scale development project shall
be given as follows:
         a.   Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the area at
least ten (10) calendar days before the date of the hearing, and
         b.   Posted in at least three (3) public locations within the city, or
on the city's official website, and
         c.   Mailed to each affected entity 1 , at least ten (10) calendar
days before the date of the hearing.
      4.   Amendments To Be Adopted By Council; Notice Required: The city
council, at a public meeting called for the purpose and after a public hearing
thereon before the council, shall consider each proposed amendment to the zone
map, text of the zoning ordinance, or ordinance of approval for a large scale
development recommended to it by the planning commission and may act to adopt
or reject the amendment or ordinance of approval as recommended by the planning
commission or after making any revision to adopt the amendment the city council
considers appropriate. Notice of the public meeting at which the city council
will consider a proposed amendment or ordinance of approval shall be given at
least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting, which notice shall, as a
minimum, be posted in at least three (3) public places within the city; or on
the city's official website.
      5.   Amendments To Be Adopted By Ordinance; Public Notice Of Adoption
Required: All amendments to the zoning ordinance and zone map shall be adopted,
published and recorded in accordance with the applicable provisions of Utah
Code Annotated 10-3-701 et seq. (Ord. 2-21-2006A, 2-21-2006)
 
Notes
1 1. As defined by UCA section 10-9a-103 (1), 1953, as amended.
10-1-8: NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES 1 :
   A.   Nonconforming Uses May be Continued: Nonconforming buildings or
structures, or use of land, may be continued to the same extent and character
as that which legally existed on the effective date of the applicable
regulations. Repairs may also be made to a nonconforming building or to a
building housing a nonconforming use.
   B.   Change To Conforming Use: Any nonconforming building or use that has
been changed to a conforming building or use shall not thereafter be changed
back to a nonconforming use.
   C.   Change To Another Nonconforming Use Prohibited: A nonconforming use of
a building or lot shall not be changed to another nonconforming use whatsoever.
Changes in use shall be made only to conforming use.
   D.   Nonconforming Lots Of Record; Dwellings Permitted: The chief building
official may issue a building permit for construction of a single-family
dwelling on any nonconforming lot of record without the necessity of hearing
officer approval; provided, that:
      1.   Single-family dwellings are listed as a permitted use in the present
zone; and
      2.   All setbacks, height, building size and special provision
requirements of the existing zone and all applicable supplementary regulations
can be met.
(Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978; amd. Ord. 4-23-80A, 4-23-1980; Ord. 07-07-2020A, 7-
7-2020)
 
Notes
  2. See also subsection
1 9-1C-3D of this code, which provides determinations relative to nonconforming
  uses may be delegated to the hearing officer.
10-1-9: RECLASSIFICATION OF TERRITORY:
The provisions pertaining to nonconforming uses of land and buildings shall
also apply to land and buildings that hereafter become nonconforming due to an
amendment to the zoning ordinance. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978)
10-1-10: PERMITS GRANTED PRIOR TO PASSAGE:
Authorization granted by the city to construct a building or structure, or to
change the use of land, shall not be denied or abridged in the event that
construction has taken place thereon to the extent of one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or more in replaceable value by the effective date hereof;
provided, however, that such authorization to construct a building or structure
shall be denied if construction would not have complied with all applicable
laws and ordinances existing prior to the date of the ordinance amendment.
"Replaceable value" shall be construed to mean the expenditure necessary to
duplicate the material and labor at market prices. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978)
10-1-11: USES PROHIBITED IN ZONES UNLESS EXPRESSLY PERMITTED:
Uses of land that are not expressly permitted within a zone are hereby declared
to be expressly prohibited therein, except as may be permitted by action of the
planning commission or city council, pursuant to express authority given under
terms of this title. Any person who may obtain state or federal properties by
purchase, lease or other arrangement must utilize such properties in accordance
with the provisions of this title. Neither the planning commission, the hearing
officer nor the zoning administrator shall permit a use within a zone that is
not expressly permitted by the terms of this title.
(Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978; amd. Ord. 07-07-2020A, 7-7-2020)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
10-2-1: Terms Defined
10-2-1: TERMS DEFINED:
For purpose of this title, certain words and phrases require specific
definition of meaning. Words and phrases used in the present tense include the
future, the singular word or number, includes the plural and the singular.
ACCESSORY APARTMENT: A subordinate dwelling within an owner occupied building,
shall have its own eating, sleeping, and sanitation facilities, which is: a)
within or attached to a single-family residential building, or b) within a
detached accessory structure associated with a single-family dwelling.
AGRICULTURE: The growing of soil crops in the customary manner in the open. It
shall not include livestock raising activities; nor shall it include retailing
of products on the premises.
ANIMAL UNITS:
  Large: One large animal unit shall be any of the following: two (2) cows,
horses, donkeys, llamas or similar large animals; or eight (8) adult sheep; or
sixteen (16) feeder lambs, or eight (8) goats, or two (2) pigs, or an
equivalent combination of the above, together with the suckling offspring
thereof. The maximum number of animal units allowed to be placed on any lot or
parcel shall be two (2) large animal units. Each large animal unit requires ten
thousand (10,000) square feet of livestock management area. Half of a large
animal unit requires five thousand (5,000) square feet of livestock management
area.
  Small: Small animals or fowl shall be one of any of the following: rabbit,
turkey, duck, chicken, pigeon, dove, turtle, quail, or similar small animals or
fowl.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY: A facility licensed by the State of Utah that
provides a combination of housing and personalized healthcare to its residents
and is designed to respond to the individual needs of those who require help
with the activities of daily living such as meal preparation, personal
grooming, housekeeping, medication, etc. Care is provided in a professionally
managed group living environment in a way that promotes maximum independence
for each resident.
ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS: An assisted living facility
occupied exclusively by persons sixty (60) years of age or older and paid
professional staff members.
AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT): One equivalent residential connection shall
constitute ten (10) trips per day.
AWNING: A rooflike cover extending over or in front of a place (as over the
deck or in front of a door or window) as a shelter.
BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY: A one-family dwelling, occupied by a residing
family and containing one or more sleeping rooms intended for the occupancy by
persons unrelated to the residing family on a short term basis (overnight and
up to 2 weeks).
BUILDABLE AREA: A lot or portion thereof possessing all of the following
physical characteristics:
   A.   The area contains no territory having a slope of thirty percent (30%)
or greater.
   B.   The area contains no territory that is located in any identified
floodplain or within any recognized inundation zone, mudflow zone or zone of
deformation, or lands subject to earth slippage, landslide or rockfall.
   C.   The engineering properties of the soil provide adequate structural
support for the intended use.
   D.   The area does not possess any other recognized natural condition that
renders it unsafe for building purposes.
BUILDING: A roofed and completely walled structure built for permanent use.
BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A subordinate building, the use of which is incidental to
that of the main building, including, but not limited to, detached garages and
storage sheds greater than one hundred twenty (120) square feet.
BUILDING, MAIN: One or more of the principal buildings upon a lot. Garages and
other buildings that are attached to a dwelling or other main building or that
are situated within twelve feet (12') of a main building shall be considered as
part of the main building.
CARGO CONTAINER: A large metal box used for the transportation of goods.
CARPORT: A structure not completely enclosed by walls for the shelter of
vehicles and/or recreation vehicles.
COLONY (HIVE): A single stack of boxes including a hive body and honey
collecting supers with one queen and attending bees.
CUSTOMARY RESIDENTIAL ACCESSORY STRUCTURES: A structure constructed on the same
zoning lot as a dwelling and which is intended for the incidental and exclusive
use of the residents of said dwelling. Such structures do not substantially
alter the characteristics of the permitted principle use or structure.
Accessory structures and uses include, but are not limited to buildings such
as: detached garages, carports, swimming pools, tennis courts, green houses,
equipment and supply storage buildings which are customarily used in
conjunction with and incidental to the principle use of the structure within
each permitted zone.
DECK: An exterior floor supported on at least two (2) opposing sides by an
adjacent structure and/or post, piers or other independent supports.
DECK COVER: Any exterior roof structure open on at least two (2) sides and
covering a deck, porch, or patio.
DENSITY: The number of dwelling units per acre of land.
DWELLING, CONVENTIONAL CONSTRUCTION: A dwelling that is constructed and placed
on a lot in compliance with the provisions of the Building, Construction and
Fire Codes as mandated by the State and as approved by the City.
DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building containing three (3) or more dwelling
units.
DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A detached residence designed for or occupied by one
family, but not including hotels, motels, or bed and breakfast facilities.
Single-family dwellings may include accessory apartments, which may be approved
as provided elsewhere in this Code.
DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building containing two (2) dwelling units.
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a building designed for living purposes
(bathing, eating and sleeping), and occupied by one family.
FAMILY: One of the following groups of individuals, but not more than one at
the same time: a) an individual living alone; or b) two (2) or more people all
of whom are related to one designated occupant of the dwelling by blood,
marriage, adoption, or legal guardianship and their foster children and up to
two (2) other unrelated persons who do not pay rent or give other consideration
for the privilege of staying with the family; or c) up to four (4) unrelated
individuals who live together as a single housekeeping unit; or d) two (2)
unrelated individuals and any children of either of them living as a single
housekeeping unit. A "guest" under this section is defined as a person who
stays with a family for a period of less than thirty (30) days within any
rolling one year period and does not utilize the dwelling as a legal address
for any purpose. For purposes of the definition of family, the term "related"
shall mean a spouse, parent, child, grandparent, grandchild, brother, sister,
uncle, aunt, nephew, niece, great-grandparent, and great-grandchild. The term
"related" does not include other, more distant relationships such as cousins.
GARAGE: A structure completely enclosed on all sides by walls and doors that is
designed and intended for the shelter or storage of automobiles.
GRADING: Any excavating or filling, or combination thereof.
HARD SURFACE: Concrete, asphalt, road base, gravel, pavers and other materials
approved by the zoning official.
LAND SURFACE SLOPES (SLOPE): Shall be determined by calculating the different
grade rise over a distance of fifty feet (50'), which rise shall not exceed
fifteen feet (15') (30 percent). Slope calculations shall be approved by the
city engineer. Exclusions to be approved by the city engineer, which may
include natural drainageways, master planned collector roadways with associated
cut and/or fill slopes, and nonbuildable zones mitigated via approved method.
LIVESTOCK MANAGEMENT AREA: All portions of a lot devoted exclusively to animal
units for the care and keeping of animals and fowl, including, but not limited
to, barns, sheds, coops, pens, hutches, paddocks, stables, corrals and
pastures. A livestock management area shall be first approved by the zoning
administrator. Each livestock management area shall be constructed to
accommodate the animals or fowl in an animal unit. All surface drainage from a
livestock management area shall be disposed of on site.
LIVING AREA: Those portions of a dwelling having a headroom height of not less
than seven feet (7') and used for customary living activities. For purposes of
this title, the term "living area" shall not include portions of the structure
intended for parking of vehicles, unenclosed porches, storage rooms having only
outside access, and rooms devoted exclusively to the housing of heating,
ventilating or similar mechanical equipment.
LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting on two (2) intersecting or intercepting streets
where the interior angle of intersection or interception does not exceed one
hundred thirty five degrees (135o).
LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.
LOT LINE, FRONT: The front boundary line of a lot bordering on the street.
LOT LINE, REAR: A lot line that is opposite and most distant from the front lot
line.
LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
LOT OF RECORD: A parcel of land that is shown as a separate and independent
parcel on the records of the county recorder.
MAIN FLOOR LIVING AREA: The area within a dwelling, measured from the outside
wall line on a horizontal plane, that, when viewed from above, contains living
area on one or more floors that are located at an elevation entirely above the
finished ground level surrounding the dwelling.
NATURAL STATE: That portion of any lot or parcel that cannot be subjected to
grading, removal of vegetation or building development.
NONCONFORMING LOT OF RECORD: A parcel of land that does not conform to the area
and/or width requirements of the zone classification in which said parcel is
now situated, but that was legally created as a conforming lot of record prior
to the effective date of the now controlling provision.
PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT): A development
project containing a combination of clustered residences and common areas that
has been planned, approved and developed in conformance with the applicable
provisions of this title.
PORTABLE GARAGE: A portable shelter constructed with a soft canopy covering.
PORTABLE UTILITY SHED: A single storied structure with one or more sides
enclosed, for the purpose of storing tools and equipment. Limited to one
hundred twenty (120) square feet floor area, maximum height of ten feet (10')
and not having a footing or foundation.
PREMISES OCCUPATION: Any use or activity consisting of the providing of a
service, or the fabrication of a product (including the storage of materials or
equipment in connection therewith), which service or activity is conducted on a
lot in a residential zone, but in a building other than the residential
dwelling.
RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle designed for recreational use such as a boat,
trailer, camper and other vehicles approved by the zoning official.
SETBACK: The shortest distance between the property line and outside surface of
the foundation wall of the main building.
SETBACK AREA, REQUIRED (REQUIRED YARD AREA): That portion of a lot between the
lot boundary and the required setback lines.
SETBACK, REQUIRED (REQUIRED YARD): The minimum required space between a lot
boundary line and the foundation wall of the main building. The depth of the
required setback shall be as set forth under the zone requirements as measured
at right angle to the applicable lot boundary line.
YARD AREA: That portion of a lot between the lot boundary and the outside
surface of the foundation wall of the main building.
ZONING LOT: A parcel of land that:
   A.   Complies with all existing area, frontage, width, setback and
supplementary requirements of the zone in which it is located.
   B.   Has frontage on a city street, which street has been accepted by the
city council, has been improved in accordance with city standards and is in use
by the public or has frontage on a private right of way within an approved
large scale development.
   C.   Is shown as a separate lot in an approved subdivision plat or large
scale development plan, which plat or plan has been approved in accordance with
the applicable ordinance or that is exempted from compliance with said
ordinance.
   D.   Contains an area sufficient in size to accommodate a conforming
structure, which area meets or exceeds all setback, slope, access, soil
capability or other applicable criteria of the zone and/or is not subject to
any easement or other encumbrance prohibiting its use for building purposes.
(Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978; amd. Ord. 4-23-80A, 4-23-1980; Ord. 5-11-83A, 5-11-
1983; Ord. 5-13-92A, 5-13-1992; Ord. 1-13-93A, 1-13-1993; Ord. 7-7-98A, 7-7-
1998; Ord. 1-20-2004B, 1-20-2004; Ord. 4-6-2004A, 4-6-2004; 2004 Code; Ord. 12-
7-2004D, 12-7-2004; Ord. 5-19-2009A, 5-19-2009; Ord. 10-20-2009C, 10-20-2009;
Ord. 1-19-2010A, 1-19-2010; Ord. 5-18-2010A, 5-18-2010; Ord. 10-19-2010A, 10-
19-2010; Ord. 11-9-2010A, 11-9-2010; Ord. 11-9-2010B, 11-9-2010; Ord. 5-3-
2011A, 5-3-2011; Ord. 5-3-2011B, 5-3-2011; Ord. 9-20-2011B, 9-20-2011; Ord. 1-
3-2012B, 1-3-2012, eff. 2-21-2012; Ord. 1-17-2012A, 1-17-2012; Ord. 07-17-
2018A, 7-17-2018; Ord. 02-05-2019A, 2-5-2019)
CHAPTER 3
ESTABLISHMENT OF ZONES
SECTION:
10-3-1: Zones Established
10-3-2: Official Zone Map
10-3-3: Boundaries Of Zones
10-3-1: ZONES ESTABLISHED:
In order to carry out the purpose of this title, the City is hereby divided
into zones as follows:
 
R-1-11,000  Residential Zone
R-1-15,000  Residential Zone
PD-1        Planned Development Zone
H-1         Hillside Development Zone
SC-1        Shopping Center Zone
RR-1-20,000 Rural Residential Zone
PR 2.2      Planned Residential Zone
PR 3.4      Planned Residential Zone
TR-1        Townsite Residential Zone
PF          Public Facilities Zone
 
(Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999; amd. Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000; Ord. 6-1-2004A, 6-1-
2004; Ord. 06-19-2018B, 6-19-2018)
10-3-2: OFFICIAL ZONE MAP:
   A.   Scope: The location and boundaries of each of the zones are shown on
the official zone map of the City, and said map is hereby declared to be an
official record and a part of this title, and said official zone map and all
notations, references and other information shown thereon shall be as much a
part of this title as if the matters and other information set forth by said
map were fully described herein. Said official zone map shall be adopted by
ordinance with the signature of the Mayor, attested to by the City Recorder,
and recorded in the Office of the City Recorder. Whenever amendments or changes
are made in zone boundaries, such amendments or changes shall be made by the
City Recorder on the official zone map promptly. No amendment or change shall
become effective until after it has been properly noted and attested to on the
official zone map.
   B.   Changes: No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zone
map except in conformity with the procedure set forth in this title. Any
unauthorized change of whatever kind by any person or persons shall be
considered a violation of this title and punishable as provided in this title.
   C.   Official Map On File: Regardless of the existence of purported copies
of the official zone map, which may from time to time be made or published, the
official zone map, which shall be located in the Office of the City Recorder,
shall be the final authority in determining current status. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-
20-1978; amd. 2004 Code)
10-3-3: BOUNDARIES OF ZONES:
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of various zones, the
following rules shall apply:
   A.   Where the indicated boundaries on the official zone map are
approximately street or alley lines, said street or alley lines shall be
construed to be the zone boundaries.
   B.   Where the indicated boundaries are approximately lot lines, said lot
lines shall be construed to be the zone boundaries, unless otherwise indicated.
   C.   Where land has not been subdivided into lots and blocks, the zone
boundaries shall be determined by use of the scale of measurement shown on the
map.
   D.   Where other uncertainty exists, the hearing officer shall interpret the
map.
(Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978; amd. Ord. 07-07-2020A, 7-7-2020)
CHAPTER 4
REGULATIONS WITHIN ZONES
SECTION:
10-4-1: Declaration
10-4-1: DECLARATION:
Regulations and restrictions governing the use of land, buildings and
structures, the size of yards, courts and other open spaces, density of
population, location, size and height of buildings and structures, and the
maintenance of premises, shall apply within the several zones as hereinafter
set forth. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978)
ARTICLE A.  R-1-11,000 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-4A-1: Legislative Intent
10-4A-2: Permitted Uses
10-4A-3: Conditional Uses
10-4A-4: Area And Width Requirements
10-4A-5: Access Requirements
10-4A-6: Location Requirements
10-4A-7: Utility Requirements
10-4A-8: Dwelling Requirements
10-4A-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
   A.   The R-1-11,000 residential zone covers the portion of the city that is
primarily intended for single-family residential development on moderate sized
lots of approximately one-fourth (1/4) acre. Uses in the zone include a
commingling of single-family dwellings and parks, playgrounds, schools,
churches and other community facilities typically located within a residential
neighborhood and intended to serve the residents thereof. The zone is
characterized by spacious lots, uncrowded buildings, and quiet residential
conditions favorable to the rearing of children. Owners and developers of
property within this zone should bear in mind that primacy is given to
residential development and maintain their properties in recognition thereof.
   B.   The provisions of this zone are intended to implement the objectives of
the high density residential areas identified in the city general plan and are
hereby declared to be consistent therewith.
   C.   The specific regulations necessary for the accomplishment of the intent
of the zone are hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
10-4A-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with the applicable requirements of this title:
Churches.
Customary household pets, but not including kennels.
Customary residential accessory structures.
Foster care homes containing not more than four (4) foster care occupants.
Gardens, orchards and field crops.
Public agency parks and playgrounds.
Single-family dwellings. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 04-15-
2014A, 4-15-2014)
10-4A-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with the applicable requirements of this title and after approval
has been given by the designated review agency:
Accessory apartment.
Assisted living facility for elderly persons.
Conventional subdivision projects, subject to compliance with the applicable
provisions of this zone and the city subdivision ordinance.
Fences, walls and hedges subject to the requirements of section
10-5-18 of this title.
Flexible design subdivision projects having a density of not greater than four
(4) dwelling units per net acre, subject to the applicable provisions of
chapter 6, article C of this title.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of title 3, chapter 1 of this code.
Small animal units. See section
10-5-33, "Small Animals Or Fowl", of this title.
Water, sewer and utility transmission lines and facilities required as an
incidental part of a conventional subdivision, flexible design subdivision or
other approved development project in the zone and subject to approval by the
city council. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998; amd. Ord. 4-21-98B, 4-21-1998; 2004
Code; Ord. 9-18-2007A, 9-18-2007; Ord. 1-19-2010A, 1-19-2010; Ord. 11-9-2010B,
11-9-2010; Ord. 9-20-2011B, 9-20-2011; Ord. 1-3-2012B, 1-3-2012, eff. 2-21-
2012)
10-4A-4: AREA AND WIDTH REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum area, width and depth requirements for a zoning lot shall be as
follows:
 
Use                      Minimum Area   Minimum Width1 Minimum Depth1
Single-family dwellings2 11,000 sq. ft.                110 ft.
 Interior lots                          90 ft.
 Corner lots                            100 ft.
Churches                 2.5 acres      200 ft.
Schools                  5 acres        200 ft.
1Standards for determining compliance with lot width and depth requirements
are set forth under section
10-5-19 of this title.
2These minimum area, width and depth requirements shall be applicable to
individual parcels and lots in conventional subdivision projects. Minimum
zone lot requirements for flexible design subdivisions shall be established
in accordance with the specific requirements for such projects.
 
(Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
10-4A-5: ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
Each lot shall abut upon and have direct access to a city street. The distance
of said abutting side shall be not less than the minimum width requirement of
the zone, except that the length of the abutting side may be reduced to not
less than sixty feet (60') when the lot fronts upon a cul-de-sac or curve in a
designated city street and the lot lines radiate in such a manner that the
width of the lot will meet or exceed the minimum lot width requirements as
determined in accordance with the provisions of section
10-5-19 of this title. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
10-4A-6: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Main Buildings: All dwellings and other main buildings and structures
shall be set back in accordance with the following:
      1.   Front Setback: All dwellings and other main buildings shall be set
back not less than thirty feet (30') from the front lot line that abuts on any
existing or proposed public street.
      2.   Side Setback:
         a.   Interior Lots: All dwellings and other main buildings shall be
set back not less than eight feet (8') from any side lot line and the combined
total setback distance of opposite side setbacks shall be not less than twenty
feet (20'). (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
         b.   Corner Lots; Side Abutting A Street: All dwellings and other main
buildings shall be set back not less than thirty feet (30') from the side lot
line that abuts on an existing or proposed street, except that in the instance
of corner lots in subdivisions approved prior to June 1, 1998, and having a lot
width of ninety five feet (95') or less, the side setback requirement adjacent
to a street shall be reduced to twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 7-7-98A, 7-7-
1998)
      3.   Rear Setback:
         a.   Interior Lots: All dwellings or other main buildings shall be set
back not less than twenty five feet (25') from the rear lot line.
         b.   Corner Lots: All dwellings and other main buildings shall be set
back not less than twenty five feet (25') from the rear lot line, except that
where a garage is attached to the rear of the dwelling, the required rear
setback for said garage may be reduced to not less than twelve feet (12') as
measured from the rear lot line to the closest part of the building. (Ord. 2-
17-98A, 2-17-1998)
      4.   Measurement Of Setbacks: Compliance with minimum setback
requirements shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of section
10-5-5 of this title. (Ord. 7-7-98A, 7-7-1998)
   B.   Accessory Buildings: All accessory buildings shall be located in
accordance with the following:
      1.   Setback From Main Building; Front Setback: Accessory buildings shall
be set back not less than twelve feet (12') to the rear of the closest rear
wall of the main building, and not less than twelve feet (12') from the closest
side wall of the main building. Accessory buildings that are located twelve
feet (12') or closer to a main building shall be considered as part of the main
building. Where no main building exists on a lot, a detached accessory building
shall be set back not less than seventy five feet (75') from the front lot
line.
      2.   Side Setback; Corner Lot, Side Abutting A Street: Accessory
buildings shall be set back not less than thirty feet (30') from the side lot
line that abuts on a street.
      3.   Side And Rear Setback; Interior Lot Line: Accessory buildings shall
be set back not less than five feet (5') from any interior side or rear lot
line. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
10-4A-7: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
All dwellings and other structures used for human occupancy shall be served
with adequate utilities, as follows:
   A.   The city culinary water system.
   B.   The city sanitary sewer system.
   C.   Electric, natural gas and telephone systems.
   D.   The city pressurized irrigation system.
   E.   The city stormwater system. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
10-4A-8: DWELLING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Area Of Dwellings: Each dwelling shall conform to one of the following:
      1.   The dwelling shall contain a main floor living area of not less than
one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet; or
      2.   The dwelling shall meet or exceed all of the following:
         a.   The dwelling shall have a total "building footprint area" of not
less than one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet as measured from the
outside of the foundation wall;
         b.   Not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of the "building
footprint area" shall be devoted exclusively to living space (portions of the
footprint area occupied by garages, porches, breezeways and similar areas shall
be excluded); and
         c.   The dwelling shall contain a total living area of not less than
one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet located on building floors or
levels, located entirely above the finished grade of the ground surface
adjacent to the foundation of the structure. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
   B.   Minimum Dimension: The minimum width or length dimension of any
dwelling as measured from the outside wall shall be not less than twenty four
feet (24'). Nonliving spaces such as garages, porches, breezeways and similar
areas shall not be included in determining compliance with this requirement.
(Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
   C.   Height Of Building:
      1.   The maximum height of any dwelling shall be thirty five feet (35')
in height as measured to the ridgeline of the roof. The maximum height of any
accessory building shall be twenty feet (20') to the ridgeline of the roof.
Both the dwelling and the accessory building height shall be measured from the
highest finished grade of the ground surface adjacent to the foundation of the
structure from the front elevation to the ridgeline. (Ord. 10-20-98A, 10-20-
1998; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   Chimneys, television antennas, and similar ancillary structures not
used for human occupancy shall be excluded in determining height; provided,
that no such ancillary structure shall extend to a height in excess of ten feet
(10') above the building. (Ord. 3-20-2012B, 3-20-2012)
      3.   The minimum height of a building used as a dwelling shall be not
less than eight feet (8'). (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
   D.   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Not less than two (2) off street parking spaces shall be required
for each dwelling unit. Each off street parking space shall be not less than
ten feet by twenty feet (10' x 20') per space.
      2.   Not less than two (2) off street parking spaces appurtenant to a
dwelling shall be enclosed within a garage.
      3.   Parking of recreational vehicles, boats, trailers, etc., is
permitted within the optional enclosure area, in a private driveway or directly
adjacent to the garage/driveway on an approved surface. (Ord. 10-20-2009C, 10-
20-2009)
   E.   Special Provisions: All dwellings shall conform to the special
provisions relating to dwellings set forth under section
10-5-5 of this title. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
ARTICLE B.  R-1-15,000 RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-4B-1: Legislative Intent
10-4B-2: Permitted Uses
10-4B-3: Conditional Uses
10-4B-4: Area And Width Requirements
10-4B-5: Access Requirements
10-4B-6: Location Requirements
10-4B-7: Utility Requirements
10-4B-8: Dwelling Requirements
10-4B-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
   A.   The R-1-15,000 residential zone covers the portion of the city that is
primarily intended for single-family residential development on moderate sized
lots of approximately one-third (1/3) acre. Uses in the zone include a
commingling of single- family dwellings and parks, playgrounds, schools,
churches and other community facilities typically located within a residential
neighborhood and intended to serve the residents thereof. The zone is
characterized by spacious lots, uncrowded buildings and quiet residential
conditions favorable to the rearing of children. Owners and developers of
property within this zone should bear in mind that primacy is given to
residential development and maintain their properties in recognition thereof.
   B.   The provisions of this zone are intended to implement the objectives of
the medium density residential areas identified in the city general plan and
are hereby declared to be consistent therewith.
   C.   The specific regulations necessary for the accomplishment of the intent
of the zone are hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
10-4B-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with the applicable requirements of this title:
Churches.
Customary household pets, but not including kennels.
Customary residential accessory structures.
Foster care homes containing not more than four (4) foster care occupants.
Gardens, orchards and field crops.
Public agency parks and playgrounds.
Single-family dwellings. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 04-15-
2014A, 4-15-2014)
10-4B-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with the applicable requirements of this title and after approval
has been given by the designated review agency:
Accessory apartment.
Assisted living facility for elderly persons.
Conventional subdivision projects, subject to compliance with the applicable
provisions of this zone and the city subdivision ordinance.
Fences, walls and hedges, subject to the requirements of section
10-5-18 of this title.
Flexible design subdivision projects, having a density of not greater than two
and nine-tenths (2.9) dwelling units per net acre and subject to the provisions
of chapter 6, article C of this title.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of title 3, chapter 1 of this code.
Large animal units. All barns, sheds, coops, pens, hutches, paddocks, stables,
corrals or similar structures used for the enclosure, housing, or confinement
of animals in a large animal unit shall be located not less than one hundred
feet (100') to an existing dwelling on an adjacent lot.
Planned residential development projects, having a density not greater than two
and nine-tenths (2.9) dwelling units per net acre and subject to the provisions
of chapter 6, article B of this title.
Small animal units. See section
10-5-33, "Small Animals Or Fowl", of this title.
Water, sewer and utility transmission lines and facilities required as an
incidental part of a conventional subdivision, flexible design subdivision,
planned residential development or other approved development project in the
zone, and approval by the City Council. (Ord. 08-25-2015A, 8-25-2015)
10-4B-4: AREA AND WIDTH REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum area, width and depth requirements for a zoning lot shall be as
follows:
 
Use                      Minimum Area   Minimum Width1 Minimum Depth1
Single-family dwellings2 15,000 sq. ft. 100 ft.        120 ft.
Churches                 2.5 acres      200 ft.
Schools                  5 acres        200 ft.
 
Notes:
   1.    Standards for determining compliance with lot width and depth
requirements are set forth under section
10-5-19 of this title.
   2.    These minimum area, width and depth requirements shall be applicable
to individual parcels and lots in conventional subdivision projects. Minimum
zone lot requirements for flexible design subdivisions and planned residential
developments shall be established in accordance with the specific requirements
for such projects.
(Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
10-4B-5: ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
Each lot shall abut upon and have direct access to a City street. The distance
of said abutting side shall be not less than the minimum width requirement of
the zone, except for the following instances:
   A.   The length of the abutting side may be reduced to not less than sixty
feet (60') when the lot fronts upon a cul-de-sac or curve in a designated City
street and the lot lines radiate in such a manner that the width of the lot
will meet or exceed the minimum lot width requirements as determined in
accordance with the provisions of section
10-5-19 of this title.
   B.   The lot has been approved as a flag lot project in accordance with the
provisions of section
10-5-12 of this title, or as a lot served by a common drive project, in
accordance with the provisions of section
10-5-20 of this title. (Ord. 07-19-2016A, 7-19-2016)
10-4B-6: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Main Buildings: All dwellings and other main buildings and structures
shall be set back in accordance with the following:
      1.   Front Setback: All dwellings and other main buildings shall be set
back not less than thirty feet (30') from the front lot line that abuts on any
existing or proposed public street.
      2.   Side Setback:
         a.   Interior Lots: All dwellings and other main buildings, including
any attached garage or similar structure, shall be set back not less than ten
feet (10') from any side lot line and the combined total setback distance of
the opposite side setbacks shall be not less than twenty four feet (24').
         b.   Corner Lots; Side Abutting A Street: All dwellings and other main
dwellings shall be set back not less than thirty feet (30') from the side lot
line that abuts on an existing or proposed street, except that in the instance
of corner lots in subdivisions approved prior to June 1, 1998, and having a lot
width of ninety five feet (95') or less, the side setback requirement adjacent
to a street shall be reduced to twenty five feet (25').
      3.   Rear Setback:
         a.   Interior Lots: All dwellings or other main buildings shall be set
back not less than twenty five feet (25') from the rear lot line.
         b.   Corner Lots: All dwellings and other main buildings shall be set
back not less than twenty five feet (25') from the rear lot line, except that
where a garage is attached to the rear of the dwelling, the required rear
setback for said garage may be reduced to not less than twelve feet (12') as
measured from the rear lot line to the closest part of the building.
      4.   Measurement Of Setbacks: Compliance with minimum setback
requirements shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of section
10-5-5 of this title.
   B.   Accessory Buildings: All accessory buildings shall be located in
accordance with the following:
      1.   Setback From Main Building; Front Setback: Accessory buildings shall
be set back not less than twelve feet (12') to the rear of the closest rear
wall of the main building, and not less than twelve feet (12') from the closest
side wall of the main building. Accessory buildings that are located twelve
feet (12') or closer to a main building shall be considered as part of the main
building. Where no main building exists on a lot, a detached accessory building
shall be set back not less than seventy five feet (75') from the front lot
line.
      2.   Side Setback; Corner Lot, Side Abutting A Street: Accessory
buildings shall be set back not less than thirty feet (30') from the side lot
line that abuts on a street.
      3.   Side And Rear Setback; Interior Lot Line: Accessory buildings shall
be set back not less than five feet (5') from any interior side or rear lot
line. (Ord. 03-06-2018B, 3-6-2018)
10-4B-7: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
All dwellings and other structures used for human occupancy shall be served
with adequate utilities, as follows:
   A.   The City culinary water system.
   B.   The City sanitary sewer system.
   C.   Electric, natural gas and telephone systems.
   D.   The City pressurized irrigation system.
   E.   The City stormwater system. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
10-4B-8: DWELLING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Area Of Dwellings: Each dwelling shall conform to one of the following:
      1.   The dwelling shall contain a main floor living area of not less than
one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet; or
      2.   The dwelling shall meet or exceed all of the following:
         a.   The dwelling shall have a total "building footprint area" of not
less than one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet as measured from the
outside of the foundation wall;
         b.   Not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of the "building
footprint area" shall be devoted exclusively to living space (portions of the
footprint area occupied by garages, porches, breezeways and similar areas shall
be excluded); and
         c.   The dwelling shall contain a total living area of not less than
one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet located on building floors or
levels, located entirely above the finished grade of the ground surface
adjacent to the foundation of the structure.
   B.   Minimum Dimension: The minimum width or length dimension of any
dwelling as measured from the outside wall shall be not less than twenty four
feet (24'). Nonliving spaces such as garages, porches, breezeways and similar
areas shall not be included in determining compliance with this requirement.
   C.   Height Of Building:
      1.   The maximum height of any dwelling shall be thirty five feet (35')
in height as measured to the ridgeline of the roof. The maximum height of any
accessory building shall be twenty feet (20') to the ridgeline of the roof, an
additional five feet (5') in building height may be granted by the Zoning
Administrator for lots exceeding the minimum square footage requirement by a
factor of two (2), should the proposed accessory building comply with the
building setback requirements of a main dwelling in the underlying zone. At no
time shall an accessory structure exceed twenty five feet (25') in height. Both
the dwelling and the accessory building height shall be measured from the
highest finished grade of the ground surface adjacent to the foundation of the
structure from the front elevation to the ridgeline.
      2.   Chimneys, television antennas, and similar ancillary structures not
used for human occupancy shall be excluded in determining height; provided,
that no such ancillary structure shall extend to a height in excess of ten feet
(10') above the building.
      3.   The minimum height of a building used as a dwelling shall be not
less than eight feet (8'). (Ord. 03-06-2018B, 3-6-2018)
   D.   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Not less than two (2) off street parking spaces shall be required
for each dwelling unit. Each off street parking space shall be not less than
ten feet by twenty feet (10' x 20') per space.
      2.   Not less than two (2) off street parking spaces appurtenant to a
dwelling shall be enclosed within a garage.
      3.   Parking of recreational vehicles, boats, trailers, etc., is
permitted within the optional enclosure area, in a private driveway or directly
adjacent to the garage/driveway on an approved surface. (Ord. 10-20-2009C, 10-
20-2009)
   E.   Special Provisions: All dwellings shall conform to the special
provisions relating to dwellings set forth under section
10-5-5 of this title. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
ARTICLE C.  PD-1 PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE
SECTION:
10-4C-1: Legislative Intent
10-4C-2: Permitted Uses
10-4C-3: Conditional Uses
10-4C-4: Area And Width Requirements
10-4C-5: Access Requirements
10-4C-6: Location Requirements
10-4C-7: Utility Requirements
10-4C-8: Dwelling Requirements
10-4C-9: Development Agreement
10-4C-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
   A.   The Planned Development Zone (PD-1) covers a portion of the City that
is primarily intended for high density single family residential development
within a homeowners' association. Uses in the zone include a combination of
single-family dwellings, parks, playgrounds, and other facilities typically
located within a residential neighborhood and intended to serve the residents
thereof. The zone is characterized by high density housing, typically between
six (6) and eight (8) units per acre.
   B.   The provisions of this zone are intended to implement the objectives of
the highest density residential areas identified in the City general plan and
are hereby declared to be consistent therewith. The PD-1 Zone shall apply only
to a parcel of property of approximately 11.4 acres, located generally at 4600
West Cedar Hills Dr., as more fully specified in exhibit A to the Development
Agreement that has been adopted by the City pursuant to section
10-4C-9 of this article.
   C.   The specific regulations necessary for the accomplishment of the intent
of the zone are hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 06-19-2018B, 6-19-2018)
10-4C-2: PERMITTED USES:
Permitted uses within the PD-1 Zone shall include single family homes and the
commercial office and retail uses included as a part of the Design Guidelines
(the "Design Guidelines") as defined in section 1.2.15 of the Development
Agreement that has been adopted by the City Council. Any use not specifically
listed as a permitted use in this section, or as a conditional use in section
10-4C-3 of this article, shall be prohibited.
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with the applicable requirements of this title:
Commercial office and retail uses subject to the provisions of chapter 6,
article A of this title.
Customary household pets, but not including kennels.
Foster care homes containing not more than four (4) foster care occupants.
Gardens.
HOA maintained parks and playgrounds.
Single-family dwellings. (Ord. 06-19-2018B, 6-19-2018)
10-4C-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land may be permitted upon
compliance with the standards set forth in this title and after approval has
been given by the designated review body.
Conventional subdivision projects, subject to compliance with the applicable
provisions of this zone and the City subdivision ordinance.
Fences, walls and hedges subject to the requirements of section
10-5-18 of this title.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of title 3, chapter 1 of this Code.
Small animal units. See section
10-5-33, "Small Animals Or Fowl", of this title.
Water, sewer and utility transmission lines and facilities required as an
incidental part of a conventional subdivision or other approved development
project in the zone and subject to approval by the City Council. (Ord. 06-19-
2018B, 6-19-2018)
10-4C-4: AREA AND WIDTH REQUIREMENTS:
Property in the PD-1 Zone shall be developed in substantial conformance with
the Concept Plan included as exhibit C to the Development Agreement that is
adopted by the City pursuant to section
10-4C-9 of this article. Lot dimensions in the PD-1 Zone shall be generally
consistent with the Concept Plan, as finally determined by the City Council
with a recommendation from the Planning Commission based on an approved
subdivision plan subject to the approval process found in title 11 of this
Code. (Ord. 06-19-2018B, 6-19-2018)
10-4C-5: ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
Except as illustrated in the Concept Plan, each lot shall abut upon and have
direct access to a street constructed to City standards. The distance of said
abutting side shall not be less than the minimum width requirement of the zone
or as adopted pursuant to the terms of the Development Agreement. (Ord. 06-19-
2018B, 6-19-2018)
10-4C-6: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Main Buildings: All dwellings and other main buildings and structures
shall be set back in accordance with the following:
      1.   Front Setback: All dwellings and other main buildings shall be set
back not less than twenty feet (20') from the front lot line that abuts on any
existing or proposed street. A front porch may extend into the front setback no
more than five feet (5').
      2.   Side Setback:
         a.   Interior lots: All dwelling and other main buildings shall be
setback not less than five feet (5') from any side lot line, and the combined
total setback distance of the opposite side setback shall be not less than ten
feet (10'). Porch may extend into side yard setback area no more than two feet
(2').
         b.   Corner lots; side abutting a street: All dwellings and other main
buildings shall be set back not less than ten feet (10') from the side lot line
that abuts on an existing or proposed street.
      3.   Rear Setback: All dwellings or other main buildings shall be set
back not less than ten feet (10') from the rear lot line.
      4.   Measurement Of Setbacks: Compliance with minimum setback
requirements shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of section
10-5-5 of this title.
   B.   Accessory Structures: All accessory structures shall meet the
provisions of sections
10-5-29 and
10-5-30 of this title; all other types of accessory structures are strictly
prohibited. (Ord. 06-19-2018B, 6-19-2018)
10-4C-7: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
All dwellings and other structures used for human occupancy shall be served
with adequate utilities, as follows:
   A.   The City culinary water system.
   B.   The City sanitary sewer system.
   C.   Electric, natural gas and telecommunication systems.
   D.   The City pressurized irrigation system.
   E.   The City stormwater system. (Ord. 06-19-2018B, 6-19-2018)
10-4C-8: DWELLING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Design Elements: Each dwelling shall conform to the following:
      1.   Dwellings shall conform to the provisions of the adopted Design
Guidelines dictating the design elements for all approved lots within the
subdivision. Design Guidelines shall dictate the following design elements:
         a.   Roof pitch;
         b.   Facade treatment;
         c.   Minimum home size;
         d.   Prohibited items.
   B.   Height Of Building:
      1.   The maximum height of any dwelling shall be thirty five feet (35')
in height as measured to the ridgeline of the roof. The dwelling height shall
be measured from the highest finished grade of the ground surface adjacent to
the foundation of the structure from the elevation to the ridgeline. The height
of all accessory structures shall comply with the provisions of sections
10-5-29 and
10-5-30 of this title.
      2.   Chimneys, television antennas, and similar ancillary structure not
used for human occupancy shall be excluded in determining height; provided,
that no such ancillary structure shall extend to a height in excess of ten feet
(10').
      3.   The minimum height of a building used as a dwelling shall be not
less than fifteen feet (15').
   C.   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Not less than two (2) off street parking spaces shall be required
for each dwelling unit. Each off street parking space shall be not less than
ten feet by twenty feet (10' x 20') per space.
      2.   Not less than two (2) off street parking spaces appurtenant to a
dwelling shall be enclosed within a garage.
      3.   Parking of recreational vehicles, boats, trailers, etc., is
permitted within the optional enclosure area, in a private driveway or directly
adjacent to the garage/driveway on an approved surface.
   D.   Special Provisions: All dwellings shall conform to the special
provisions relating to dwellings set forth under section
10-5-5 of this title. (Ord. 06-19-2018B, 6-19-2018)
10-4C-9: DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT:
The City has entered into a Development Agreement contemporaneously with the
adoption of this PD-1 Zone and zoning the property PD-1. The Development
Agreement specifies the following development standards for the PD-1 Zone:
   A.   Number Of Residential Units: The maximum number of residential units
allowed shall be eighty (80) single family units.
   B.   Height/Setbacks/Landscaping/Fencing/Trails/Open Space/Lighting/
Architectural Style/Parking And Other Design Aspects Of The Residential Units:
The height, setbacks, fencing, trails, open space, lighting, architectural
style and all other design aspects of the residential structures in the PD-
1 Zone shall be as specified in the Design Guidelines.
   C.   Commercial Building And Uses: All aspects of the development of the
commercial building shown on exhibit C to the Development Agreement shall be as
specified in the Design Guidelines. All commercial buildings shall be limited
to the area identified in exhibit C to the Development Agreement. The
development of the commercial portion of the PD-1 Zone shall be subject to all
provisions adopted by chapter 6, article A of this title. (Ord. 06-19-2018B, 6-
19-2018)
ARTICLE D.  H-1 HILLSIDE DEVELOPMENT ZONE 1
SECTION:
10-4D-1: Legislative Intent
10-4D-2: Permitted Uses
10-4D-3: Conditional Uses
10-4D-4: Density, Area And Width Requirements
10-4D-5: Access Requirements
10-4D-6: Location Requirements
10-4D-7: Utility Requirements
10-4D-8: Buildable Area Required
10-4D-9: Dwelling And Structural Requirements
10-4D-10: Special Provisions
10-4D-11: Approval Procedure And Requirements
10-4D-12: Full Disclosure Required
10-4D-13: Costs And Charges
 
Notes
1 1. See also subsection 11-5-1B of this code for technical report requirements
  and subsection 11-5-2B of this code for special design requirements.
10-4D-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
   A.   The H-1 hillside development zone includes those areas of the city
that, as the result of the presence of steep slope, soil characteristics, flood
hazard, mudflow or earthquake potential, wildfire hazard or similar adverse
natural conditions, are considered environmentally fragile.
   B.   It is hereby declared that the intent and purpose of the city council
in establishing the H-1 hillside development zone is to:
      1.   Delineate environmentally sensitive areas within the city and to
establish standards and guidelines for the uses and development activities
occurring therein that recognize and appropriately balance: a) the need for the
preservation of the natural environmental conditions; b) the need for
mitigation of potentially adverse or unsafe conditions arising from development
activities; c) the protection of the interests of subsequent purchasers and
occupants; and d) the rights of current owners to the reasonable use of their
property.
      2.   Avoid or mitigate the effect of natural hazard from earthquake,
landslide, flood, fire and similar calamities, and to reduce the potential for
subsequent public involvement or expenditure in mitigation of such adverse or
unsafe conditions occurring as a result of disruption of natural conditions
from development activity.
      3.   Protect and conserve the culinary water supply, sensitive
vegetation, soil, wildlife habitat and other natural resources within the area.
      4.   Facilitate and encourage the location, design and construction of
uses, development projects and building sites in the zone area that provide
maximum safety and human enjoyment consistent with the natural limitations and
the need for protection of the environment.
      5.   Preserve the aesthetic appearance of the landscape. Because of the
fragile nature of the land in this zone, special conditions and requirements
are attached to developments occurring therein to promote the implementation of
the purposes stated above and to mitigate the potential adverse aspects of
developments in the area. The requirements hereinafter set forth are considered
the minimum required for the accomplishments of the intent of this zone. (Ord.
1-13-93A, 1-13-1993)
10-4D-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following uses of land shall be permitted upon compliance with the
applicable standards and conditions set forth in this title:
Buildings and other structures for the storage and keeping of agricultural
products and machinery.
Churches.
Customary household pets, but not including kennels.
Customary residential accessory structures that are an integral part of and
incidental to an approved dwelling.
Production of crops and fruits in the field.
Public park and recreation developments. (Ord. 1-13-93A, 1-13-1993; amd. Ord.
8-5-2003A, 8-5-2003; Ord. 4-6-2004A, 4-6-2004; 2004 Code; Ord. 7-8-2008B, 7-8-
2008)
10-4D-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land may be permitted upon
compliance with the standards and conditions set forth in this title and after
approval has been given by the designated review body:
Accessory apartment.
Assisted living facility for elderly persons.
Fences, walls and hedges subject to the requirements of section
10-5-18 of this title.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of title 3, chapter 1, article B of
this code.
Large animal units. All barns, sheds, coops, pens, hutches, paddocks, stables,
corrals or similar structures used for the enclosure, housing, or confinement
of animals in a large animal unit shall be located not less than one hundred
feet (100') to an existing dwelling on an adjacent lot.
Minor utility transmission lines and facilities included as an integral part of
an approved subdivision or planned residential development within the zone.
Motor vehicle roads and rights of way subject to compliance with city standards
for design and construction for such uses and upon approval of a site plan by
the planning commission.
Planned residential developments subject to compliance with the applicable
requirements of chapter 6, article B of this title.
Premises occupations, subject to the provisions of section
3-1E-1 of this code.
Single-family dwellings, conventional construction, subject to compliance with
the conditions of the zone and approval of a site plan by the planning
commission.
Small animal units. See section
10-5-33, "Small Animals Or Fowl", of this title.
Townsite residential projects, subject to the provisions of chapter 6, article
D of this title. (Ord. 1-13-93A, 1-13-1993; amd. Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998; Ord.
8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000; 2004 Code; Ord. 9-18-2007A, 9-18-2007; Ord. 7-8-2008B,
7-8-2008; Ord. 1-19-2010A, 1-19-2010; Ord. 11-9-2010B, 11-9-2010; Ord. 9-20-
2011B, 9-20-2011; Ord. 1-3-2012B, 1-3-2012, eff. 2-21-2012)
10-4D-4: DENSITY, AREA AND WIDTH REQUIREMENTS:
The maximum residential subdivision project density, and minimum lot area and
width requirements of a zoning lot shall be as set forth in the following
schedule: (Ord. 1-13-93A, 1-13-1993)
   A.   When each lot is contained within an approved subdivision project:
 
Use           Maximum Project Density Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width
              1 lot for every 1 acre
              of buildable area in
Single-family project Plus 1 lot for  80 acre          130 feet
dwellings     every 10 acres of
              nonbuildable area in
              the project
Churches                             2.5 acres        200 feet
 
   (Ord. 8-5-2003A, 8-5-2003)
   B.   When the lot is not included as part of an approved subdivision project
and is legally exempt therefrom:
 
Use                     Minimum Lot Area Minimum Lot Width
Single-family dwellings 1 acre           130 feet
 
   (Ord. 1-13-93A, 1-13-1993)
10-4D-5: ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
Each lot shall abut upon and have direct access to a city maintained street
that is shown on the official street map or that has been formally accepted by
action of the city council. The distance of said abutting side shall be not
less than the minimum lot width requirement of the zone except that the length
of said abutting side may be reduced to not less than eighty feet (80') when:
   A.   The lot has been approved by the planning commission as a "flag lot",
as defined in section
10-5-12 of this title; and provided, the lot, excluding the stem portion,
conforms to the minimum area and width requirements of the zone; or
   B.   The lot fronts upon a cul-de-sac or curve in a designated city street
and the side lot lines radiate in such a manner that the width of the lot,
measured between the side lot lines at points one hundred sixty feet (160')
from the front lot line, will meet or exceed the minimum width requirements of
the zone. (Ord. 1-13-93A, 1-13-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
10-4D-6: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Main Buildings: All dwellings and other main buildings and structures
shall be set back in accordance with the following:
      1.   Front Setback: All dwellings and other structures shall be set back
not less than fifty feet (50') from the front lot line; provided, that on lots
qualifying under the provisions of subsection 10-4D-5B of this article, the
front setback shall be the distance from the front lot line at which the
minimum width requirements are met, but not less than fifty feet (50').
      2.   Side And Rear Setback: All dwellings and other structures shall be
set back not less than fifty feet (50') from the side or rear lot line.
   B.   Accessory Buildings: Accessory buildings shall be set back not less
than fifty feet (50') from any lot line that abuts upon a street and not less
than five feet (5') from any interior lot line. (Ord. 1-13-93A, 1-13-1993)
10-4D-7: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All structures used for human occupancy shall be served by the city
culinary water system at a rate of flow and pressure sufficient for both
culinary and firefighting purposes. (Ord. 7-7-98A, 7-7-1998)
   B.   All dwellings and other structures intended for human occupancy shall
be served by the city central sewage collection system. (Ord. 1-13-93A, 1-13-
1993)
   C.   Electric, natural gas and telephone systems.
   D.   The city pressurized irrigation system.
   E.   The city storm water system. (2004 Code)
10-4D-8: BUILDABLE AREA REQUIRED:
All buildings to be located on a buildable area. Each lot shall contain at
least one area of not less than twelve thousand (12,000) square feet that
qualifies as a "buildable area", as defined in section
10-2-1 of this title, and that is accessible over a driveway having a width of
not less than twelve feet (12') and conforming to the minimum standards of
subdivision streets with respect to slope, grading, drainage and design
features. The site plan required pursuant to section
10-4D-3 of this article (single-family dwellings) shall delineate the location
of the territory qualifying as buildable area and also the alignment of the
proposed driveway access. All dwellings and other habitable structures and
accessory buildings shall be located within the designated buildable area. For
purposes of determining compliance herewith, any territory that has been graded
to produce a slope of less than thirty percent (30%) shall be excluded. (Ord.
1-13-93A, 1-13-1993)
10-4D-9: DWELLING AND STRUCTURAL REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Area Of Dwelling: Each dwelling shall conform to the requirements for
dwellings in the R-1-15,000 residential zone, subsections 10-4B-8A and B of
this chapter. (Ord. 1-13-93A, 1-13-1993; amd. Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
   B.   Construction Standards: All dwellings and other structures intended for
human occupancy shall be constructed in accordance with the applicable seismic
requirements of the adopted building code.
   C.   Location On Fault Traces Prohibited; Minimum Setbacks To Be Determined:
No portion of a dwelling or other structure intended for human occupancy shall
be located over any identified fault trace or zone of deformation. The minimum
setback distance from any fault trace or zone of deformation, or from the base
or crest of any potentially unstable slope, shall be as established by the city
engineer following the receipt of a recommendation on the subject from the
geotechnical engineer as part of the technical report. (Ord. 1-13-93A, 1-13-
1993; amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Height Of Building:
      1.   The maximum height of any dwelling shall be thirty five feet (35')
in height as measured to the ridgeline of the roof. The maximum height of any
accessory building shall be twenty feet (20') to the ridgeline of the roof.
Both the dwelling and the accessory building height shall be measured from the
highest finished grade of the ground surface adjacent to the foundation of the
structure from the front elevation to the ridgeline. (2004 Code)
      2.   Chimneys, television antennas, and similar ancillary structures not
used for human occupancy shall be excluded in determining height; provided,
that no such ancillary structure shall extend to a height in excess of ten feet
(10') above the building. (Ord. 3-20-2012B, 3-20-2012)
      3.   The minimum height of a building used as a dwelling shall be not
less than eight feet (8'). (2004 Code)
   E.   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Not less than two (2) off street parking spaces shall be required
for each dwelling unit. Each off street parking space shall be not less than
ten feet by twenty feet (10' x 20') per space.
      2.   Not less than two (2) off street parking spaces appurtenant to a
dwelling shall be enclosed within a garage.
      3.   Parking of recreational vehicles, boats, trailers, etc., is
permitted within the optional enclosure area, in a private driveway or directly
adjacent to the garage/driveway on an approved surface. (Ord. 10-20-2009C, 10-
20-2009)
   F.   Special Provisions: All dwellings shall conform to the special
provisions relating to dwellings set forth under section
10-5-5 of this title. (2004 Code)
10-4D-10: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Grading: No grading, filling or excavation of any kind shall be
commenced on land within the zone without first having obtained a grading
permit from the city engineer, who shall not issue such permit until a grading
plan, endorsed by a licensed civil engineer, shall have been approved in
accordance with the provisions of section
10-4D-11 of this article. All land surface having a slope of thirty percent
(30%) or greater shall remain in its natural state and shall not be graded or
otherwise disturbed, except for the planting of additional vegetation, the
addition of sprinkler irrigation systems, the establishment of required fire
breaks or access easements, or when such disturbance is specifically provided
for under an approved site plan.
   B.   Landscaping: Natural vegetative material shall not be removed, except
for those portions of the site to be committed to the dwelling and attendant
yard area, required roadways, driveways and for firebreaks. All areas proposed
for removal of vegetative materials shall be shown on the site plan. (Ord. 1-
13-93A, 1-13-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
10-4D-11: APPROVAL PROCEDURE AND REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Site Plan: Wherever the terms of this zone require submission and
approval of a site plan, said plan shall be approved by the planning commission
as a conditional use.
   B.   Technical Reports:
      1.   In addition to other materials required for submission, the site
plan shall be accompanied by copies of the following technical reports and
plans:
         a.   Geotechnical report;
         b.   Engineering geology report;
         c.   Grading and drainage plan;
         d.   Natural conditions analysis map.
      2.   The scope and content of these required technical reports and plans
shall be in accordance with city standards as approved by the city engineer.
The planning commission, subject to the prior recommendation of the city
engineer, may waive the necessity for submitting one or more of the technical
reports or any element of a report where, in his opinion, conditions associated
with the proposed development do not require consideration of the subject
matter covered. Also, where the lot is contained within an approved subdivision
and the technical reports previously submitted as part of the subdivision
process are sufficient in scope and detail to adequately address the issues
required under this title, this requirement may be waived.
   C.   City Engineer To Review Technical Reports:
      1.   The plans and technical reports required herein shall be reviewed by
the city engineer for the purpose of making a determination as to the adequacy
of the reports and recommendations relating to the proposed project. Prior to
the time of action by the planning commission, the city engineer shall provide
to the planning commission a written or oral report of the results and
conclusions of the review, together with any recommendation or amendment of the
technical reports.
      2.   If the city engineer concludes that the determinations required by
this title require further review by professionals having qualifications not
possessed by the city staff, he may designate a qualified person to make the
required determination. Any person dissatisfied with a determination made by
the city engineer may appeal the same within thirty (30) days to the city
council.
   D.   Project Evaluation Guidelines:
      1.   The planning commission shall review the site plan, technical
reports and recommendations of the city engineer and shall approve the
application upon a finding that:
         a.   All the plan submissions and technical reports required for
review and consideration have been submitted and in a form suitable for
evaluation by the city and the evaluation of conditions and the recommendations
for mitigation provided by the technical reports are reasonably adequate to
accomplish the intent of the zone.
         b.   The plan conforms, in all respects, to applicable city
requirements, standards and criteria.
         c.   The location and arrangement of the buildings, roadways, open
areas and other elements of the development duly recognize and accommodate the
natural conditions present and construction of such elements will not result in
the creation of an adverse or unsafe condition.
         d.   The development will accomplish and preserve the intent of the
zone.
      2.   The city may require changes in the plan in order to more fully
accomplish the intent of the zone. Such changes may include, but are not
limited to, adjustments in the boundaries of the buildable area and changes in
the location of roadways, structures, utility lines and similar elements. (Ord.
1-13-93A, 1-13-1993)
10-4D-12: FULL DISCLOSURE REQUIRED:
   A.   Disclosure Required; Penalty: It shall be unlawful for any person,
directly or indirectly, in connection with the sale or offering for sale of any
property located within the zone, to make any untrue statements of a material
fact related to the known geologic condition of the subject property, or to
omit to state a known material fact regarding a geologic condition that, under
the conditions, would be misleading. Failure to abide by the terms and
conditions of this section shall be punishable as a class C misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code.
   B.   Deed Disclosure Statement: As a prerequisite to the approval of a site
plan and the granting of a building permit, the city may require a deed
disclosure statement, recorded in the office of the county recorder that: 1)
the lot may contain significant geological or other natural hazard and
describing such hazard; and 2) because of the defined hazard and other natural
constraints, development on portions of the lot is prohibited under city
ordinance and describing by map or other means the portion of the lot so
designated. (Ord. 1-13-93A, 1-13-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
10-4D-13: COSTS AND CHARGES:
All cost for processing the application and for conducting all regular and
special reviews shall be borne by the applicant. The city council may, by
resolution, establish fees for the administration of this article and provide
for the assessment and collection thereof according to the city fee schedule.
(Ord. 1-13-93A, 1-13-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE E.  SC-1 SHOPPING CENTER ZONE
SECTION:
10-4E-1: Legislative Intent
10-4E-2: Permitted Uses
10-4E-3: Regulations Governing Commercial Uses
10-4E-4: Temporary Use Permit
10-4E-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
The SC-1 zone is established to provide an area in which the primary use of
land is for commercial and service uses to serve the needs of the community and
surrounding area and is located in the portion of the city most appropriately
suited for the purpose. It is intended that development within the zone shall
be characterized by a harmonious grouping of commercial stores and shops and
essential ancillary uses (parking, signs, landscape features) architecturally
designed and functioning as an integrated unit. Clean, well lighted parking
lots, readily accessible from adjacent streets, and attractive, well maintained
shops with significant peripheral and on site landscaping will be
characteristic of development within this zone. It is the specific intent that
architectural design and character of operation shall, to the maximum extent
possible, be compatible with that of surrounding residential environment, and
review, approval and attachment of conditions upon development within the zone
will be predicated upon the accomplishment of this objective. (Ord. 10-11-95A,
10-11-1995)
10-4E-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted,
subject to compliance with applicable requirements set forth in this title:
Agriculture and the production of crops in the field.
Planned commercial development projects subject to the provisions of chapter 6,
article A of this title.
Public utility rights of way and related utility facilities. (Ord. 10-11-95A,
10-11-1995; amd. 2004 Code)
10-4E-3: REGULATIONS GOVERNING COMMERCIAL USES:
   A.   Check Cashing And Other Credit Services:
      1.   Separation Requirement: No check cashing business shall be located
within one mile of any other check cashing business as measured in a straight
line between the closest property lines of the lots on which the business is
located regardless of intervening structures or zoning districts.
      2.   Limitation: No more than one check cashing business or deferred
deposit loan business shall be allowed for every twenty thousand (20,000)
citizens living in the City of Cedar Hills.
      3.   Clarification: For purposes of this section, each separate physical
location shall count as a check cashing business. (Ord. 2-17-2009A, 2-17-2009)
10-4E-4: TEMPORARY USE PERMIT:
   A.   Intent: This section is enacted to accommodate certain uses that are
temporary or seasonal in nature. No person shall construct or use a temporary
site or building without first obtaining approval as set forth in this section.
   B.   Uses: Temporary uses may include, but are not limited to, the
following: carnivals, circuses, firework stands, Christmas tree lots, shaved
ice stands, farmers' markets, retreats, or political rallies. All temporary
uses must comply with the conditions of this section.
   C.   Application: The application for a temporary use permit shall be made
by the property owner, lessee, contract purchaser, official, department, board,
or bureau of any government. If the property owner has not signed the
application, a contract purchaser or lessee must file a copy of the contract or
some form of written statement that indicates the endorsement of the
application by the property owner. Said agreement shall address the question of
use of restroom facilities by employees, responsibility for maintenance, and
restoration of the site upon termination of the use. A copy of the proposed
agreement shall be part of the application.
   D.   Application Process: Application for a temporary use permit shall be
made to the zoning administrator a minimum of thirty (30) calendar days prior
to the scheduled event or temporary use is to take place. The zoning
administrator shall evaluate the impact of each temporary site and will assure
that the site plan is compatible with the zone in which it is to be located.
The zoning administrator may require additional information deemed necessary to
understand the application. The application for the temporary use shall include
the following details along with a full site plan:
      1.   Shows location of structure;
      2.   Dimensions to all property boundaries and structures;
      3.   Shows proposed parking locations and traffic flow patterns;
      4.   Shows vehicular ingress and egress locations;
      5.   Location of restroom facilities;
      6.   Provides details on the exterior facade (materials, colors, etc.);
      7.   Signage plan to comply with section
10-5-26 of this title;
      8.   Include date, hours of operation and anticipated average daily
traffic (i.e., number of vehicles and number of patrons);
      9.   Landowner agreement with owner of temporary structure;
      10.   Proof of insurance for the proposed use; and
      11.   Restoration plan of site upon termination of the temporary use.
   E.   Criteria: Those temporary uses that meet the following criteria in the
opinion of the zoning administrator may be approved subject to the appropriate
conditions. The criteria are as follows:
      1.   The use and/or structure complies with all applicable codes and
ordinances, and has obtained the appropriate federal, state and/or county
permits where applicable;
      2.   The use and/or structure does not interfere with pedestrian
accessways, fire lanes, driveways, landscaped areas, or traffic visibility at
driveways or street intersections;
      3.   The use and/or structures are compatible with surrounding land uses;
and
      4.   The use and/or structures have adequate parking on the property to
serve any existing permanent use and the temporary use.
   F.   Review: Application for a temporary use permit shall be reviewed by the
zoning administrator who shall approve, conditionally approve, or disapprove
such application.
   G.   Approval: An application for a temporary use shall only be approved if
the zoning administrator finds that it meets the requirements herein. Approval
may be made subject to further conditions deemed necessary to assure that all
adverse impacts to the surrounding properties are minimized to the fullest
extent possible. Conditions may include additional off street parking, on site
landscaping, or any other physical improvements. Other conditions to be
considered may include, but are not limited to, the following:
      1.   Conformity between the request and the general objectives of the
general plan, city ordinances, and the particular zone in which the request is
located;
      2.   Whether or not the request may be injurious to potential development
in the vicinity;
      3.   Present and future requirements for transportation, traffic, water,
sewer, and other utilities;
      4.   Aesthetic impact of the proposed use on the neighborhood;
      5.   Impact of the proposed use on health, safety and welfare of the city
and persons owning property in the area;
      6.   The anticipated parking, dust control measures, and lighting needs
for the site;
      7.   Regulation of site ingress and egress;
      8.   No indoor seating of patrons;
      9.   Assurance of compliance with building, fire, electrical and all
other appropriate codes;
      10.   Written evidence from the county health department that the use
will meet all health code requirements;
      11.   No motor vehicle, mobile home, shipping container, or trailer from
which sales are transacted or product is displayed shall be accessible for the
public to enter therein;
      12.   The location, size, and height of buildings, structures, walls and
fences, and the nature and extent of screening, buffering and landscaping shall
be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development
and use of adjacent or nearby land and/or buildings or adversely impair the
value thereof; and
      13.   Such other conditions deemed necessary to carry out the intent and
purpose of this section.
The city shall notify the applicant of the decision in writing and shall state
any conditions for approval or reasons for denial on said letter. Once a
temporary use has been approved, however, the use shall not be enlarged,
extended, changed, increased in intensity, or relocated unless an application
is made for a new or revised temporary site plan.
   H.   Appeals: Upon receiving notification of the decision, the applicant,
any citizen or any party in interest, aggrieved by the decision may file with
the city a written notice of appeal to the city manager or designee within
seven (7) calendar days of the decision. Upon appeal, all material in the
matter shall be filed by the city with the city council. The council may then
review the case and based upon the information, uphold the action of the staff,
remand the matter back to staff with instructions for further review, or
overturn the action of the staff. The council's decision shall be limited to
whether or not the proposed use meets the criteria set forth in this section.
   I.   Additional Permit Required: The temporary use regulation of this
section does not exempt the applicant or operator from any other required
permits, such as business licenses or health department permits.
   J.   Permit Duration: All temporary use permit approvals shall be made
subject to a time limit as set forth by the city.
   K.   Duration: Temporary uses shall be allowed for no more than a maximum
thirty (30) day duration. Upon expiration of the time limit set forth at the
time of approval, any continuation of the use shall require the submittal and
approval of a new application. In no event shall a temporary use permit
extension be granted for longer than six (6) months.
Exceptions:
      1.   Fast food huts for the retail sale of food items such as shaved ice,
snow cones, hot dogs, tacos, soft drinks, and farmers' markets shall be
permitted from May 1 to September 30.
      2.   Christmas tree lots shall be permitted from November 15 to December
31.
   L.   Design Standards:
      1.   No temporary use structure shall exceed a total foot print of one
hundred twenty (120) square feet. The total height of the temporary structure
shall not exceed a total height of ten feet (10') as measured from the highest
point of the structure to the grade directly below the structure. The zoning
administrator shall provide a written exception on a case by case basis to both
the square footage requirement and the height requirement if the zoning
administrator deems that the temporary structure will not have any undue
detrimental effects on adjacent property or create blight within the city.
Special consideration will be given to neighboring properties, traffic flow,
light, and safety.
      2.   All structures shall not be permanently affixed to the ground but
should be temporarily affixed to the ground with no less than four (4) points
and as approved by the zoning administrator.
   M.   Parking:
      1.   All parking shall meet the off street parking standards as set forth
in city ordinances, shall be based on the average daily traffic, and as
specified by the zoning administrator.
      2.   Parking surface shall be provided on a gravel (or suitable
alternative) surface rather than an asphalt or concrete parking surface. The
parking size shall be adequate to meet the requirements as set forth above.
   N.   Revocation Of Permit: A temporary use permit shall be denied if the
zoning administrator determines that the public health, safety, or welfare
would be impaired, or if the applicant has not adequately addressed all
requirements associated with the proposed use. A temporary use permit may be
revoked if the anticipated average daily traffic is exceeded, without the
approval of an amended application.
   O.   Cessation And/Or Expiration:
      1.   Upon cessation of the use or expiration of the permit, whichever
occurs first, the premises will be promptly cleaned and restored to
substantially the same condition existing prior to commencement of such use.
      2.   The applicant shall remove within seven (7) days any structure or
materials used for the temporary site such as tents, poles, display bins, etc.
This date may be extended to fourteen (14) days with the approval of the zoning
administrator. The applicant shall restore the site to the approved original
site plan. If no original site plan exists, the applicant shall restore the
site to its original condition. If deemed appropriate by the zoning
administrator, the landowner of the parcel shall provide a cash bond for the
restoration of the site of said use to its original condition, including
cleanup, replacement of facilities, and removal of any structures.
   P.   Fees: In order to offset a portion of the costs incurred by the city in
processing temporary use permits, the applicant shall be charged a fee, as
shown in the city fee schedule, at the time of application submittal. (Ord. 1-
3-2012A, 1-3-2012)
ARTICLE F.  RR-1-20,000 RURAL RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-4F-1: Legislative Intent
10-4F-2: Permitted Uses
10-4F-3: Conditional Uses
10-4F-4: Lot Area And Width Requirements
10-4F-5: Access Requirements
10-4F-6: Location Requirements
10-4F-7: Dwelling Requirements
10-4F-8: Utility Requirements
10-4F-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
The objective in establishing the RR-1-20,000 rural residential zone is to
encourage the maintenance of a residential environment within the city
characterized by large lots, surrounded by well kept lawns, trees and other
plantings, and where residents may engage in limited agricultural and livestock
raising pursuits for family food production and/or recreation purposes. (Ord.
5-11-83A, 5-11-1983)
10-4F-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with requirements set forth in this title:
Churches.
Customary household pets, but not including kennels.
Customary residential accessory structures.
Large animal units. All barns, sheds, coops, pens, hutches, paddocks, stables,
corrals or similar structures used for the enclosure, housing, or confinement
of animals in a large animal unit shall be located not less than one hundred
feet (100') to an existing dwelling on an adjacent lot.
Public agencies, parks and playgrounds.
Public and parochial schools and grounds.
Single-family dwellings, conventional construction.
Small animal units. See section
10-5-33, "Small Animals Or Fowl", of this title. (Ord. 5-11-83A, 5-11-1983;
amd. Ord. 3-21-84, 3-21-1984; 2004 Code; Ord. 1-19-2010A, 1-19-2010; Ord. 9-20-
2011B, 9-20-2011)
10-4F-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land may be permitted upon
compliance with the standards and conditions set forth in this title and after
approval has been given by the designated review body:
Accessory apartment.
Assisted living facility for elderly persons.
Bed and breakfast facility, when approved by the planning commission, subject
to the prior approval of a site plan for the use and a finding of compliance
with the conditions and limitations set forth in section
10-5-25 of this title.
Fences, walls and hedges subject to the requirements of section
10-5-18 of this title.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of title 3, chapter 1, article B of
this code.
Premises occupations, subject to the provisions of section
3-1E-1 of this code. (2004 Code; amd. Ord. 12-7-2004D, 12-7-2004; Ord. 9-18-
2007A, 9-18-2007; Ord. 7-8-2008B, 7-8-2008; Ord. 11-9-2010B, 11-9-2010; Ord. 1-
3-2012B, 1-3-2012, eff. 2-21-2012)
10-4F-4: LOT AREA AND WIDTH REQUIREMENTS:
The minimum area and width requirements for a zoning lot shall be as follows:
 
Use                     Minimum Area       Lot Width
Single-family dwellings 20,000 square feet 80 feet
Churches                2.5 acres          200 feet
Schools                 5.0 acres          200 feet
 
(Ord. 5-11-83A, 5-11-1983)
10-4F-5: ACCESS REQUIREMENTS:
Each lot shall abut upon and have access to a designated city street. The
distance of said abutting side shall be not less than the minimum width
requirement, except as follows:
   A.   For interior lots that front upon a cul-de-sac or curve, the distance
may be reduced to not less than thirty five feet (35'); provided, that the side
lot lines radiate in such a manner that the width of the lot at the minimum
setback line is not less than the minimum requirement of the zone. (Ord. 5-11-
83A, 5-11-1983)
   B.   The lot has been approved as a flag lot project in accordance with the
provisions of section
10-5-12 of this title, or as a lot served by a common drive project, in
accordance with the provisions of section
10-5-20 of this title. (Ord. 1-2-2001A, 1-2-2001)
10-4F-6: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
Same as R-1-15,000. (Ord. 5-11-83A, 5-11-1983; amd. Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
10-4F-7: DWELLING REQUIREMENTS:
Same as R-1-15,000. (2004 Code)
10-4F-8: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
All dwellings and other structures used for human occupancy shall be served
with adequate utilities, as follows:
   A.   The city culinary water system.
   B.   The city sanitary sewer system.
   C.   Electric, natural gas and telephone systems.
   D.   The city pressurized irrigation system.
   E.   The city stormwater system. (Ord. 7-7-98A, 7-7-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
ARTICLE G.  PR 2.2 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-4G-1: Legislative Intent
10-4G-2: Permitted Uses
10-4G-3: Conditional Uses
10-4G-4: Location Requirements
10-4G-5: Utility Requirements
10-4G-6: Dwelling Requirements
10-4G-7: Special Provisions
10-4G-8: Minimum Standards For Development On Nonconforming Lots Of Record
10-4G-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
   A.   The PR 2.2 planned residential zone covers the portion of the city that
is primarily suited for residential development represented by a commingling of
single-family dwellings and parks, playgrounds, schools, churches and other
community facilities designed to serve the residents of the city. The zone is
characterized by spacious lots of various sizes, uncrowded buildings and quiet
residential conditions favorable to the rearing of children. Owners and
developers of property within this zone should bear in mind that primacy is
given to residential development and maintain their properties in recognition
thereof.
   B.   The provisions of this zone are intended to implement the objectives of
the medium density residential areas identified in the city general plan and
are hereby declared to be consistent therewith.
   C.   The specific regulations necessary for the accomplishment of the intent
of the zone are hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
10-4G-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with the applicable requirements of this title:
Buildings and other structures for the storage and keeping of agricultural
products and machinery.
Customary household pets, but not including kennels.
Customary residential accessory structures that are an integral part of and
incidental to an approved dwelling.
Foster care homes containing not more than four (4) foster care occupants.
Production of crops and fruits in the field.
Public agency parks and playgrounds. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998; amd. 2004 Code;
Ord. 04-15-2014A, 4-15-2014)
10-4G-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land may be permitted upon
compliance with the standards and conditions set forth in this title and after
approval has been given by the designated review body:
Accessory apartment.
Assisted living facility for elderly persons.
Fences, walls and hedges, subject to the requirements of section
10-5-18 of this title.
Flexible design subdivision projects, having a density not greater than two and
five-tenths (2.5) dwelling units per net acre, subject to the provisions of
chapter 6, article C of this title.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of title 3, chapter 1 of this code.
Planned residential developments having a density not greater than two and
five-tenths (2.5) dwelling units per net acre, subject to compliance with the
applicable requirements of chapter 6, article B of this title.
Residential facility for handicapped persons.
Single-family dwellings when located on an existing "lot of record", subject to
compliance with the provisions of section
10-4G-8 of this article, relating to minimum standards for nonconforming lots,
approval of a site plan in accordance with the provisions of section
10-4G-7 of this article, and conformance with the other applicable requirements
of this zone.
Single-family dwellings when located upon a lot within an approved planned
residential development or flexible design subdivision, subject to approval of
a site plan in accordance with the provisions of section
10-4G-7 of this article and conformance with the applicable requirements of
this zone.
Small animal units. See section
10-5-33, "Small Animals Or Fowl", of this title.
Water, sewer and utility transmission lines and facilities required as an
incidental part of a flexible design subdivision, planned residential
development or other approved development project in the zone and subject to
the approval of a site plan by the city council. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998;
amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 9-18-2007A, 9-18-2007; Ord. 1-19-2010A, 1-19-2010; Ord.
11-9-2010B, 11-9-2010; Ord. 9-20-2011B, 9-20-2011; Ord. 1-3-2012B, 1-3-2012,
eff. 2-21-2012)
10-4G-4: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings shall be located within the designated building envelope as shown
on the final plat of a planned residential development or flexible subdivision
project, or as established in accordance with the provisions of section
10-4G-7 of this article; except, where no designated setback envelope has been
established, all buildings shall be located in accordance with the following:
(Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
   A.   Main Buildings: All dwellings and other main buildings and structures
shall be set back in accordance with the following:
      1.   Front Setback: All dwellings and other main buildings shall be set
back not less than thirty feet (30') from the front lot line that abuts on any
existing or proposed public street.
      2.   Side Setback:
         a.   Interior Lots: All dwellings and other main buildings, including
any attached garage or similar structure, shall be set back not less than ten
feet (10') from any side lot line and the combined total setback distance of
the opposite side setbacks shall be not less than twenty four feet (24'). (Ord.
2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
         b.   Corner Lots; Side Abutting A Street: All dwellings and other main
buildings shall be set back not less than thirty feet (30') from the side lot
line that abuts on an existing or proposed street, except that in the instance
of corner lots in subdivisions approved prior to June 1, 1998, and having a lot
width of ninety five feet (95') or less, the side setback requirement adjacent
to a street shall be reduced to twenty five feet (25'). (Ord. 7-7-98A, 7-7-
1998)
      3.   Rear Setback:
         a.   Interior Lots: All dwellings or other main buildings shall be set
back not less than twenty five feet (25') from the rear lot line.
         b.   Corner Lots: All dwellings and other main buildings shall be set
back not less than twenty five feet (25') from the rear lot line, except that
where a garage is attached to the rear of the dwelling, the required rear
setback for said garage may be reduced to not less than twelve feet (12') as
measured from the rear lot line to the closest part of the building. (Ord. 2-
17-98A, 2-17-1998)
      4.   Measurement Of Setbacks: Compliance with minimum setback
requirements shall be determined in accordance with the provisions of section
10-5-5 of this title. (Ord. 7-7-98A, 7-7-1998)
   B.   Accessory Buildings: All accessory buildings shall be located in
accordance with the following:
      1.   Setback From Main Building; Front Setback: Accessory buildings shall
be set back not less than twelve feet (12') to the rear of the closest rear
wall of the main building, and not less than twelve feet (12') from the closest
side wall of the main building. Accessory buildings that are located twelve
feet (12') or closer to a main building shall be considered as part of the main
building. Where no main building exists on a lot, a detached accessory building
shall be set back not less than seventy five feet (75') from the front lot
line.
      2.   Side Setback; Corner Lot, Side Abutting A Street: Accessory
buildings shall be set back not less than thirty feet (30') from the side lot
line that abuts on a street.
      3.   Side And Rear Setback; Interior Lot Line: Accessory buildings shall
be set back not less than five feet (5') from any interior side or rear lot
line. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
10-4G-5: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
All dwellings and other structures used for human occupancy shall be served
with adequate utilities, as follows:
   A.   The city culinary water system.
   B.   The city sanitary sewer system.
   C.   Electric, natural gas and telephone systems.
   D.   The city pressurized irrigation system.
   E.   The city stormwater system. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
10-4G-6: DWELLING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Area Of Dwellings: Each dwelling shall conform to one of the following:
      1.   The dwelling shall contain a main floor living area of not less than
one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet; or
      2.   The dwelling shall meet or exceed all of the following:
         a.   The dwelling shall have a total "building footprint area" of not
less than one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet as measured from the
outside of the foundation wall; and
         b.   Not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of the "building
footprint area" shall be devoted exclusively to living space (portions of the
footprint area occupied by garages, porches, breezeways and similar areas shall
be excluded); and
         c.   The dwelling shall contain a total living area of not less than
one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet located on building floors or
levels, located entirely above the finished grade of the ground surface
adjacent to the foundation of the structure.
   B.   Minimum Dimension: The minimum width or length dimension of any
dwelling as measured from the outside wall shall be not less than twenty four
feet (24'). Nonliving spaces such as garages, porches and sheds shall not be
included in determining compliance with this requirement. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-
1998)
   C.   Height Of Building:
      1.   The maximum height of any dwelling shall be thirty five feet (35')
in height as measured to the ridgeline of the roof. The maximum height of any
accessory building shall be twenty feet (20') to the ridgeline of the roof.
Both the dwelling and the accessory building height shall be measured from the
highest finished grade of the ground surface adjacent to the foundation of the
structure from the front elevation to the ridgeline. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998;
amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   Chimneys, television antennas, and similar ancillary structures not
used for human occupancy shall be excluded in determining height; provided,
that no such ancillary structure shall extend to a height in excess of ten feet
(10') above the building. (Ord. 3-20-2012B, 3-20-2012)
      3.   The minimum height of a building used as a dwelling shall be not
less than eight feet (8'). (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Not less than two (2) off street parking spaces shall be required
for each dwelling unit. Each off street parking space shall be not less than
ten feet by twenty feet (10' x 20') per space.
      2.   Not less than two (2) off street parking spaces appurtenant to a
dwelling shall be enclosed within a garage.
      3.   Parking of recreational vehicles, boats, trailers, etc., is
permitted within the optional enclosure area, in a private driveway or directly
adjacent to the garage/driveway on an approved surface. (Ord. 10-20-2009C, 10-
20-2009)
   E.   Conformance With Special Dwelling Requirements: All dwellings shall
conform to the special provisions relating to dwellings set forth under section
10-5-5 of this title. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
10-4G-7: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Designated Setback Envelope: All dwellings shall be located within the
limits of a designated setback envelope as shown on the final plat of a planned
residential development, flexible subdivision project or otherwise established
pursuant to the provisions of this title.
   B.   Location Of Designated Setback Area: Where a site plan is required
pursuant to the terms of this title, said plan shall delineate the location of
the designated setback area.
   C.   Review Of Site Plan; Findings: The planning commission or city council,
as applicable, shall review the site plan and the recommendations of the city
engineer, and any technical reports submitted in connection with a request for
adjustment of the standards or criteria of this title, and shall approve the
application only upon a finding that:
      1.   All the plan submissions necessary for an adequate review and
decision shall have been submitted and in a form suitable for evaluation by the
city.
      2.   That the plan conforms, in all respects, to applicable city
requirements, standards and criteria.
      3.   The location and arrangement of the buildings, roadways, open areas
and other elements of the development duly recognize and accommodate the
natural conditions present and construction of such elements will not result in
the creation of an adverse or unsafe condition.
      4.   The development will accomplish and preserve the intent of the zone.
   D.   Changes May Be Required: The city may require changes in the plan in
order to more fully accomplish the intent of the zone. Such changes may
include, but are not limited to, adjustments in the boundaries of the
designated setback area and changes in the location of roadways, structures and
similar elements. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
10-4G-8: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT ON NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
Pursuant to the provisions of section
10-4G-3 of this article (single-family dwellings when located on an existing
"lot of record"), a dwelling may be constructed upon a nonconforming lot of
record, situated outside the boundaries of a planned residential development or
flexible subdivision project, subject to conformance with the following minimum
standards and requirements. These standards shall be in addition to the minimum
requirements applicable within the zone (i.e., utility, dwelling, special
provisions, etc.):
   A.   The parcel shall qualify as a "nonconforming lot of record", as defined
in section
10-2-1 of this title.
   B.   The nonconforming lot shall abut upon and have direct access to a city
maintained street. The distance of the abutting side shall be not less than one
hundred feet (100'), except as follows: 1) the length of the abutting side may
be reduced to not less than sixty feet (60') in instances where the lot fronts
upon a cul-de-sac or curve and the side lot lines radiate in such a manner that
the width of the lot measured at a point not less than forty feet (40') from
the front lot line will meet the minimum width requirements of this section; or
2) the lot qualifies and is approved as a "flag lot" in accordance with the
provisions of section
10-5-12 of this title.
   C.   The proposed dwelling and all accessory buildings shall be located
within a designated setback envelope. The boundaries of said designated setback
envelope shall conform to the setback requirements of the zone or shall have
been granted a variance therefrom by the hearing officer.
   D.   Not more than one dwelling and appurtenant accessory buildings shall be
constructed on any nonconforming lot. Any development that proposes a division
of territory within a nonconforming lot shall be considered as a proposed
planned residential development or flexible subdivision project and shall
conform to the provisions relating thereto.
(Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 07-07-2020A, 7-7-2020)
ARTICLE H.  PR 3.4 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-4H-1: Legislative Intent
10-4H-2: Permitted Uses
10-4H-3: Conditional Uses
10-4H-4: Location Requirements
10-4H-5: Utility Requirements
10-4H-6: Dwelling Requirements
10-4H-7: Special Provisions
10-4H-8: Minimum Standards For Development On Nonconforming Lots Of Record
10-4H-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
   A.   The PR 3.4 planned residential zone is established to provide areas
within the city providing an environment suitable for family life. Typical uses
within the zone are a combination of single-family detached housing units and
also attached housing units located in a coordinated design setting, together
with a commingling of parks, playgrounds, schools, churches and other community
facilities designed to serve the residents of the city. The zone is
characterized by dwellings interspersed with significant amounts of park and
open space areas, at densities approximately the same as for the R-1-11,000
zone, but with the opportunity for increased flexibility in the layout of land
development projects. Owners and developers of property within the zone should
bear in mind that primacy is given to residential development and maintain
their properties in recognition thereof.
   B.   The specific regulations necessary for the accomplishment of the intent
of the zone are hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999)
10-4H-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with the applicable requirements of this title:
Buildings and other structures for the storage and keeping of agricultural
products and machinery.
Customary household pets, but not including kennels.
Customary residential accessory structures that are an integral part of and
incidental to an approved dwelling.
Foster care homes containing not more than four (4) foster care occupants.
Production of crops and fruits in the field.
Public agency park and playgrounds. (Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999; amd. 2004 Code;
Ord. 04-15-2014A, 4-15-2014)
10-4H-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land may be permitted upon
compliance with the standards and conditions set forth in this title and after
approval has been given by the designated review body:
Accessory apartment.
Assisted living facility for elderly persons.
Fences, walls and hedges, subject to the requirements of section
10-5-18 of this title.
Home occupations, subject to the provisions of title 3, chapter 1 of this code.
Planned residential developments, subject to compliance with the applicable
requirements of chapter 6, article B of this title.
Residential facility for handicapped persons.
Single-family dwellings when located on an existing "lot of record", subject to
compliance with the provisions of section
10-4H-8 of this article relating to minimum standards for nonconforming lots,
approval of a site plan in accordance with the provisions of section
10-4H-7 of this article, and conformance with the other applicable requirements
of this zone.
Single-family dwellings when located upon a lot within an approved planned
residential development, subject to approval of a site plan in accordance with
the provisions of section
10-4H-7 of this article and conformance with the applicable requirements of
this zone.
Small animal units. See section
10-5-33, "Small Animals Or Fowl", of this title.
Water, sewer and utility transmission lines and facilities required as an
incidental part of a flexible design subdivision, planned residential
development or other approved development project in the zone and subject to
the approval of a site plan by the city council. (Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999; amd.
2004 Code; Ord. 9-18-2007A, 9-18-2007; Ord. 1-19-2010A, 1-19-2010; Ord. 11-9-
2010B, 11-9-2010; Ord. 9-20-2011B, 9-20-2011; Ord. 1-3-2012B, 1-3-2012, eff. 2-
21-2012)
10-4H-4: LOCATION REQUIREMENTS:
All buildings shall be located within the designated building envelope as shown
on the final plat of a planned residential development or flexible subdivision
project, as established in accordance with the provisions of section
10-4H-7 of this article; except, where no designated setback envelope has been
established, all buildings shall be located in accordance with the following:
(Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999; amd. 2004 Code)
   A.   Main Buildings: All dwellings and other main buildings and structures
shall be set back in accordance with the following:
      1.   Front Setback: All dwellings and other main buildings shall be set
back not less than thirty feet (30') from the front lot line that abuts on any
existing or proposed public street.
      2.   Side Setback:
         a.   Interior Lots: All dwellings and other main buildings, including
any attached garage or similar structure, shall be set back not less than ten
feet (10') from any side lot line and the combined total setback distance of
the opposite side setbacks shall be not less than twenty four feet (24').
         b.   Corner Lots; Side Abutting A Street: All dwellings and other main
buildings shall be set back not less than thirty feet (30') from the side lot
line that abuts on any existing or proposed public street.
      3.   Rear Setback:
         a.   Interior Lots: All dwellings or other main buildings shall be set
back not less than twenty five feet (25') from the rear lot line.
         b.   Corner Lots: All dwellings and other main buildings shall be set
back not less than twenty five feet (25') from the rear lot line, except that
where a garage is attached to the rear of the dwelling, the required rear
setback for said garage may be reduced to not less than twelve feet (12') as
measured from the rear lot line to the closest part of the building.
   B.   Accessory Buildings: All accessory buildings shall be located in
accordance with the following:
      1.   Setback From Main Building; Front Setback: Accessory buildings shall
be set back not less than twelve feet (12') to the rear of the closest rear
wall of the main building, and not less than twelve feet (12') from the closest
side wall of the main building. Accessory buildings that are located twelve
feet (12') or closer to a main building shall be considered as part of the main
building. Where no main building exists on a lot, a detached accessory building
shall be set back not less than seventy five feet (75') from the front lot
line.
      2.   Side Setback; Corner Lot, Side Abutting A Street: Accessory
buildings shall be set back not less than thirty feet (30') from the side lot
line that abuts on a street.
      3.   Side And Rear Setback; Interior Lot Line: Accessory buildings shall
be set back not less than five feet (5') from any interior side or rear lot
line. (Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999)
10-4H-5: UTILITY REQUIREMENTS:
All dwellings and other structures used for human occupancy shall be served
with adequate utilities, as follows:
   A.   The city culinary water system.
   B.   The city sanitary sewer system.
   C.   Electric, natural gas and telephone systems.
   D.   The city pressurized irrigation system.
   E.   The city stormwater system. (Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999; amd. 2004 Code)
10-4H-6: DWELLING REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Area Of Dwellings:
      1.   Single-Family Detached: Each dwelling shall conform to one of the
following:
         a.   The dwelling shall contain a main floor living area of not less
than one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet; or
         b.   The dwelling shall meet or exceed all of the following:
            (1)   The dwelling shall have a total "building footprint area" of
not less than one thousand four hundred (1,400) square feet as measured from
the outside of the foundation wall; and
            (2)   Not less than one thousand (1,000) square feet of the
"building footprint area" shall be devoted exclusively to living space
(portions of the footprint area occupied by garages, porches, breezeways and
similar areas shall be excluded); and
            (3)   The dwelling shall contain a total living area of not less
than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet located on building floors
or levels, located entirely above the finished grade of the ground surface
adjacent to the foundation of the structure.
      2.   Twin Homes (Duplex) And Multi-Dwelling Structures: Each dwelling
unit shall contain a total living area of not less than one thousand (1,000)
square feet.
   B.   Minimum Dimension: The minimum width or length dimension of any
dwelling as measured from the outside wall shall be not less than twenty four
feet (24'). Nonliving spaces such as garages, porches and sheds shall not be
included in determining compliance with this requirement. (Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-
1999)
   C.   Height Of Building:
      1.   The maximum height of any dwelling shall be thirty five feet (35')
in height as measured to the ridgeline of the roof. The maximum height of any
accessory building shall be twenty feet (20') to the ridgeline of the roof.
Both the dwelling and the accessory building height shall be measured from the
highest finished grade of the ground surface adjacent to the foundation of the
structure from the front elevation to the ridgeline. (Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999;
amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   Chimneys, television antennas, and similar ancillary structures not
used for human occupancy shall be excluded in determining height; provided,
that no such ancillary structure shall extend to a height in excess of ten feet
(10') above the building. (Ord. 3-20-2012B, 3-20-2012)
      3.   The minimum height of a building used as a dwelling shall be not
less than eight feet (8'). (Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999; amd. 2004 Code)
   D.   Off Street Parking:
      1.   Not less than two (2) off street parking spaces shall be required
for each dwelling unit. Each off street parking space shall be not less than
ten feet by twenty feet (10' x 20') per space.
      2.   Not less than two (2) off street parking spaces appurtenant to a
dwelling shall be enclosed within a garage.
      3.   Parking of recreational vehicles, boats, trailers, etc., is
permitted within the optional enclosure area, in a private driveway or directly
adjacent to the garage/driveway on an approved surface. (Ord. 10-20-2009C, 10-
20-2009)
   E.   Conformance With Special Dwelling Requirements: In addition to the
requirements herein set forth, all dwellings shall conform to the special
provisions relating to dwellings set forth under section
10-5-5 of this title. (Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999)
10-4H-7: SPECIAL PROVISIONS:
   A.   Designated Setback Envelope: All dwellings shall be located within the
limits of a designated setback envelope as shown on the final plat of a planned
residential development project or otherwise established pursuant to the
provisions of this title.
   B.   Location Of Designated Setback Area: Where a site plan is required
pursuant to the terms of this title, said plan shall delineate the location of
the designated setback area.
   C.   Review Of Site Plan; Findings: The planning commission or city council,
as applicable, shall review the site plan and the recommendations of the city
engineer, and any technical reports submitted in connection with a request for
adjustment of the standards or criteria of this title, and shall approve the
application only upon a finding that:
      1.   All the plan submissions necessary for an adequate review and
decision shall have been submitted and in a form suitable for evaluation by the
city.
      2.   That the plan conforms, in all respects, to applicable city
requirements, standards and criteria.
      3.   The location and arrangement of the buildings, roadways, open areas
and other elements of the development duly recognize and accommodate the
natural conditions present and construction of such elements will not result in
the creation of an adverse or unsafe condition.
      4.   The development will accomplish and preserve the intent of the zone.
   D.   Changes May Be Required: The city may require changes in the plan in
order to more fully accomplish the intent of the zone. Such changes may
include, but are not limited to, adjustments in the boundaries of the
designated setback area and changes in the location of roadways, structures and
similar elements. (Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999)
10-4H-8: MINIMUM STANDARDS FOR DEVELOPMENT ON NONCONFORMING LOTS OF RECORD:
Pursuant to the provisions of section
10-4H-3 of this article (single-family dwellings when located on an existing
"lot of record"), a dwelling may be constructed upon a nonconforming lot of
record, situated outside the boundaries of a planned residential development,
subject to conformance with the following minimum standards and requirements.
These standards shall be in addition to the minimum requirements applicable
within the zone (i.e., utility, dwelling, special provisions, etc.):
   A.   The parcel shall qualify as a "nonconforming lot of record", as defined
in section
10-2-1 of this title.
   B.   The nonconforming lot shall abut upon and have direct access to a city
maintained street. The distance of the abutting side shall be not less than one
hundred feet (100'), except as follows: 1) the length of the abutting side may
be reduced to not less than sixty feet (60') in instances where the lot fronts
upon a cul-de-sac or curve and the side lot lines radiate in such a manner that
the width of the lot measured at a point not less than forty feet (40') from
the front lot line will meet the minimum width requirements of this section; or
2) the lot qualifies and is approved as a "flag lot" in accordance with the
provisions of section
10-5-12 of this title.
   C.   The proposed dwelling and all accessory buildings shall be located
within a designated setback envelope. The boundaries of said designated setback
envelope shall conform to the setback requirements of the zone or shall have
been granted a variance therefrom by the hearing officer.
   D.   Not more than one dwelling and appurtenant accessory buildings shall be
constructed on any nonconforming lot. Any development that proposes a division
of territory with a nonconforming lot shall be considered as a proposed planned
residential development or flexible subdivision project and shall conform to
the provisions relating thereto.
(Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999; amd.  2004 Code; Ord. 07-07-2020A, 7-7-2020)
ARTICLE I.  TR-1 TOWNSITE RESIDENTIAL ZONE
SECTION:
10-4I-1: Legislative Intent
10-4I-2: Permitted Uses
10-4I-3: Conditional Uses
10-4I-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
   A.   The TR-1 townsite residential zone is established to provide for the
coordinated planning and development of large areas within the city. Typical
uses within the zone are a combination of single-family detached housing units
and also attached housing units located in a coordinated design setting,
together with a commingling of parks and open space areas, playgrounds,
schools, churches and other private and community facilities designed to serve
the residents of the city and neighborhood. The zone is characterized by
dwellings interspersed with significant amounts of park and open space areas at
a base density of approximately one dwelling unit per acre, but with the
opportunity for a substantial increase in density above the base density,
through a combination of factors, including, but not limited to, extensive
clustering of residential and other urban uses; use of innovative design
concepts that will result in an increased sense of community within the project
area and decreased need for public funding of services to the area; preparation
of a coordinated design within the project area and surrounding territory that
effectively accommodates the physical constraints to development within and
adjacent to the project area (i.e., steep slopes, existing highways, flood
areas, drainage channels, etc.); providing increased levels of open space area
and amenities above the base required amount; and providing unique and
extensive project and/or community amenities and facilities. (Ord. 8-17-2000A,
8-17-2000; amd. 2004 Code)
   B.   The zone is consistent with and intended to facilitate implementation
of the areas designated on the general plan as planned townsite projects.
Owners and developers of property within this zone should bear in mind that
primacy is given to residential development and other complementary facilities
such as schools, churches, recreational facilities and open space and should
maintain their properties in recognition thereof.
   C.   The specific regulations necessary for the accomplishment of the intent
of the zone are hereinafter set forth. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
10-4I-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with the applicable requirements of this title:
Any permitted use within the R-1-15,000 residential zone, subject to the
applicable requirements for such use as set forth therein. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-
17-2000; amd. 2004 Code)
10-4I-3: CONDITIONAL USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with the applicable requirements of this title, and after approval
has been given by the designated review agency:
Accessory apartment.
Assisted living facility for elderly persons.
Small animal units. See section
10-5-33, "Small Animals Or Fowl", of this title.
Townsite residential projects, subject to the provisions of chapter 6, article
D of this title. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000; amd. Ord. 1-19-2010A, 1-19-2010;
Ord. 11-9-2010B, 11-9-2010; Ord. 9-20-2011B, 9-20-2011; Ord. 1-3-2012B, 1-3-
2012, eff. 2-21-2012)
ARTICLE J.  PF PUBLIC FACILITIES ZONE
SECTION:
10-4J-1: Legislative Intent
10-4J-2: Permitted Uses
10-4J-3: Approval Procedure
10-4J-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
   A.   The PF public facilities zone is established to provide areas for the
location and establishment of facilities owned and maintained by public and
quasi public entities and that utilize relatively large areas of land.
   B.   It is the intent of this zone district to provide for effective
regulation of the placement and construction of major public systems and
facilities within the city in order to ensure that said facilities will be
consistent with the purposes of the general plan and be located, constructed
and maintained in a manner that will further the interest of the city and its
residents, and facilitate the implementation of Utah Code Annotated sections
10-9-106 and 10-9-305, as amended. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
10-4J-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land shall be permitted upon
compliance with applicable requirements of this title:
Cemeteries.
Electric substations.
Major electric transmission lines (above 45 kv capacity).
Municipal buildings and public works buildings and facilities.
Parks.
Schools.
Water reservoirs and storage tanks. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
10-4J-3: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   Specified: Approval for the placement of the zone and for the location
and layout of uses within this zone shall be obtained from the city council,
following recommendation of the planning commission in the manner required for
an amendment to the zoning ordinance.
   B.   Site Plan May Be Required: To facilitate evaluation of the potential
impact from the zoning of the property and the placement of proposed use
thereon, the planning commission and/or the city council may require the
submittal of a site plan showing the area proposed to be included in the zone,
the proposed placement of major buildings and facilities to be located on the
site and provisions intended to minimize adverse impacts resulting from the
construction or operation of said use. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
CHAPTER 5
SUPPLEMENTARY DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS
SECTION:
10-5-1: Intent
10-5-2: Yard Space For One Building Only
10-5-3: Sale Or Lease Of Required Space Prohibited
10-5-4: Storage Of Junk And Debris Prohibited
10-5-5: Development In Required Setback Area (Required Yard Area)
10-5-6: Annexed Territory
10-5-7: Effect Of Street Plan
10-5-8: Drainage
10-5-9: Recreational Vehicles And Mobile Homes Prohibited; Exceptions
10-5-10: Each Dwelling To Be On A Zoning Lot
10-5-11: Off Street Parking Required; To Be Covered
10-5-12: Flag Lot Development
10-5-13: Earth Home Projects
10-5-14: Setback Of Buildings From Proposed Streets
10-5-15: Home Occupations 1  (Rep. by Ord. 9-18-2007A, 9-18-2007)
10-5-16: Water Rights To Be Conveyed; Exceptions
10-5-17: Clear View Of Intersecting Streets
10-5-18: Fences
10-5-19: Rules For Determining Compliance With Lot Width
10-5-20: Common Drive Projects
10-5-21: Cross Connection Control
10-5-22: Campaign Signs (Rep. by Ord. 8-16-2011A, 8-16-2011)
10-5-23: Premises Occupations 2  (Rep. by Ord. 7-8-2008B, 7-8-2008)
10-5-24: Reduction In Setback To Accommodate Public Water Or Sewer System
Authorized
10-5-25: Bed And Breakfast Facility
10-5-26: Signs
10-5-27: Landscaping
10-5-28: Wireless Telecommunications
10-5-29: Decks, Porches, Patios, Pergolas, Awnings, Hot Tubs, Carports And
Similar Structures
10-5-30: Portable Utility Sheds And Utility Sheds
10-5-31: Average Daily Traffic (ADT) Design Criteria
10-5-32: Accessory Apartment
10-5-33: Small Animals Or Fowl
10-5-34: Assisted Living Facility For Elderly Persons
10-5-35: Apiary Requirements
10-5-36: Flagpoles
10-5-37: Conditional Uses And Zones
10-5-38: Renewable Energy Systems
10-5-39: Tobacco Sales, Tobacco Paraphernalia And Tobacco Specialty Businesses
 
Notes
1 1. See title 3, chapter 1, article B of this Code. See section
  3-1-6 of this Code for license approval or renewal.
2 2. See title 3, chapter 1, article E of this Code.
10-5-1: INTENT:
The intent of this chapter is to provide for several miscellaneous land
development standards that are applicable in more than one zone. The
requirements of this chapter shall be in addition to development standards
contained within the various zones. Where the provisions of this chapter may be
in conflict with other provisions of this title, the more stringent shall
prevail. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978)
10-5-2: YARD SPACE FOR ONE BUILDING ONLY:
All required yards shall be situated on the same lot as the building or
structure to which it applies. No required yard area or other open space around
the existing building that is needed to comply with the setback or open space
requirements of this title shall be considered as providing the required yard
area or setback or open space for any other building; and no required setback,
yard area or other required open space on an adjoining lot may be considered as
providing the setback, yard or open space on the lot where a building is to be
erected or constructed. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978)
10-5-3: SALE OR LEASE OF REQUIRED SPACE PROHIBITED:
No space needed to meet the area, frontage, width, coverage, off street
parking, frontage on a public street, or other requirement of this title for a
lot or building may be sold, bequeathed or leased apart from such lot or
building, unless other space so complying is provided, nor shall any land be
sold that will result in an existing or future lot for dwelling purposes that
does not comply with all of the provisions of this title. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-
1978)
10-5-4: STORAGE OF JUNK AND DEBRIS PROHIBITED:
No yard or other open space shall be used for the storage of junk, debris or
obsolete vehicles; and no land shall be used for such purposes, except as
specifically permitted herein. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978)
10-5-5: DEVELOPMENT IN REQUIRED SETBACK AREA (REQUIRED YARD AREA):
All required setback area (required yard area) of a lot shall be open and
unobstructed, except for the following uses and projections:
   A.   Side Setback Areas (Side Yard Areas):
      1.   The ordinary projections of windowsills, belt courses, cornices and
other ornamental features to the extent of not more than twelve inches (12").
      2.   The projection of eaves not more than two feet (2').
      3.   The projection of a step not over two feet (2').
      4.   Awnings projecting from side of dwelling.
      5.   A bay window or chimney not over ten feet (10') long projecting not
more than two feet (2'), providing such extension maintains the minimum side
yard allowable for the smallest side yard in the zone.
      6.   A fence or wall constructed in accordance with the provisions of
section
10-5-18 of this chapter.
      7.   An open area used for the temporary storage of recreational
vehicles, boats, etc., but only when said area is located immediately adjacent
to the outside wall of an attached garage.
      8.   Hot tubs, patios or similar uses at ground level shall be allowed in
accordance with the provisions of section
10-5-29 of this chapter.
      9.   Private swimming pools and similar uses shall be allowed in a side
yard, provided they are located at least thirty feet (30') from any dwelling on
an adjoining lot and at least ten feet (10') from any property line. Corner
lots, with a side abutting street: pool shall be set back not less than thirty
feet (30') from the property line that abuts on a street. Swimming pools shall
be enclosed within a fence or wall which conforms to International Building
Code requirements.
      10.   Accessory buildings and portable sheds located in conformance with
the applicable setback requirements.
      11.   Customary vegetative landscaping.
      12.   Decks, pergolas, covers, and awnings shall be allowed in accordance
with the provisions of section
10-5-29 of this chapter.
      13.   Parking of recreational vehicles, boats, trailers, etc., is
permitted within the optional enclosure area, in a private driveway or directly
adjacent to the garage/driveway on an approved surface.
      14.   A driveway leading to a properly located garage or parking area,
providing for or making possible the parking of automobiles. The City shall not
allow any curb cuts or approve any driveways except for entrance and exit
driveways leading to properly located parking areas.
      15.   Circular driveways may be permitted in required side yard areas of
single-family dwellings leading to and from a properly located garage on the
property subject to the following conditions:
         a.   Such drives shall be hard surfaced.
         b.   Such drives shall not be over twenty feet (20') in width.
         c.   There shall be a landscaped area at least fifteen feet (15') in
depth from the front property line to the inside of the drive.
         d.   Circular driveway areas are not to be used for the parking or
storage of any trailer, camper, motor home, boat, or other equipment at any
time, nor is the area to be used for permanent parking of any vehicle.
         e.   Passenger automobiles may be parked on driveways serving private
residences, provided the automobile is parked completely on private property.
         f.   The forty five foot (45') line of sight as measured from the
point of curvature on circular driveways shall remain open, and free from
visual obstructions.
   B.   Rear Setback Areas (Rear Yard Areas):
      1.   A bay window or chimney not over ten feet (10') long projecting not
more than two feet (2').
      2.   The projection of eaves or cornices not more than two feet (2').
      3.   Private swimming pools and similar uses shall be allowed in a rear
yard, provided they are located at least thirty feet (30') from any dwelling on
an adjoining lot and at least ten feet (10') from any property line. Swimming
pools shall be enclosed within a fence or wall which conforms to International
Building Code requirements.
      4.   Garages and other accessory buildings as hereinafter provided. Such
structures shall not cover over fifty percent (50%) of the rear yard area.
      5.   Hard surfaced parking areas subject to the same location
requirements of a garage.
      6.   Air conditioners.
      7.   A fence or wall constructed in accordance with the provisions of
section
10-5-18 of this chapter.
      8.   Hot tubs, patios or similar uses at ground level shall be allowed in
accordance with the provisions of section
10-5-29 of this chapter.
      9.   Accessory buildings and portable sheds located in conformance with
the applicable setback requirements.
      10.   Customary vegetative landscaping.
   C.   Front Setback Areas (Front Yard Areas):
      1.   A fence or wall constructed in accordance with the provisions of
sections
10-5-17 and
10-5-18 of this chapter.
      2.   Uncovered steps leading to the main building; provided, however,
that they are not more than four feet (4') in height and do not cause any
danger or hazard to traffic by obstructing the view of the street or
intersection. Any portion of any steps, covered or uncovered, that are more
than four feet (4') above grade must maintain the required setback line.
      3.   Eaves or cornices projecting not more than two feet (2').
      4.   A bay window or chimney not over ten feet (10') long projecting not
more than two feet (2').
      5.   A driveway leading to a properly located garage or parking area;
providing for or making possible the parking of automobiles.
         a.   The city shall not allow any curb cuts or approve any driveways
except for entrance and exit driveways leading to properly located parking
areas.
         b.   The maximum width of a residential driveway approach shall not
exceed thirty feet (30'). Such lots with extended driveway areas shall maintain
fifty percent (50%) front yard landscaping.
         c.   Secondary Driveway: One secondary driveway may be allowed in
residential areas under the following conditions:
            (1)   The width of the secondary driveway shall not exceed twenty
feet (20').
            (2)   Spacing between the primary driveway and the secondary
driveway shall be a minimum ten feet (10'), with a minimum of ten feet (10')
driveway approach, not including flares.
            (3)   Secondary driveways located on corner lots shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of the total area; front and side yard setbacks combined.
      6.   Circular driveways shall be permitted in required front yard areas
of single-family dwellings leading to and from a properly located garage on the
property subject to the following conditions:
         a.   Such drives shall be hard surfaced.
         b.   Such drives shall not be over sixteen feet (16') in width.
         c.   There shall be a landscaped area at least fifteen feet (15') in
depth from the front property line to the inside of the drive.
         d.   Driveway areas are not to be used for the parking or storage of
any trailer, camper, motor home, boat, or other equipment at any time, nor is
the area to be used for permanent parking of any vehicle.
         e.   Passenger automobiles may be parked on driveways serving private
residences, provided the automobile is parked completely on private property.
      7.   Customary vegetative landscaping.
(Ord. 7-7-98A, 7-7-1998; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 10-20-2015B, 10-20-2015; Ord. 07-
16-2019B, 7-16-2019; Ord. 11-19-2019A, 11-19-2019)
10-5-6: ANNEXED TERRITORY 1 :
   A.   All land annexed to the City shall be classified into the zone to which
it is contiguous. Where the annexed land is contiguous to more than one zone,
the newly annexed land shall be classified into that zone having the largest
contiguous boundary.
   B.   The zone designation assigned pursuant to this provision shall remain
in effect until amended in accordance with the procedure for amending this
title. Property shall not be reclassified to another zone concurrently with or
prior to completion of annexation proceedings. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 1, chapter 12 of this Code.
10-5-7: EFFECT OF STREET PLAN:
Wherever a front or side setback is required for a building, which building
abuts on a proposed street that has not been constructed but that has been
designated by the planning commission as a future street, the depth of such
front or side setback shall be measured from the planned street lines. (Ord. 6-
20-78A, 6-20-1978)
10-5-8: DRAINAGE:
Surface water from parking areas and other sealed surfaces shall not be
disposed of by draining into adjacent property, except after written agreement
between the two (2) parties.
(Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978)
10-5-9: RECREATIONAL VEHICLES AND MOBILE HOMES PROHIBITED; EXCEPTIONS:
It shall be unlawful to place any recreational vehicle or mobile home on any
lot or parcel of land in the area covered by the zoning map and to use the same
for human habitation.
(Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978; amd. Ord. 11-19-2019B, 11-19-2019)
10-5-10: EACH DWELLING TO BE ON A ZONING LOT:
Only one building that contains a dwelling shall be located and maintained on a
zoning lot. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978)
10-5-11: OFF STREET PARKING REQUIRED; TO BE COVERED:
Not less than two (2) off street parking spaces shall be required for each
single-family dwelling. Said off street parking shall be not less than ten feet
by twenty feet (10' x 20') per space and parking spaces shall be enclosed
within a garage. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978)
10-5-12: FLAG LOT DEVELOPMENT:
A flag lot development may be approved by the city council following the
recommendation of the planning commission and subject to the following findings
and standards:
   A.   The access requirements of the zone permit flag lot developments.
   B.   In the opinion of the city council, the site is not developable under
conventional development procedures and that approval of the flag lot will not
preclude the proper development of the proposed flag lot, any residual parcel,
or the adjacent properties.
   C.   An accessway not less than twenty feet (20') in width nor more than two
hundred fifty feet (250'), or the minimum depth or one lot in length (whichever
is less) shall connect the building site portion of the lot with a designated
city street. Said accessway shall be owned in fee as part of the lot.
   D.   The area of the building site exclusive of the accessway shall not be
less than the minimum area requirement of the zone.
   E.   Any residual lot created by the action shall conform to the minimum
zone requirements.
   F.   The setbacks from the boundaries of the building site shall be the same
as those required within the zone. Measurements of the front setback shall be
made from the lot line of the building site portion of the lot most closely
paralleling the road.
   G.   A detailed site plan prepared in conformance with the above conditions
shall be submitted and approved. (Ord. 5-11-83A, 5-11-1983; amd. Ord. 1-2-
2001A, 1-2-2001)
10-5-13: EARTH HOME PROJECTS:
An earth home may be approved by the city council subject to the following
findings and standards:
   A.   The minimum height requirements of the zone allow the placement of
earth homes.
   B.   In the opinion of the city council, the design of all aboveground
structures and other surface features appurtenant to the proposed home will be
compatible with traditional housing styles present and/or anticipated in the
vicinity of the home and consistent with the intent of the zone.
   C.   All portions of the lot not devoted to aboveground structures will be
landscaped following good landscape practices.
   D.   A detailed site plan for the lot showing the location of the home and
all surface features and proposed landscape treatment shall be submitted and
approved. (Ord. 5-11-83A, 5-11-1983)
10-5-14: SETBACK OF BUILDINGS FROM PROPOSED STREETS:
The front or side setback for structures abutting on a proposed street that is
shown on the major street plan as a future street or upon an existing street
that is shown on said plan as needing to be widened shall be measured from the
planned street line. For purposes of determining the setback requirement and
similar location standards, said planned street line shall be considered as the
property line. For the purposes of compliance with this requirement, all
structures on lots that abut upon Canyon Road (Utah Highway 146) shall be set
back not less than eighty feet (80') from the centerline of said road. (Ord. 5-
11-83A, 5-11-1983)
10-5-15: HOME OCCUPATIONS 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 9-18-2007A, 9-18-2007)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 3, chapter 1, article B of this code. See section 3-1-6 of this
  code for license approval or renewal.
10-5-16: WATER RIGHTS TO BE CONVEYED; EXCEPTIONS 1 :
   A.   All requests for approval of a subdivision or issuance of a building
permit shall, as a condition of approval of the subdivision or issuance of the
building permit, as applicable, convey to the city title to water rights using
the following formula: (2.58 x exact lot size in acres) + (0.5 x number of
dwelling units) = water rights in acre-feet to be dedicated for each
subdivision lot or building permit. (Ord. 2-19-2008A, 2-19-2008)
   B.   All water rights previously conveyed as part of the annexation process
or as part of the subdivision process shall be considered as a credit toward
satisfying the requirements of this section.
   C.   Any dwelling that receives its culinary water directly from the Manila
culinary water system shall be considered as having complied with the
conveyance requirement. (Ord. 6-15-94A, 6-15-1994)
 
Notes
1 2. See also subsection 1-12-3A of this code. See also section 10-6-16 of this
  title relative to large scale development.
10-5-17: CLEAR VIEW OF INTERSECTING STREETS:
In all zones, no fence or structure in excess of three feet (3') in height that
will prevent a clear view to automobile drivers of approaching vehicles or
pedestrians shall be placed on a corner lot or parcel of land within a
triangular area formed by the lip of curb and gutter and a line connecting them
at points forty five feet (45') from the point of intersection of said street
lines (clear vision area). Street trees and other landscaping plants are
permitted within the clear vision area, provided they are pruned and trimmed to
a height of not more than three feet (3') nor less than seven feet (7') above
the established grade so as to not obstruct the clear view of motor vehicle
drivers. (Ord. 4-16-2002A, 4-16-2002)
10-5-18: FENCES:
   A.   Intent: It is the intent of this section to establish minimum standards
for the placement and height of fences for the purpose of facilitating safety
of pedestrians and motor vehicle users in connection with ingress and egress to
private drives and parking areas, and to more adequately protect the health,
safety and general welfare of the population.
   B.   Definitions And Terms: For the purpose of facilitating the
implementation of this section, the following terms are hereby defined and
further identified on the following figures 4-6-18A, 4-6-18B and 4-16-18C of
this section:
CLEAR VISION AREA: That portion of a corner lot or parcel as defined within and
subject to the provisions of section
10-5-17 of this chapter.
FENCE: Any constructed tangible barrier, lattice work, screen, wall, or any
continuous growth of shrubs, vines, trees or other vegetative material.
OPEN FENCE: Means and includes any fence that is forty percent (40%) or more
open and measured as an eight foot (8') width by the maximum fence height being
proposed, including fence posts/pillars and rails.
OPTIONAL ENCLOSURE AREA: Means and includes the portion of the street side
enclosure area beginning at the point fifteen feet (15') from the lip of curb
and gutter to the required side setback excluding the clear vision area, all of
the required front setback area and further identified in figure 4-6-18A of
this section.
REAR SIDE ENCLOSURE AREA: Means and includes all yard area of a lot other than
the area within the street side enclosure area and further identified in figure
4-6-18A of this section.
STREET SIDE ENCLOSURE AREA: Means and includes, as applicable:
      1.   Corner Lot: All of the required front setback area and also all of
the required side setback area adjacent to a street and further identified in
figure 4-6-18A of this section.
      2.   Interior Lot: All of the required front setback area of a lot and
further identified in figure 4-6-18A of this section.
   C.   Fence Height And Placement:
      1.   Street Side Enclosure Area:
         a.   No fence shall be constructed or maintained at a height greater
than three feet (3'), within any portion of the street side enclosure area;
provided however, an open fence may be constructed at a height no greater than
four feet (4').
         b.   Where there is uncertainty regarding the location of the lip of
curb and gutter (i.e., lots adjacent to undedicated streets), the location of
the street side enclosure area shall be determined by the city engineer.
      2.   Optional Enclosure Area: Within the portion of a lot designated as
optional enclosure area, any fence may be constructed, subject to all of the
following:
         a.   The maximum height of the fence shall be not more than six feet
(6').
         b.   Driveway safe vision area. Where the closest portion of any
vehicular driveway on the same or an adjacent lot is located within twelve feet
(12') of a fence, the height of the fence shall be modified to conform to
subsection C1 of this section.
         c.   Where the adjacent lot is vacant, the location of the closest
portion of a vehicular driveway shall be assumed to be six feet (6') from the
common lot boundary.
         d.   The entire portion of the street side enclosure area situated
between the lot boundary and any proposed fence within the optional enclosure
area shall be landscaped. The landscape treatment shall include, but not be
limited to:
            (1)   A combination of turf and other plant materials;
            (2)   An adequate sprinkler irrigation system; and
            (3)   The placement of street trees distributed at the rate defined
on the "list of acceptable street trees" as defined in figure 4-6-18B of this
section. Trees installed in conformance with this requirement shall be limited
to the species set forth and shall have a caliper of not less than one inch
(1").
         e.   The request for approval of a fence within the optional enclosure
area shall include a plan, drawn to scale, and show the proposed landscape
treatment of the area between the property line and fence, together with a bond
or other assurance acceptable to the city for the purpose of ensuring the
installation of the landscape features.
         f.   Clear vision area. Notwithstanding any provision of this
subsection, any fence, including any appurtenant pillar or post, or similar
screening material, situated within the clear vision area of a corner lot or
parcel shall comply with the requirements for such area as set forth under
section
10-5-17 of this chapter. In the event of conflict, the provisions of the more
strict shall apply.
      3.   Rear/Side Enclosure Area: Within the portion of a lot designated as
rear/side enclosure area, the maximum height of any fence shall be six feet
(6'), excluding the required front setback area.
   D.   Exceptions To Height Requirements:
      1.   Public Utility Facilities: Fences required by state law or policy to
enclose public utility installations and schools shall be exempt from the
height requirements, but shall meet other pertinent state and local
requirements. (Ord. 4-16-2002A, 4-16-2002)
      2.   Tennis Courts, Sport Courts, Batting Cages, Swimming Pools, Etc.:
Fence type enclosures for uses such as tennis courts, sport courts, swimming
pools, ball diamond backstops, batting cages, etc., may be erected to a height
greater than six feet (6') but not more than eighteen feet (18'), provided:
         a.   Such enclosure does not constitute a part of a fence enclosing a
property.
         b.   All portions of the enclosure shall be located within the rear/
side enclosure area of the lot.
         c.   The enclosure shall be set back from the property line of the lot
to which it is appurtenant and also the main building upon said lot for a
distance of not less than ten feet (10'). (Ord. 11-18-2008B, 11-18-2008)
      3.   Retaining Walls: Where a retaining wall protects a cut or fill slope
along a property line separating two (2) parcels, the owner of the parcel at
the top of the retaining wall shall be entitled to construct a fence at the top
of the retaining wall in conformance with the requirements of this section. The
owner of the property at the bottom of the retaining wall shall be entitled to
construct a fence to the same elevation as the top of a fence constructed or
proposed to be constructed along the top of the retaining wall.
      4.   Pillars: Where a fence proposes the use of pillars, said pillars
shall be allowed to extend up to eighteen inches (18") above the allowable
height of the fence and a minimum spacing of six feet (6') between pillars.
   E.   General Requirements:
      1.   Construction Materials: All fences shall be constructed of
substantial material and the design and construction shall be consistent with
the quality of dwellings and other improvements within the surrounding area.
      2.   Barbed Wire Fences Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person
to erect or cause to be erected or to maintain any barbed wire fence along or
adjacent to any public street within a residential zone.
      3.   Building Permit Required; Zoning Administrator To Approve; Appeal:
Before commencing construction, plans for all fences shall first be submitted
to and approved by the zoning administrator. Where, in the opinion of the
zoning administrator, a proposed fence does not conform to the criteria
applicable for the proposed fence, or other requirement of this section, or
would have the effect of creating an unsafe condition, the zoning administrator
shall deny such application. Any applicant aggrieved by a decision of the
zoning administrator may appeal the decision to the board of adjustment who
shall have the authority to reverse, affirm or modify any decision of the
zoning administrator.
      4.   Double Frontage Lots: The placement of fences within the rear lot
portion of any double frontage lot shall conform to the standards for fences
within the optional enclosure area (subsection C2 of this section) and the
clear vision area (section
10-5-17 of this chapter), where applicable. (Ord. 4-16-2002A, 4-16-2002)
   F.   Special Provisions Relating To Fences Adjacent To Public Parks, Trails
And Certain Major Streets:
      1.   Intent: It is the intent of this subsection to establish certain
standards for the construction of fences adjacent to public parks, public trail
corridors and certain major traffic arteries that are highly visible to the
public for the purpose of achieving a coordinated appearance and consistent
quality in design and construction of such facilities.
      2.   Applicability: The provisions of this subsection shall apply to
those certain portions of dwelling lots and other parcels located within the
boundaries of the street/parkway fence overlay zone, or parcels adjacent to
current or planned parks or trail corridors. The territory included within the
street/parkway fence overlay zone shall be as set forth on that certain map,
figure 4-6-18C of this section. All fences located within the boundaries of the
street/parkway fence overlay zone or any segment thereof shall be designed,
constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this
subsection.
      3.   Special Fencing Standards: The following standards shall apply to
all fences constructed on applicable parcels: (Ord. 11-18-2008B, 11-18-2008)
         a.   Material: The fence shall be white, tan, or gray vinyl, of any
style or shape. Wrought iron fencing is permissible, provided it shall be black
or brown in color.
         b.   Type: Where trail segments are greater than one hundred thirty
feet (130') in length and less than thirty feet (30') in width, no fence
bordering the trail segment shall be constructed or maintained at a height
greater than four feet (4'); however, an open fence may be constructed at a
height no greater than six feet (6'). When the trail segment is adjacent to a
major street corridor, according to the parkway fence overlay map, fence
standards as specified elsewhere in this section apply with planning commission
approval. (Ord. 06-17-2014A, 6-3-2014)
         c.   Height: The maximum height is six feet (6'). The height shall be
measured from natural grade.
         d.   Placement: The fence shall be constructed on the property line.
Exceptions may be granted by the city manager or designee for topographical
issues.
   G.   General Exceptions:
      1.   Planned Residential Or Commercial Developments: No fencing of any
type or style is allowed surrounding or within a planned residential or
commercial development without the prior recommendation of the planning
commission and approval of the city council. The city council is authorized to
grant approval on any type or style of fence within any planned residential or
commercial development.
      2.   Altering Standards; Appeals: Standards may be altered upon request
by a group of adjacent property owners upon a finding by the city manager or
designee, after consulting with the zoning administrator, that the request is
consistent to the objectives of this section.
         a.   Appeals to the city manager's decision on exceptions may be made
to the city council within thirty (30) days of the city manager's decision.
(Ord. 11-18-2008B, 11-18-2008)
[image]
FIGURE 4-6-18B
LIST OF ACCEPTABLE STREET TREES
   (For purpose of fencing ordinance)
 
Tree Species  Spacing
                       
Maples                  
Norway maple           35 feet
Queen emerald maple    35 feet
Red maple              30 feet
Sugar maple            30 feet
Hedge maple            20 feet
Sycamore maple         20 feet
Amur maple             15 feet
Columnar maple         15 feet
                       
London plane tree      40 feet
                       
Lindens (all species)  30 feet
                       
Poplar (all species)   20 feet
                       
Oak (all species)      35 feet
                       
Ash                     
White ash              35 feet
European ash           30 feet
Green ash              35 feet
 
[image]
(Ord. 4-16-2002A, 4-16-2002)
10-5-19: RULES FOR DETERMINING COMPLIANCE WITH LOT WIDTH:
   A.   Lot Width: For purposes of determining compliance with the lot width
requirements, the measurement of lot width shall be the straight line distance
between the opposite side lot lines measured at the minimum setback line. In
the instance of a lot where more than seventy five percent (75%) of the front
lot line abuts upon a cul-de-sac or curve having a radius less than eighty feet
(80'), the width of lot shall be measured along a line that is at right angle
to the point of tangency of said curve at the approximate midpoint of the lot,
and at a distance equal to the front setback requirement.
   B.   Front Lot Line: The front lot line shall be the lot boundary line
bordering on the adjacent public street that provides vehicular access to the
lot. In the instance of a corner lot, the front lot line shall be the lot line
having the shortest distance adjacent to a public street. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-
1998)
10-5-20: COMMON DRIVE PROJECTS:
A common drive project may be approved by the city council following
recommendation of the planning commission and subject to the following findings
and standards:
   A.   The access requirements of the zone permit common drive projects.
   B.   The maximum number of lots served by the common drive shall be five
(5).
   C.   The common drive area shall be included as a part of a lot area of one
or more lots in the common drive project. Each of the lots within the common
drive project shall have a perpetual right of access to the common drive. Such
right of access shall be in the form of a recorded easement or other conveyance
approved by the city.
   D.   Each lot within the common drive project shall conform to the area and
width requirements of the underlying zone, not including any portion of the lot
included within the common drive. (Ord. 1-2-2001A, 1-2-2001)
   E.   The common drive area shall be not less than twenty four feet (24') in
width and shall be improved with an all weather driveway not less than twenty
feet (20') in width that conforms to the requirements of the adopted fire code.
The common drive shall be no longer than three hundred feet (300') and shall
terminate with a cul-de-sac or other turnaround approved by the fire chief, or
his designated representative.
   F.   Each lot in the project shall be served by separate connections for
culinary water, secondary irrigation water and sewer. Each lot shall be
serviced by a fire hydrant that is connected directly to a city owned water
line and located such that it provides adequate fire flow, as determined by the
fire chief, or his designated representative. (Ord. 1-2-2001A, 1-2-2001; amd.
2004 Code)
   G.   The maximum grade of the common drive shall comply with the
requirements for subdivisions. The grade, at the point of connection with the
public street, shall conform with the minimum city standards for street
intersections. (Ord. 3-4-2003C, 3-4-2003)
   H.   The design shall make adequate provision for on site disposal of all
surface drainage arising on the project, as determined by the city engineer.
(Ord. 1-2-2001A, 1-2-2001)
10-5-21: CROSS CONNECTION CONTROL:
Cross connections shall be as provided in title 7, chapter 5 of this code.
(2004 Code)
10-5-22: CAMPAIGN SIGNS:
(Rep. by Ord. 8-16-2011A, 8-16-2011)
10-5-23: PREMISES OCCUPATIONS 1 :
(Rep. by Ord. 7-8-2008B, 7-8-2008)
 
Notes
1 1. See title 3, chapter 1, article E of this code.
10-5-24: REDUCTION IN SETBACK TO ACCOMMODATE PUBLIC WATER OR SEWER SYSTEM
AUTHORIZED:
Where a public water line or sewer line is to be placed in an easement adjacent
to a side lot line of a lot within a subdivision, planned unit development or
similar large scale development project, and requires an extraordinary width of
easement to accommodate the water line or sewer line, the city council may
approve a reduction in the setback distance of the opposite side yard. Any such
reduction shall not exceed thirty percent (30%) of the minimum setback
distance. (Ord. 6-1-2004A, 6-1-2004)
10-5-25: BED AND BREAKFAST FACILITY:
   A.   Intent: The following regulations have been established to provide
standards for the establishment and operation of bed and breakfast facilities.
(Ord. 12-7-2004D, 12-7-2004)
   B.   Application And Approval Required: A bed and breakfast facility may be
approved by the Planning Commission, subject to a finding of compliance with
the following terms and conditions:
      1.   Use Within District: A bed and breakfast facility is specifically
listed as a permitted or conditional use within the zone district.
      2.   Lot Area; Frontage: The lot area upon which the bed and breakfast
facility is to be located shall be thirty thousand (30,000) square feet or
greater, and contain a frontage of at least two hundred feet (200').
      3.   Number Of Bedrooms: The maximum number of bedrooms to be available
for rental to patrons of the bed and breakfast facility shall be two (2), not
including the portion of the structure occupied by the residing family. A bed
and breakfast facility may include one (1) additional bedroom for each
additional five thousand (5,000) square feet of lot area in excess of thirty
thousand (30,000) square feet of lot area, up to a maximum of six (6) bedrooms,
not including the portion of the structure occupied by the residing family.
      4.   Location Of Bedrooms: All bedrooms shall be located within the
primary dwelling, except where a bed and breakfast facility contains five (5)
or more bedrooms for patrons, up to two (2) of the bedrooms may be located in
separate buildings located on the site of the primary structure.
      5.   Entrance: The primary entrance for bedrooms located within the
primary structure shall be the same as for the residing family.
      6.   Use Of Bedrooms; Food Preparation And Consumption: Each bedroom used
for rental shall be for sleeping purposes only. No bedroom shall include any
facilities for the preparation of food. All meals provided shall be prepared
within the kitchen utilized by the residing family and consumed within the
dining area used by the residing family.
      7.   Off Street Parking: Off street parking space shall be provided for
both the residing family and occupants of each bedroom intended for rental, as
follows: not less than two (2) spaces for the residing family, plus one (1)
space for each bedroom proposed for rental.
      8.   Inspection: The structure shall have been inspected by the City
Chief Building Official or building inspector and approved for fire safety and
structural adequacy.
      9.   Residential Environment Retained: In the opinion of the Planning
Commission, the placement of parking and other elements of the project will be
consistent with the surrounding residential environment. No portion of the
front setback area shall be used for off street parking, except for the portion
occupied by the driveway.
      10.   Signage: Signs shall comply with the requirements of the City's
sign regulations section
10-5-26, "Signs", of this chapter.
      11.   Business License Required: The bed and breakfast facility shall
have been issued a business license to operate within the City. (Ord. 05-16-
2017A, 5-16-2017)
10-5-26: SIGNS:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The City Council finds that unregulated signage can
be detrimental to public safety, that it can result in visual blight and
negatively impact local property values, and that it can displace alternative
land uses.
      1.   It is the purpose of this section to promote public safety and to
foster an appealing cityscape, and in accordance with the State and Federal
Constitutions, the General Plan, and for the general welfare 1 ; and
      2.   To promote the health and well being of the public generally,
pedestrians and motorists, by minimizing obstruction, visual or otherwise,
distraction, and related safety and traffic hazards within the city; and
      3.   To preserve and enhance the beauty of the city by minimizing visual
clutter and regulating physical characteristics of and placement of signage
within the city.
   B.   General Provisions:
      1.   Signage shall be regulated within each zone of the city. Signage in
residential zones shall have specific limitations as set forth herein. Signage
in commercial/industrial zones shall have specific limitations as set forth
herein.
      2.   Signs shall be deemed either permanent or temporary. Both temporary
and permanent signs are allowed in all zones, except where specifically
prohibited. A permit shall be required for all permanent signs, except as
otherwise provided herein.
      3.   All signage shall be reasonably secured and maintained so as to
withstand normal weather conditions including, but not limited to, wind, rain,
snow and so forth. Signs, whether temporary or permanent, shall be constructed
in such a way so as to preserve the public safety and shall be maintained in
such a manner so as to prevent disrepair and visual blight.
      4.   All signage shall be generally prohibited from being posted or left
behind on public property, in any public right of way, on utility poles,
historical markers, on publicly owned property, including trees, and on street
and traffic signs.
         a.   Exception: Where the city has traditionally allowed public
property to be used as an open public forum, temporary noncommercial signage
shall be allowed only if the signage is handheld or personally attended, and
where said signage presentation does not block public rights of way, disrupt
the peace, incite to violence, or cause any other public disturbance.
         b.   Exempt: Signage dedicated for government use including traffic
signs, traffic lights, street signs, directional signs, public safety signs and
related signage shall be exempt from the prohibition against signage in any
public right of way. (Ord. 8-16-2011A, 8-16-2011)
         c.   Exempt Temporary Signage: Temporary signage used for government
purposes that is informational in nature or related to events, elections,
recreation, or other city programming may be placed on public property or in
the public right of way. Such temporary signage shall be limited to three feet
(3') in height, and five feet (5') in length. Signage may be posted no more
than fourteen (14) days before the occurrence of an event and shall remain for
no more than one business day after the occurrence of an event; no more than
two (2) signs shall be permitted in any location; and where said signage
presentation does not block public right of way, disrupt the peace, incite to
violence, or cause any other public disturbance. Such exception does not apply
to the roundabout portion of 4600 W. Cedar Hills Drive, where signs shall be
limited to one at any given time. (Ord. 10-20-2015C, 10-20-2015)
      5.   All signage shall be subject to a discontinued use limitation,
whereupon the owner of said signage shall remove such no later than sixty (60)
days after a discontinued use. A "discontinued use" shall include the
expiration of a permit, abandonment of the sign, or the completion of an event
or sale for which the sign was posted. "Discontinued use" shall not include the
involuntary destruction of a sign in whole or in part due to fire or other
calamity unless the sign has been abandoned.
   C.   Signs In Residential Zones:
      1.   In residential zones, signage may be placed in accordance with the
lesser of the following setback limitations:
         a.   Signage may be placed on a lot in accordance with the front,
side, and rear yard limitations of the applicable zone, if there be such, and
may conform to setback limitations provided for accessory buildings, so long as
such placement conforms to all setback and placement limitations for accessory
buildings as set forth in the zoning code; or
         b.   Signage may be placed no closer than three (3) linear feet from
the sidewalk, curb, or street (whichever is farthest) three (3) linear feet
from the edge of the lot, and three (3) linear feet from a neighboring lot.
      2.   Except for window signs, all signage on any residential lot shall be
limited to a maximum elevation or height of six feet (6'). Where a building on
a residential lot has more than one level, window signs shall be allowed on
each level of the building.
      3.   Any window sign shall not exceed twenty five percent (25%) of a
window display area and shall not exceed a total window display area for all
windows of thirty two (32) square feet. In multiple- unit residential
buildings, the total window display area allowed shall apply to each
individually rented or owned unit and not to the building as a whole.
      4.   Commercial signage on a residential lot shall be limited to a
cumulative display area of thirty two (32) square feet for temporary commercial
signs, plus an additional six (6) square feet for a permanent commercial sign
if a variance has been granted for a business use on the residentially zoned
lot.
      5.   Noncommercial signage on a residential lot shall be limited to a
cumulative display area equal to that permitted for any commercial signage on
the same lot.
      6.   The display area of a two (2) faced sign with identical copy on both
sides shall be counted as the display area of only one of the faces.
   D.   Signs In Commercial And Industrial Zones:
      1.   In commercial or industrial zones, signage may be placed in
accordance with the lesser of the following setback limitations:
         a.   Signage may be placed on a lot in accordance with the front,
side, and rear yard setback limitations of the applicable zone, if there be
such; or
         b.   Signage may be placed no closer than three (3) linear feet from
the sidewalk curb, or street (whichever is furthest), three (3) linear feet
from the edge of the lot, and three (3) linear feet from a neighboring lot.
      2.   All signage on a commercial or industrial lot shall be limited to a
maximum elevation or height of thirty feet (30').
      3.   Any window sign on a commercial or industrial lot shall not exceed
fifty percent (50%) of a window display area and shall not exceed a total
window display area for all windows of one hundred (100) square feet. Where a
building on a commercial lot has more than one level, window signs shall be
allowed on each level of the building.
      4.   Commercial signage on a commercial or industrial lot shall be
limited to a cumulative display area of twenty five percent (25%) of the facade
of the building or structure it represents or which is found on the commercial
lot, or to ninety (90) square feet, whichever is greater.
      5.   Noncommercial signage on a commercial or industrial lot shall be
limited to a cumulative display area equal to that permitted for any commercial
signage on the same lot.
      6.   The display area of a two (2) faced sign with identical copy on both
sides shall be counted as the display area of only one of the faces. (Ord. 8-
16-2011A, 8-16-2011)
   E.   Signs In Public Facility Zone:
      1.   In the Public Facility Zone, signage may be placed in accordance
with the lesser of the following setback limitations:
         a.   Signage may be placed on a lot in accordance with the front,
side, and rear yard setback limitations of the applicable zone, if there be
such; or
         b.   Signage may be placed no closer than three (3) linear feet from
the sidewalk curb, or street (whichever is furthest), three (3) linear feet
from the edge of the lot, and three (3) linear feet from a neighboring lot.
      2.   All signage on a lot in the Public Facility Zone shall be limited to
a maximum elevation or height of twenty feet (20').
      3.   Marquee digital signs may be allowed in the Public Facility Zone,
subject to the following conditions:
         a.   Sign is owned, operated, and maintained by a public school. Any
messages displayed on a digital marquee should be those that relate with such
property type of events/activities, with the exception of public service
announcements.
         b.   Sign does not illuminate into adjacent residential lots. Only
indirect and diffused lighted signs are permitted in the PF Zone. Lights that
are not an integral part of a sign must be directed away from surrounding
properties and oncoming traffic. No flashing or rotating lights are
permissible.
         c.   Electronic displays shall not include animation, full motion
video, flashing, strobing, racing, blinking, changes in color, fade in or fade
out in any manner imitating movement, or any other means not providing constant
illumination.
         d.   Each message shall be illuminated for at least eight (8) seconds
before transitioning to a new message.
         e.   Operation and illumination of sign shall not occur between the
hours of nine o'clock (9:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M. (Ord. 06-19-
2018A, 6-19-2018)
   F.   Permanent Signs:
      1.   Permit and fee required.
      2.   Any sign that is permanently constructed, attached, or intended to
remain for more than one hundred twenty (120) days shall be deemed permanent
and requires a permit. Permanent signs shall be subject to a fee.
      3.   A sign shall be deemed permanently constructed if, standing alone,
it exceeds thirty two (32) square feet in display area, or exceeds six feet
(6') in height, or weighs more than twenty (20) pounds.
      4.   A sign shall be deemed attached if it is connected to or protruding
from any building or similar structure, interior window signs excluded.
      5.   A sign intended for use during a specified, limited time, which is
posted more than sixty (60) days before the occurrence of an event or sale and
which shall remain for more than sixty (60) days after the occurrence of an
event or sale or commencement thereof shall be deemed permanent.
Exempt: Any signage related to issues on the ballot for an upcoming election,
whether a primary or general election, are hereby deemed temporary despite the
actual number of days displayed and are deemed to have satisfied any permit and
fee requirements. Said signage is subject to the discontinued use provision set
forth above.
      6.   The City finds that permanent signage requires review by the Zoning
Administrator to ensure that the constructed sign will be structurally safe and
durable so as to preserve and promote public safety.
      7.   Permanent signage shall be subject to the discontinued use provision
set forth above.
   G.   Temporary Signs:
      1.   No permit or fee required.
      2.   Any sign that is not permanently constructed or attached as defined
above, or that is intended for use during a specified, limited time of one
hundred twenty (120) days or less shall be deemed temporary and shall not
require a permit or be subject to a fee. All temporary signage shall be subject
to the discontinued use provision set forth above.
   H.   Window Signs:
      1.   No permit or fee required. No time limitation.
      2.   A window sign is any copy posted on or sign posted inside of a
window of a building, house, or similar structure. No permit or fee is required
to post a window sign. Window signs shall not be limited to a specific number
of days allowed for display; however said signage shall be removed upon
discontinued use. Window signs shall be subject to the display area limitations
and size limitations set forth above under signs in residential and commercial/
industrial zones.
   I.   Sexually Oriented Business Signs: Commercial signage for a sexually
oriented business shall be prohibited off site from the actual lot where the
business is lawfully located. Said signage shall be limited to alphanumeric
copy only and shall be limited to a display area of thirty two (32) square
feet. (Ord. 8-16-2011A, 8-16-2011; amd. Ord. 06-19-2018A, 6-19-2018)
   J.   Prohibited Signs:
A-FRAME SIGN: Any sign or structure composed of two (2) sign faces mounted or
attached back to back to form a triangular vertical cross section through the
faces or structure over three feet (3') in height and three feet (3') in width
from grade.
ABANDONED SIGN: Any sign or structure that no longer correctly directs or
influences a person, identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor,
service, owner, product, or activity.
ANIMATED OR FLASHING SIGN: A sign that includes movement or optical illusion of
movement or rotation of any part by mechanical, artificial or atmospheric means
or a sign that displays flashing or intermittent lights. Time and temperature
devices and banners and flags shall be exempted from this definition.
BALLOON OR INFLATABLE SIGN: Any device supported by heated air, forced air, or
other gases for the purpose of drawing attention.
BILLBOARD: A high profile freestanding ground sign on one or more poles,
typically located along freeways or major highways, but not limited thereto,
designed or intended to direct attention to a business, product, or service
that is not sold, offered, or existing on the property where the sign is
located.
MARQUEE SIGN: Any sign attached to, in any manner, or made part of a marquee. A
marquee is a permanent rooflike structure projecting beyond a building or wall
of the building, generally designed and constructed to provide protection from
the weather.
MOTION SIGN: A sign that has motion either constantly or at intervals or that
gives the impression of movement through intermittent flashing, scintillating,
or varying the intensity of illumination whether or not said illumination is
reflected from an artificial source or the sun.
PENNANT SIGN: A sign made of lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material
whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from rope, wire, or
string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
PROJECTING SIGN: A sign attached perpendicular to a building structure and
extending in whole or in part more than twelve inches (12") beyond the wall to
which it is attached.
ROOF SIGN: A sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a
building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the
highest portion of the roof or which does not lie flat on the roof.
ROTATING SIGN: Any sign or portion of a sign that moves in a revolving or
similar manner.
SNIPE SIGNS: Any sign typically made of non- or semi-durable material, mounted
to a tree, to a utility pole, or to the ground by nails, staples, a wire frame,
or similar device within a right-of-way, including public and private parking
strips and medians, or on public property. (Ord. 8-16-2011A, 8-16-2011; amd.
Ord. 3-20-2012C, 3-20-2012; Ord. 06-19-2018A, 6-19-2018)
   K.   Issuing A Permit: Permit issuance is subject to the following
application process and review:
      1.   Application Process: The City shall prepare a "sign permit request"
form, which shall request the applicant or agent's name, telephone number,
address, where the proposed sign(s) will be placed, whether the sign is
intended to remain for more than one hundred twenty (120) days, whether the
sign is intended to serve commercial purposes, to identify zoning restrictions,
and which may include, but is not limited to, a site plan, sign layout, a sign
depiction, elevation of existing and future buildings, and any other reasonably
related information necessary for the Zoning Administrator to be able to
determine whether the sign complies with the design and placement requirements
set forth in this chapter. Proposed signs that are larger and that are intended
to remain for a longer period of time will require more information to assist
the Zoning Administrator in determining whether the sign will be safe and
durable.
      2.   Application; Fee: Applications will not be accepted without the
accompanying fee for a permanent sign.
      3.   Fees: Permanent signage shall be subject to a permit application fee
as determined by the City Council (see City fee schedule).
      4.   Form: The sign permit request form shall include a checkbox with a
statement indicating that, if checked, the applicant agrees to allow the City
to enter and remove the sign for which the permit is requested if the sign's
removal period expires, in lieu of prosecution by the City Prosecutor and in
lieu of a fine.
      5.   Review: If the Zoning Administrator determines that a sign permit
request is incomplete, or that signage will conflict with the provisions of
this chapter because of illegal content or nonconforming proposed design and
placement, the request shall be returned to the applicant as incomplete. The
applicant may revise and resubmit the amended sign permit request with
additional information as necessary.
      6.   Granting Or Denial Of Permit Request: The Zoning Administrator shall
make a decision to grant or deny a sign permit request in accordance with this
chapter and other applicable City, State, and Federal laws and ordinances. No
sign permit shall issue unless the sign permit request and sign comply with the
provisions of this chapter.
      7.   Permanent Signs: The Zoning Administrator shall issue a decision to
grant, deny, or return as incomplete the sign permit request within thirty (30)
days of submission.
      8.   Appeal: An applicant wishing to appeal the Zoning Administrator's
decision to reject a permit application to the Planning Commission has ten (10)
days to do so 2 . The planning commission, on administrative appeal, shall
review the applicant's sign permit request form for completeness in an open and
public meeting at which the applicant shall be allowed to appear and present
and then determine whether the applicant's proposed sign complies with the
design and placement requirements set forth in this chapter, and subsequently
return a decision either to uphold or reverse the Zoning Administrator's
decision within twenty (20) days.
   L.   Permit Limitations:
      1.   Transferability: Permits, permit numbers, permit applications, and
supporting information shall not be transferable to other sites or signs and
shall be valid only for a specific sign at the designated location. If at any
time a sign or sign structure is altered, removed, or relocated in a manner
different from the terms of an issued sign permit, such existing sign permit
will become void and a new application must be made for the sign as altered or
relocated.
Exception: Signs associated with a business that has its ownership transferred
with no proposed alteration to the business name, building, or signage shall,
upon notification to the City, have its permits transferred to the new business
owner without need of a new application.
      2.   Expiration: A permit shall expire and become null and void if work
on the sign is not commenced within sixty (60) days from the date of the permit
or if work is suspended or abandoned. In such case, a new permit shall be
obtained, and where the permit is for a permanent sign, a new fee shall be
paid.
      3.   Written Suspension Of Permit: The City may in writing suspend or
revoke a permit issued under provisions of this section whenever the permit is
issued on the basis of a material omission or misstatement of fact or in
violation of any ordinance.
      4.   Nuisance: No permit for a sign may be deemed to constitute
permission or authorization to maintain a public or private nuisance, nor shall
any permit issued hereunder constitute a defense in any action to abate a
nuisance.
   M.   Removal Of Signs:
      1.   Zoning Administrator: The Zoning Administrator is hereby authorized
to require removal of any sign. Before bringing action to require removal of
any sign, the Zoning Administrator shall give written notice to the owner of
the sign or the owner of the premises on which such sign is located. The notice
shall state the violation charged and the reasons and grounds for removal,
specifying the deficiencies or defects and what repairs, if any, will make the
sign conform to the requirements of this chapter. The notice shall also specify
that the sign must be removed or made to conform with the provisions of this
chapter within the notice period. Service of notice shall be made personally on
the owner or lessee, or by certified mail addressed to the owner or lessee at
the address specified in the permit or the last known address.
      2.   Notice Period: The notice period for permanent signs shall be
fifteen (15) days. The notice period for temporary signs shall be three (3)
days.
      3.   Prosecution: If the owner or lessee of the premises upon which the
sign is located has not demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Zoning
Administrator that the sign has been removed or brought into compliance with
the provisions of this chapter by the end of the notice period, the Zoning
Administrator shall first submit an order for removal by the City, and if
necessary, due to inability to access the sign for removal, submit the
violations to the City Prosecutor for prosecution. If the City removes the
sign, any and all prosecution charges shall be dropped.
      4.   Continuous Violation: Reerection of any sign or substantially
similar sign on the same premises after a notice of violation has been issued
shall be deemed a continuation of the original violation.
      5.   Removal Of Temporary Signs: The Zoning Administrator may remove any
illegal temporary sign which is maintained or reerected after the expiration of
the notice period, if the owner or lessee of the premises has been issued a
notice of violation at least once before for the same violation involving the
same or similar sign. When temporary signs are removed by City staff, the
responsible party shall be notified within two (2) business days of the reason
for the removal and the location from which the sign was removed. Removed signs
shall be made available for the responsible party to pick up for three (3)
calendar days. After that time, removed signs will be destroyed.
      6.   Safety Hazard: Notwithstanding other provisions of this subsection,
the Zoning Administrator may cause the immediate removal, following notice to
the owner of the sign or the property on which it is located of any unsafe or
defective sign that creates an immediate hazard to persons or property.
      7.   Costs Of Corrective Action: The costs of removal of a sign by the
City shall be borne by the owner of the sign.
   N.   Requirement Of Conformity:
      1.   No sign for which a permit is issued after the effective date of
this chapter, may be placed or maintained in the City except as provided in
this chapter.
      2.   All signs maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter are
declared to be nonconforming and, as such, may be dealt with or removed as
provided herein.
      3.   Any sign that poses a public safety hazard may be removed as
specified herein.
   O.   Nonconforming Signs:
      1.   Nonconforming signs which preexist the effective date hereof shall
be removed upon their discontinued use according to the general discontinued
use provision set forth above.
      2.   Nonconforming signs which become unsafe due to natural wear and tear
shall be deemed a discontinued use and subject to removal without an option to
repair or replace with a similar nonconforming sign.
      3.   Except as provided for in the Utah Code Annotated, billboards shall
be generally prohibited. Signs which constitute billboards prior to the
effective date hereof are protected only insofar as provided for in the Utah
Code Annotated. Titles within the Utah Code Annotated which protect billboards
include, but are not limited to, title 72, chapter 7, which is the Protection
of Highways Act and title 10, chapter 9a, which is the Municipal Land Use,
Development, and Management Act 3 .
   P.   Enforcement: A violation of this section is punishable as a Class C
misdemeanor and shall be punishable by a fine of not more than five hundred
dollars ($500.00) when a person fails to alter or repair or remove a
noncompliant sign after notice of a violation.
   Q.   Noncommercial Copy: Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to
the contrary, to the extent that this chapter allows a sign containing
commercial copy, it shall allow a sign containing noncommercial copy to the
same extent. Any signage containing obscenity, defamation, fighting words, true
threats or anything like unto it is prohibited as a matter of law.
   R.   Applicability Of The Zoning Code: The regulations of this section are
in addition to those set forth in the planning and zoning provisions of this
chapter and any other ordinances adopted by the City Council, and do not
contain any rights not otherwise granted under the provisions and procedures
contained in this chapter or any other ordinances.
   S.   Applicability Of The Utah Code: The provisions of this section are
enforceable only in accordance with the governing and enabling provisions of
the Utah Code Annotated. It is the intent of the drafters herein that this
section comply with such governing provisions.
   T.   Scope: The requirements of this chapter shall not be construed so as to
prohibit or limit other applicable provisions of this chapter/title, this Code,
or the Utah Code Annotated (UCA). In the instance where provisions of this
chapter conflict with other provisions of this Code, the terms of this chapter
shall govern. In the instance where provisions of this chapter conflict with
provisions of the Utah Code, the Utah Code shall govern.
   U.   Interpretation:
      1.   In interpreting and applying the provisions of this chapter, the
sign regulations contained herein shall be interpreted by the Zoning
Administrator. If the Zoning Administrator determines that an application needs
further interpretation, he may request Planning Commission review of the
proposal.
      2.   The Zoning Administrator and Planning Commission shall seek to
administer this section in a content neutral manner.
   V.   Variances: For rules regarding variances, see Utah Code Annotated
section 10-9a-702. (Ord. 8-16-2011A, 8-16-2011; amd. Ord. 06-19-2018A, 6-19-
2018)
 
Notes
1 1. UCA §§ 10-9a-102, 10-9a-104, 10-8-26, 10-8-28.
2 1. UCA § 10-9a-704.
3 1. UCA § 10-9a-512.
10-5-27: LANDSCAPING:
   A.   Intent: It is the intent of this section to ensure the timely
installation of landscaping within the front yard areas of residential lots
occupied by a dwelling. (Ord. 2-17-2009B, 2-17-2009)
   B.   Required: The front yard area of any existing lot containing a dwelling
shall be landscaped. It shall be unlawful for the owner of any residential lot
within the City to refuse to install and maintain landscaping within the front
yard area of any existing residential lot containing a dwelling. The front yard
area shall consist of the entire lot area from the front lot line to the face
of the dwelling, or the front setback area, whichever is greater (except for
approved designated parking areas). Corner lots have two (2) front setback
areas. Landscaping shall be properly maintained including removing weeds and
mowing turf areas. Turf grass shall not exceed six inches (6") in height. (Ord.
10-20-2009C, 10-20-2009)
   C.   Defined: The term "landscaping" shall mean and include the installation
of any combination of turf (including either sod or seeded area), planter beds,
gardens, trees and shrubs, statuary, boulders, rock areas, xeriscape or other
customary landscape features that occupy the entire unpaved portion of the
front yard area.
      1.   Irrigation System: Where the landscaping includes turf and other
plant materials that require the application of irrigation water in order to be
sustained, an irrigation system shall be installed and designed to provide
adequate quantities of water to those areas requiring irrigation. Xeriscaped
areas shall be watered only using drip/trickle irrigation systems, or other
similar systems used to reduce water consumption.
      2.   Xeriscape: A landscaping method that employs the use of drought
tolerant plants and techniques in order to conserve water. Nothing in this
section shall be construed to prohibit the use of drought tolerant vegetation
and nonvegetative materials. Provided however, failure of an owner to install
and maintain landscaping within the front yard area under the guise that the
vegetation and bare ground that occur naturally on the site constitutes
xeriscaping shall not qualify as conforming with the provisions of this
section. (Ord. 05-19-2015A, 5-19-2015)
   D.   Landscaping In New Construction; Time Limitation: In the instance of
lots upon which a dwelling is being constructed, the landscape features
required by this section shall be installed within twelve (12) months of
issuance of a final inspection approval for the dwelling. Notice of this
requirement shall be given to the utility services applicant prior to, or at
the time of, final inspection approval.
   E.   Landscaping Of Existing Dwellings: In the instance of lots upon which a
dwelling unit has already been constructed and/or occupied, the owner shall be
noticed in writing of the landscape ordinance and required to install
landscaping within twelve (12) months of written notice.
   F.   Enforcement: The Zoning Administrator is hereby charged with the
responsibility for enforcement of this section. The owner of any dwelling that
does not conform with the provisions of this section shall be in violation of
this section, and as such, be subjected to an immediate administrative citation
and a landscape installation fine as shown on the City fee schedule.
   G.   Appeal: The owner of any dwelling aggrieved by the issuance of an
administrative citation or bond forfeiture shall have and maintain a right to
appeal to the City Manager or designee, provided said appeal shall be submitted
not more than thirty (30) days following the issuance of the administrative
citation or forfeited bond. The City Manager or designee shall have the right,
after notice to the utility services applicant and hearing on the matter, to
confirm, waive or amend the terms of the administrative citation or forfeiture
of bond. In considering an appeal under this section, the City Manager or
designee shall ensure that the purposes and intent of this section and the
City's other land use ordinances are achieved.
   H.   Penalty: Any public or private entity violating any of the provisions
of this section, as determined by a finding by the Zoning Administrator, shall
receive a fine/fee according to the City fee schedule. (Ord. 2-17-2009B, 2-17-
2009)
10-5-28: WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The unique character, landscapes and scenic vistas
of the City are among its most valuable assets. Preserving and promoting those
assets are essential to the long range social and economic well being of the
City and its inhabitants. Protecting these assets requires sensitive placement
and design of wireless communication facilities so that these facilities remain
in scale and harmony with the existing character of the community. The purpose
and intent of this section is:
      1.   To accommodate new technology and develop regulations on the use and
development of City property for new cell tower facilities.
      2.   To regulate personal wireless services antennas, with or without
support structures, and related electronic equipment and equipment structures.
      3.   To provide for the orderly establishment of personal wireless
services facilities in the City.
      4.   To minimize the number of antenna support structures by encouraging
the collocation of multiple antennas on a single new or existing structure.
      5.   To establish siting, appearance, and safety standards that will help
mitigate the potential impacts related to the construction, use and maintenance
of personal wireless communication facilities.
      6.   To comply with the Telecommunication Act of 1996 by establishing
regulations that: a) do not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the
provision of personal wireless services, b) do not unreasonably discriminate
among providers of functionally equivalent services, and c) are not based on
the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such
facilities comply with the Federal Communications Commission's regulations
concerning such emissions.
   B.   Findings:
      1.   Personal wireless services facilities (PWSF) are an integral part of
the rapidly growing and evolving telecommunications industry, and present
unique zoning challenges and concerns by the City.
      2.   The City needs to balance the interests and desires of the
telecommunications industry and its customers to provide competitive and
effective telecommunications systems in the City, against the sometimes
differing interests and desires of others concerning health, safety, welfare,
and aesthetics, and orderly planning of the community.
      3.   The City has experienced an increased demand for personal wireless
services facilities to be located in the City, and expects the increased demand
to continue in the future.
      4.   It is in the best interests of the City to have quality personal
wireless services available, which necessarily entails the erection of personal
wireless services facilities in the City.
      5.   The unnecessary proliferation of personal wireless services
facilities throughout the city creates a negative visual impact on the
community.
      6.   The visual effects of personal wireless services facilities can be
mitigated by fair standards regulating their site, construction, maintenance
and use.
      7.   A private property owner who leases space for a personal wireless
services facility is the only one who receives compensation for the facility,
even though numerous other property owners in the area are adversely affected
by the location of the facility.
      8.   Chapter 69-3, Utah Code Annotated, grants cities the authority to
create or acquire sites to accommodate the erection of telecommunications
towers in order to promote the location of telecommunication towers in a
manageable area and to protect the aesthetics and environment of the area. The
law also allows the city to require the owner of any tower to accommodate the
multiple use of the tower by other companies where feasible and to pay the city
the fair market rental value for the use of any city owned site.
      9.   Telecommunications towers located on government property with the
lease payments being paid to the city, instead of individual property owners
evenly distributes the income from the lease payments to all citizens of the
city through increased government services thus indirectly compensating all of
the citizens of the city for the impact all citizens experience. The public
policy objectives to reduce the proliferation of telecommunications towers and
to mitigate their impact can be best facilitated by locating telecommunications
and antenna support structures on property owned, leased or used by the city as
a highest priority whenever feasible.
   C.   Definitions: The following words shall have the described meanings when
used in this section, unless a contrary meaning is apparent from the context of
the word:
ANTENNA: A transmitting or receiving device used in telecommunications that
radiates or captures radio signals.
ANTENNA SUPPORT STRUCTURE: Any structure that can be used for the purpose of
supporting an antenna(s).
CITY: The City of Cedar Hills, Utah.
CITY OWNED PROPERTY: Real property that is owned by the city.
CLOSE TO TOWER MOUNT (Also Known As SLIM MOUNT): Antennas on cell towers
mounted very close to the tower in order to appear less noticeable.
COLLOCATION: The location of an antenna on an existing structure, tower or
building that is already being used for personal wireless services facilities.
MONOPOLE: A single, self-supporting, cylindrical pole, constructed without
guywires.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES: Commercial mobile telecommunications services,
unlicensed wireless communications services, and common carrier wireless
telecommunications exchange access services.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES ANTENNA: An antenna used in connection with the
provision of personal wireless services.
PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITIES (PWSF): Facilities for the provision of
personal wireless services. Personal wireless services facilities include
transmitters, antennas, structures supporting antennas, and electronic
equipment that is typically installed in close proximity to a transmitter.
PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property not owned by the city, even if the property
is owned by another public or government entity.
STEALTH DESIGN: Personal wireless services facilities that have been designed
to be compatible with the natural setting and surrounding structures, and that
camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas and/or towers.
TOWER: A freestanding structure that is used as a support structure for an
antenna.
WHIP ANTENNA: An antenna that is cylindrical in shape. Whip antennas can be
directional or omnidirectional and vary in size depending on the frequency and
gain for which they are designed.
   D.   Applicability: This section applies to both commercial and private low
power radio services and facilities, such as "cellular" or PCS (personal
communications system) communications, and paging systems. This section shall
not apply to the following types of communications devices, although they may
be regulated by other city ordinances and policies:
      1.   Amateur Radio: Any tower or antenna owned and operated by an amateur
radio operator licensed by the federal communication commission.
      2.   Amateur T.V.: Any tower or antenna owned and operated by an amateur
T.V. operator licensed by the federal communication commission.
      3.   Residential Rooftop Antenna: Any device designed for over the air
reception of television broadcast signals, multichannel multipoint distribution
service, internet service, or direct satellite service.
      4.   Cable: Any cable television head end or hub towers and antennas used
solely for cable television services.
   E.   Location:
      1.   Priority Of Antenna Site Locations: Personal wireless services
antennas shall be located as unobtrusively as is reasonably possible. To
accomplish this goal, the provider shall locate antennas on sites in the
following order of priority:
         a.   First: Collocation on approved city owned property.
         b.   Second: Other city owned properties.
         c.   Third: Public school property.
   F.   Uses:
      1.   Conditional Uses: A wireless telecommunication facility that
conforms to the development standards shall be a conditional use in any zone. A
separate application shall be required for each proposed facility.
         a.   Stealth Design Is Preferred: The intent of this subsection is to
allow creativity in the design of a proposed facility so that it will have as
little visual impact as possible. Stealth designs may include, but are not
limited to, the use of one or more of the following:
            (1)   Appearance (Mounted): Screening, structure, and/or antenna
design that blends with the architecture of the existing structure upon which
the antenna will be mounted;
            (2)   Appearance: Screening, structure, antenna, and/or location
design that blends with and/or takes advantage of existing vegetation and/or
features of a site; and
            (3)   Color: Color schemes that make an antenna less noticeable.
Existing structures on the lattice tower may remain and new structures must be
stealth design;
            (4)   Not Permitted Uses: Lattice towers, guyed towers, and other
nonstealth towers are not permitted in any location.
      2.   Collocation Requirement: Unless otherwise authorized by the
approving authority for good cause shown, every new tower shall be designed and
constructed to be of sufficient size and capacity to accommodate at least two
(2) additional wireless telecommunications providers on the structure in the
future.
      3.   Lease Agreement: The city has no implied obligation to lease any
particular parcel of city owned property to an applicant. The city shall enter
into a standard lease agreement with the applicant for any facility built on
city property. The mayor or city manager is hereby authorized to execute the
standard lease agreement on behalf of the city. The lease shall contain the
condition that the approving authority must first approve the site plan before
the lease can take effect, and that failure to obtain such approval renders the
lease null and void.
   G.   Procedure:
      1.   Application Requirements: Any person desiring to develop, construct
or establish a personal wireless services facility in the city shall submit an
application for site plan approval to the city. The city shall not consider the
application until all required information has been included. The application
shall include the following:
         a.   Fee: The applicable fee as set by the city fee schedule.
         b.   Site Plan: A site plan meeting the city's standard requirements
for site plans.
         c.   Written Information: The following written information:
            (1)   Maintenance: A description of the anticipated maintenance
needs for the facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs,
equipment needs, and traffic noise or safety impacts of such maintenance.
            (2)   Service Area: A description of the service area for the
antenna or tower and a statement as to whether the antenna or tower is needed
for coverage or capacity.
            (3)   Licenses And Permits: Copies of all licenses and permits
required by other agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design,
construction, location, and operation of the antenna.
            (4)   Radio Frequency Emissions: A written commitment to comply
with applicable federal communications commission radio frequency emission
regulations.
            (5)   Liaison: The name of a contact person who can respond to
questions concerning the application and the proposed facility. Include name,
title, address, telephone number, facsimile number and electronic mail address,
if applicable.
      2.   Approval Process: The application, site plan, and conditional uses
shall be reviewed by the city pursuant to its standard site plan approval
process. The city shall process all applications within a reasonable time and
shall not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent
services. Any decision to deny a request to place, construct, or modify
personal wireless service facilities shall be in writing and supported by
substantial evidence contained in a written record. The city may require
changes in the plan to more absolutely accomplish the objectives of this
chapter.
      3.   Building Permits:
         a.   General Requirements: No tower or antenna support structure shall
be constructed until the applicant obtains a building permit from the city. No
building permit shall be issued for any project for which a site plan or
amended site plan is required, until the site plan or amended site plan has
been approved by the appropriate authority. If the design or engineering of the
antenna support structure is beyond the expertise of the building official, the
city may require third party review by an engineer selected by the city prior
to the issuance of a building permit. The applicant shall pay an additional fee
to cover the cost of the third party review.
         b.   Additional Requirements For New Towers: If the applicant is
constructing a new tower, the applicant shall, if requested by the city, submit
a written report from a qualified, structural engineer licensed in the state of
Utah, documenting the following:
            (1)   Height and design of the new tower, including technical,
engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the
proposed design.
            (2)   Seismic load design and wind load design for the new tower.
            (3)   Total anticipated capacity of the new tower, including number
and types of antennas that can be accommodated.
            (4)   Structural failure characteristics of the new tower and a
demonstration that the site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain
debris.
            (5)   Soil investigation report, including structural calculations.
   H.   Antenna And Antenna Support Structure Regulations For New Towers In The
City:
      1.   Standards For Antennas And Antenna Support Structures For New
Towers: Personal wireless services facilities are characterized by the type or
location of the antenna structure. If a particular type of antenna structure is
allowed by this section as permitted, the minimum standards for that type of
antenna are as follows:
         a.   Stealth Facilities:
            (1)   Maximum Height: The height of a stealth design shall not
exceed sixty feet (60') above the natural grade.
            (2)   Determination: Not every disguised or screened personal
wireless services facility qualifies as a stealth facility. The city shall make
an administrative decision as to whether or not a particular facility qualifies
as a stealth design or a monopole. In making the decision, the city will
determine whether any new "stealth design" or "monopole", as defined by this
section, meets the specifications outlined in the definition. The city will
also determine if the antenna will be permitted on designated city owned
property.
      2.   Regulations For Accessory Structures:
         a.   Storage Areas And Solid Waste Receptacles: No outside storage or
solid waste receptacles shall be permitted on site.
         b.   Equipment Enclosures: All electronic and other related equipment
and appurtenances necessary for the operation of any personal wireless services
facility shall, whenever possible, be located within a lawfully preexisting
structure or completely below grade. When a new structure is required to house
such equipment, the structure shall be harmonious with, and blend with, the
natural features, buildings and structures surrounding such structure.
         c.   Accessory Buildings: Freestanding accessory buildings used with a
personal wireless services facility shall not exceed four hundred fifty (450)
square feet and shall comply with the setback requirements for structures in
the zone in which the facility is located.
      3.   Parking: The city may require a minimum of one parking stall for
sites containing a personal wireless services facility and/or accessory
buildings, if there is insufficient parking available on the site.
      4.   Maintenance Requirements: All personal wireless services facilities
shall be maintained in a safe, neat, and attractive manner.
      5.   Landscaping: All sites with a personal wireless services facility
shall be landscaped in accordance with the zone requirements where the facility
is located. A landscaping plan shall be submitted to the planning commission
who will make a recommendation to the city council who will approve the
landscape plan.
      6.   Site Restoration Upon Abandonment: All sites shall be restored to
the original configuration upon termination of the lease abandonment.
      7.   Fencing: The city will determine the type of fencing used on
wireless telecommunications sites on a case by case basis. Fencing will be
recommended by the planning commission and approved by the city council.
      8.   Color And Material Standards: The city shall make an administrative
decision as to the color. To the extent the personal wireless services
facilities extend above the height of the vegetation immediately surrounding
it, they shall be painted in a nonreflective light gray, light blue or other
hue, which blends with the skyline and horizon or a brown to blend in with the
surrounding hillside.
      9.   Facility Lighting Standards: Facility lighting shall be designed so
as to meet but not exceed minimum requirements for security, safety and/or FAA
regulations. Lighting of antennas or support structures shall be prohibited
unless required by the FAA and no other alternatives are available. In all
instances, the lighting shall be designed so as to avoid glare and minimize
illumination on adjacent properties. Lighting shall also comply with any
applicable city lighting standards. (Ord. 7-17-2007D, 7-17-2007)
      10.   Facility Signs: Signs should be limited to those needed to identify
the numbers to contact in an emergency, public safety warnings, certifications,
or other required seals. These signs shall also comply with the requirements of
the city's sign regulations, section
10-5-26, "Signs", of this chapter. (Ord. 8-16-2011A, 8-16-2011)
      11.   Utility Lines: All utility lines serving new cell towers shall be
located underground.
      12.   Monopoles With Antennas And Antenna Support Structures:
         a.   All monopoles, antennas, associated support structures, and
facilities shall require approval of a conditional use permit application. A
monopole and its associated equipment and facilities shall be a conditional use
in all zoning districts provided such monopole, equipment and facilities meet
the minimum requirements of this section and all conditions of approval, as
determined necessary.
         b.   The maximum height of a monopole, including antennas and antenna
support structures shall be sixty feet (60'), measured from the natural average
grade at the base of the monopole to the highest point of the pole, antenna, or
support structure.
         c.   All monopoles and associated equipment and facilities shall be
stealth design, as provided by this section. The planning commission shall have
authority to determine whether a proposed monopole and its associated accessory
equipment and facilities will have as little visual impact as possible.
         d.   A monopole and its associated equipment shall comply with the
minimum yard setback requirements of the zoning district in which it is
located. In addition, if located in a residential or agricultural zoning
district a minimum of four feet (4') for every foot of pole height from the
closest property line of any residential structure shall be provided. If
located in a commercial or industrial zoning district a minimum of four feet
(4') for every foot of pole height from the closest property line of any
property in an adjacent residential zone shall be provided.
         e.   A monopole shall be set back from all public rights of way a
minimum of one hundred feet (100').
         f.   A monopole shall not be located within one thousand (1,000)
linear feet from another monopole.
         g.   All communication and power lines between any accessory building,
accessory equipment, and antenna structure shall be located underground.
      13.   Roof Mounted Antennas: The following provisions shall apply to roof
mounted antennas.
         a.   Roof mounted antennas shall be permitted only if determined to be
stealth design.
         b.   The maximum height of any roof mounted antenna shall be ten feet
(10') above the roofline of the building.
      14.   Wall Mounted Antennas: The following provisions shall apply to
flush and nonflush mounted wall antennas.
         a.   Wall mounted antennas shall not extend above the wall line of the
building or extend more than one foot (1') horizontally from the wall surface.
         b.   Wall mounted antennas, equipment, and supporting structures shall
be painted to match the color of the building or structure or the background
against which they are most commonly seen.
         c.   Antennas mounted directly on walls with no portion of the antenna
extending above the wall line shall be considered wall mounted antennas.
         d.   All wall mounted antennas shall be a stealth design.
      15.   Equipment Screening: Any associated mechanical or electrical
equipment shall be completely screened from view from public rights of way, on
site parking areas and adjacent properties with a decorative screening fence
and landscaping.
   I.   Safety:
      1.   Regulation Compliance:
         a.   Compliance With FCC And FAA Regulations: All operators of
personal wireless services facilities shall demonstrate compliance with
applicable federal communication commission (FCC) and federal aviation
administration (FAA) regulations, including FCC radio frequency regulations, at
the time of application and periodically thereafter as requested by the city.
Failure to comply with the applicable regulations shall be grounds for revoking
a site plan.
         b.   Other Licenses And Permits: The operator of every personal
wireless services facility shall submit copies of all licenses and permits
required by other agencies and governments with the jurisdiction over the
design, construction, location, and operation of the facility to the city;
shall maintain such licenses and permits in good standing; and shall provide
evidence of renewal or extension thereof upon request by the city.
      2.   Protection Against Climbing: New towers shall be protected against
unauthorized climbing by removing the climbing pegs from the lower twenty feet
(20') of the towers.
      3.   Fencing: New towers shall be fully enclosed by a minimum six foot
(6') tall fence or wall, as directed by the City, unless the City determines
that a wall or fence is not needed or appropriate for a particular site due to
conditions specific to the site.
      4.   Security Lighting Requirements: New towers shall comply with the FAA
requirements for lighting. The City may also require security lighting for the
site. If security lighting is used, the lighting impact on surrounding
residential areas shall be minimized by using indirect lighting, where
appropriate.
      5.   Abandonment: The City may require the removal of all antennas and
towers if the facility has been inoperative or out of service for more than
twelve (12) consecutive months.
         a.   Notice: Notice to remove shall be given in writing by personal
service, or by certified mail addressed to the operator's last known address.
         b.   Violation: Failure to remove the antennas and towers after
receiving written notice to remove is a violation of the terms of this section.
The City may initiate criminal and/or civil legal proceedings against any
person, firm, entity, or corporation, whether acting as principal, agent,
property owner, lessee, lessor, tenant, landlord, employee, employer, or
otherwise, for the failure to remove antennas and towers in accordance with
this section. The City may seek a civil injunction requiring the removal of any
structures on the sites in accordance with this section. Any lease agreement
with the City may also stipulate failure to remove the antennas and towers
after receiving written notice to do so pursuant to this section will result in
the antenna or tower being removed within thirty (30) days at the owner's
expense.
      6.   Emergency: The City shall have the authority to move or alter a
personal wireless services facility in case of emergency. Before taking any
such action, the City shall first notify the owner of the facility, if
feasible. (Ord. 7-17-2007D, 7-17-2007)
10-5-29: DECKS, PORCHES, PATIOS, PERGOLAS, AWNINGS, HOT TUBS, CARPORTS AND
SIMILAR STRUCTURES:
   A.   Structures Permitted: Decks, porches, patios, pergolas, awnings,
carports, hot tubs and similar structures are permitted in the rear and side
setback areas subject to the following conditions:
      1.   All sides of the portion of the structure located within a
designated setback area shall remain open. Carports may only be used for the
parking and storage of vehicles and/or recreational vehicles.
      2.   No structure within a setback area shall be converted into livable
space, nor shall it be constructed as to appear as though it could be easily
converted into livable space.
      3.   Prior to construction, a building permit shall be obtained for all
structures.
         a.   Prior to issuing a building permit, the chief building official
shall make a finding whether the design, materials and finish of the proposed
attached structure are in harmony with the primary structure and issue a permit
with a positive finding.
         b.   The structure shall not be located closer than five feet (5') to
the property line, except those structures that comply with subsection A3b(1)
or A3b(2) of this section, notwithstanding that no structure shall be
constructed within a clear view area nor on a corner lot beyond the optional
enclosure area. Additionally, structures in the rear setback area shall not
cover over fifty percent (50%) of the rear setback area.
            (1)   Structures located entirely at ground level shall be
permitted to be located no closer than one foot (1') of the property line.
            (2)   Special exception for awnings located in the side setback
area and immediately adjacent to a garage. A permanent awning located in the
side setback area may be constructed immediately adjacent to the outside wall
of an attached garage provided that:
               (A)   The front, rear, and sides shall remain open, except that
an approved fence may be constructed independent of the structure.
               (B)   The awning shall be constructed over a "hard surface" area
as defined in chapter 2, "Definitions", of this title.
               (C)   The awning shall be no closer than one foot (1') from the
property line and no higher than seven feet (7') at the point nearest the
property line. The roof pitch cannot be greater than four to twelve (4:12) and
must slope away from the main building and toward the property line.
               (D)   Three feet (3') is the fire separation distance. Any
portion of the awning structure projecting within three feet (3') of the
property line shall be one hour fire resistance rated construction per Building
Code.
               (E)   The awning shall include a system or method for retaining
rainwater on the property owner's own property.
      4.   The finished level of any deck shall be not more than six feet (6')
above the finished grade at any location within ten feet (10') from the
property line.
      5.   The height for the structure shall not be greater than the height
allowed for an accessory building at the same location.
      6.   A carport may only be located in side or rear setbacks of property,
provided structure is not integrated into the design front of main garage
entrance.
         a.   Carports shall meet side and rear setback regulations for
accessory building in each zone.
         b.   The total width of the carport located on a side setback shall
not exceed twenty four feet (24').
         c.   For homes with multiple side setback areas, a carport may be
located in only one of the side setbacks. Carports located in side setbacks may
not extend beyond side setback areas of property or outside the existing
roofline of the garage whichever is greater.
         d.   Carport elevation must not exceed the main dwelling elevation or
a maximum of twenty feet (20'), whichever is less.
         e.   Carport shall be treated as an accessory structure and shall
maintain twelve feet (12') separation from main dwelling.
   B.   Temporary Structures: The temporary version of any structure listed in
subsection A of this section shall be subject to the same provisions as that of
a permanent structure. Portable garages are not permitted. Canvas, tarps, or
plastic covers are prohibited as part of any permanent structure in all
Residential Zones. Prefabricated carports will be subject to engineering
approval.
   C.   Storage Equipment: Storage containers, freight/cargo containers, box
cars, and similar storage equipment are prohibited as permanent structures or
being defined as a utility or portable shed. Temporary storage containers may
be used during a move, but may not be present on the property for more than one
week, extensions may be granted by Code enforcement.
      1.   Cargo Containers: Cargo containers may be approved for temporary use
by the City under the following standards:
         a.   Construction or renovations provided a building permit has been
issued for construction related activities. The cargo container may be allowed
on site with an active building permit. For the purpose of permitted cargo
containers, a building permit will be considered inactive after ninety (90)
days after the last inspection that shows substantial progress toward
completion of the project.
         b.   Cargo containers must not be located in public right-of-ways,
fire lanes, required parking spaces, recorded easements, areas deemed as a
safety hazard, or on landscaping. All containers must be placed on an improved
surface, unless approved with the building permit, and shall not be stacked.
         c.   Storage containers, freight, cargo, box car or similar containers
are prohibited from being used as part of a residential or any permanent
structure on premises.
   D.   Additional Requirements: The determination that a structure is allowed
by this Code shall not be interpreted as to meaning that the structure meets
the requirements of any private CC&Rs applicable to the parcel. (Ord. 02-05-
2019A, 2-5-2019)
10-5-30: PORTABLE UTILITY SHEDS AND UTILITY SHEDS:
   A.   Portable Utility Shed: Portable utility sheds are permitted in the rear
and side setback areas subject to the following conditions:
      1.   No portion of the shed's structure is permitted to cross the
property line or to drain onto a neighboring property.
      2.   Where the property is located on a corner lot, the portable utility
shed may be located within the optional enclosure area.
      3.   Portable sheds will be limited to one hundred twenty (120) square
feet floor area, maximum eave height of ten feet (10') as measured from the
finished floor surface to the bottom edge of the main roof eave, a roof pitch
not to exceed 8/12 (8 inches of rise per 12 inches of run) and will not have a
traditional type footing or foundation. They shall be built upon a hard
surface.
   B.   Utility Shed:
      1.   No portion of the shed's structure is permitted to cross the
property line or to drain onto a neighboring property.
      2.   Utility sheds may be located on the rear or side lot area, no shed
over one hundred twenty (120) square feet may be built in a setback area.
      3.   Utility sheds will be limited to two hundred (200) square feet floor
area, maximum eave height of ten feet (10') as measured from the finished floor
surface to the bottom edge of the main roof eave, a roof pitch not to exceed 8/
12 (8 inches of rise per 12 inches of run) and will not have a traditional type
footing or foundation. They shall be built upon a hard surface. (Ord. 01-07-
2014B, 1-7-2014)
10-5-31: AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC (ADT) DESIGN CRITERIA:
The maximum ADT for cul-de-sacs or dead end streets shall be two hundred fifty
(250) trips or less. City owned facilities or parcels having access via cul-de-
sacs or dead end streets shall be exempt, and trips generated by City use shall
not be included in the maximum ADT because the City may close public facilities
in the event of a safety or emergency situation. (Ord. 5-18-2010A, 5-18-2010)
10-5-32: ACCESSORY APARTMENT:
   A.   Purpose And Intent: The purpose and intent of this section is to
recognize the residential character of Cedar Hills and to provide for
supplementary opportunities of property owners. These provisions are intended
to provide for affordable housing with reasonable limitations to minimize the
impact on neighboring properties and neighborhoods, and to promote the health,
safety, and welfare of the property owners and residents of accessory
apartments.
   B.   Permitted: Accessory apartments are permitted within the City subject
to compliance with the conditions and criteria hereinafter set forth.
      1.   Conditions And Criteria:
         a.   Conditional Use Permit: Accessory apartments may be permitted as
a conditional use, upon approval of the Zoning Administrator and building
official. Conditional use permit is subject to fees paid.
         b.   Time Limit: An accessory apartment conditional use permit shall
be valid for the year in which it is first issued. Thereafter, the conditional
use permit shall be automatically renewed for the next succeeding year upon
receipt of: 1) the initial one time registration fee; 2) evidence that the
primary dwelling is occupied by the owner; and 3) a determination by the City
that all conditions of approval remain in effect.
         c.   Building Permit: A building permit shall be obtained by the
homeowner from the City before the commencement of any new construction of an
accessory apartment, and a certificate of occupancy shall be obtained prior to
anyone occupying an accessory apartment dwelling unit. All construction and
remodeling shall comply with Building Codes and ordinance requirements in
effect at the time of construction or remodeling.
         d.   Appearance: The outside appearance of a single family home with
an accessory apartment shall not be changed from that of a single family home.
A maximum of one accessory apartment may be allowed in a single-family home
within all single-family residential zones. Accessory apartments shall not be
calculated as additional density. No accessory apartment may be allowed in any
multi-family dwelling unit, or on any lot or parcel that cannot satisfy the
parking requirements.
         e.   Entrances: An accessory apartment may have a dedicated entrance
located on any side or rear of the single family home or at the front of the
home if it is below grade and maintains the characteristics of a single family
home.
         f.   Address: The principal dwelling unit and the accessory apartment
shall have the same address number, but shall refer to the principal dwelling
as unit "A" and the accessory apartment as unit "B"; unit then should have an
external entrance to the accessory apartment. Address must be located in a
visible location on the street frontage side of the home.
         g.   Interior Access: When an accessory apartment is located within
the main dwelling, an interior access shall be maintained.
         h.   Size Limitations: The accessory apartment shall contain no less
than three hundred (300) square feet of living area and shall comply with all
size and access specifications of the International Residential and Building
Codes. Accessory dwelling units are subject to compliance with current Building
Code at time of approval.
         i.   Owner Occupied: No accessory apartment shall be created or
occupied in a single-family home unless; the owner of the property resides in
either the primary dwelling unit or the accessory apartment. Or if a property
is owned within a trust, documentation concerning the trust shall be provided
to the City. For the purpose of this section, the term "owner occupied" shall
be defined as full time residency within the home by the bona fide property
owner(s) as shown on the Utah County tax assessment rolls.
            (1)   Owner occupancy shall not be required when: owner has a
family member living at residence in his/her absence, owner has submitted a
temporary absence application prior to beginning the temporary absence, and the
owner has resided in the residence for at least one year prior to beginning the
temporary absence and meets the following criteria:
               (A)   The owner has a bona fide, temporary absence of three (3)
years or less for activities such as temporary job assignments, sabbaticals, or
voluntary service (indefinite periods of absence from the dwelling shall not
qualify for this exception); or
               (B)   The owner is placed in a hospital, nursing home, assisted
living facility or other similar facility, while a family member lives at
residence in his/her absence.
         j.   Occupancy: Accessory apartment may only be rented to one family
unit as defined by section
10-2-1, "Terms Defined", of this title, "family" for a single family dwelling.
         k.   No Separate Utilities: A single family home with an accessory
apartment shall have not more than one meter for each water, gas and electric
utility service, and the meter shall be in the name of the owner. The property
owner shall be responsible for payment of all utilities.
         l.   Parking: A minimum of two (2) off-street parking spaces shall be
provided for tenant parking, in addition to those already required for a
single-family dwelling. More spaces may be required to ensure accommodation for
additional vehicles. No parking spaces may be located within a front or side
yard, except within an approved driveway. Tandem parking within a driveway is
allowed to meet parking requirements. Tenants shall comply with all other
parking regulations of section
5-2-5 of this Code.
         m.   Accessory Apartment Registration: Any person owning an existing
accessory apartment that has not previously been permitted by the City, or any
person constructing or causing the construction of a residence that has an
accessory apartment, or any person remodeling or causing the remodeling of a
residence for an accessory apartment, shall register the accessory apartment
with the Zoning Administrator. This shall be in addition to a building permit
for the work to be performed. In order to meet the requirements of the
registration, the applicant shall:
            (1)   Submit a registration fee with a completed registration form
including a site plan that shows property lines and dimensions, the location of
existing buildings and building entrances, proposed additions, location of
parking for tenants, and the dwelling is owner occupied.
            (2)   Pay building permit fees, if applicable, for the construction
of a new dwelling, or the remodeling of an existing dwelling, in accordance
with the established fees and charges, and
            (3)   Make all corrections identified as necessary to comply with
International Residential and Building Code requirements, as identified by the
building official or his designee. Include safety items required by code such
as; carbon monoxide detectors, working smoke detectors, ground fault circuit
interrupter protected outlet on existing wiring, street addressing, functioning
and safe electrical and plumbing, hand rails and occupancy separation doors as
required by International Residential and Building Code.
         n.   Failure To Complete Registration: If the property owner does not
complete the registration as outlined above, the accessory apartment shall not
be considered legal or approved. Failure to complete the registration of an
existing accessory apartment within two (2) years of the passing of this
section may result in a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00). After fine is
assessed, the zoning official or his designee shall determine an appropriate
deadline for compliance. An additional fine may be assessed for each deadline
that is not met.
         o.   Sale Of Single Family Dwelling: Accessory apartment registration
permit shall become null and void upon the sale of the single-family dwelling
in which it is located, unless a new permit is applied for and obtained by the
purchaser(s) of the single-family dwelling in which said accessory apartment
rental is located.
         p.   Not Intended For Sale: The accessory apartment shall not be sold
or detached by deed and shall only be rented.
         q.   Exceptions: The provisions of subsections B1c, B1e, and B1i of
this section shall not apply to an existing non-conforming rental dwelling unit
that existed prior to July 17, 2018, and converts the basement into an owner
occupied accessory apartment. (Ord. 07-17-2018A, 7-17-2018)
10-5-33: SMALL ANIMALS OR FOWL:
Small animals or fowl are allowed in residential zones only if the following
conditions are met:
   A.   No small animal or fowl shall be kept in a residential zone for the
purpose of commercial production.
   B.   Small animals or fowl shall be permitted in a residential zone provided
the following are met:
 
Lot Size (In Square Feet) Maximum Number Of Small Animals Or Fowl
Up to 6,000               2
6,001 - 10,000            6
10,001 - 14,000           15
14,001 - 20,000           30
20,001 and above          40
 
   C.   All sheds, coops, hutches, or similar structures used for the housing
of small animals or fowl, in a small animal unit, shall be located not less
than the required distance from any neighboring building envelope on an
adjacent lot.
 
Small Animal Lot Size (In Distance To Neighboring  Building Envelope (In
Square Feet)              Feet)
Up to 6,000               15
6,001 - 10,000            20
10,001 - 20,000           25
Over 20,000               30
 
   D.   Small animals or fowl must be kept in a predator resistant coop or
chicken tractor at night. The enclosure shall not be located in the front yard.
The enclosure shall be cleaned and maintained to prevent it from becoming a
nuisance.
   E.   Small animals or fowl shall not be allowed to roam freely unless in an
enclosed yard.
   F.   Each animal unit requires a minimum of four (4) square feet of a
livestock management area on a single level.
   G.   The slaughtering of small animal or fowl shall be restricted from
public view.
   H.   Roosters and geese are prohibited. (Ord. 9-20-2011B, 9-20-2011)
10-5-34: ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS:
Upon application to the building and zoning department, the chief building
official shall grant a permit for the establishment of an assisted living
facility for elderly persons in a residential zone if the applicant meets the
following requirements:
   A.   The facility conforms to all applicable standards and requirements of
the Utah state department of human services and the owner/operator has obtained
all licenses required by the state to operate such a facility.
   B.   The facility conforms to all state and local building, safety, health,
and zoning requirements applicable to similar structures.
   C.   The facility is operated for the primary purpose of providing a living
arrangement for elderly persons in a group home setting.
   D.   The facility is occupied only by individuals sixty (60) years of age or
older and paid, professional staff members. Occupancy by any staff member shall
only be allowed if such occupancy is primarily for the purpose of serving the
elderly persons and not primarily a benefit of employment to the staff member.
The facility shall not house more than eight (8) elderly persons.
   E.   Applicant may exceed eight (8) but no more than sixteen (16) residents
if approved by the zoning official and applicable state agencies. To exceed
eight (8) residents will require one hundred fifty (150) square feet of
personal room space per individual or two hundred (200) square feet for double
occupancy, with adequate finished common space to accommodate residents.
   F.   Residency in the facility shall be on a strictly voluntary basis and
not a part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a
correctional facility. An assisted living facility for elderly persons shall
not include any persons referred by the Utah state department of corrections or
any court.
   G.   The facility will not likely create a fundamental change in the
character of the residential neighborhood in which it is proposed to be
located.
   H.   No individual who has impairment due to addiction of any controlled
substance or alcohol and currently uses such controlled substance or alcohol
will be a resident.
   I.   The facility shall not be made available to or occupied by any
individual whose tenancy would constitute a direct threat to the health or
safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial
physical damage to the property of others.
   J.   At least three (3) off street parking stalls are provided to serve the
needs of residents, visitors, and staff members. Additional parking may be
required based on the number of residents occupying the facility, the
reasonably anticipated number of visitors and the number of staff members who
will be serving the residents.
   K.   An assisted living facility for elderly persons located in an existing
residential dwelling shall be capable of use as an assisted living facility for
elderly persons without structural or landscaping alterations that would change
the structure's residential character. Any new structure constructed for use as
an assisted living facility for elderly persons shall be of a size, scale, and
design that are in harmony with other residential uses in the vicinity.
   L.   The exterior appearance and landscaping of the facility should enhance
the overall feel of the surrounding neighborhood and should in no way detract
from a residential environment.
   M.   No person convicted of the illegal manufacture or distribution of a
controlled substance shall be an occupant in a residential facility for
disabled persons.
   N.   The applicant for a permit provides sufficient documentation and other
evidence reasonably required by the city to establish compliance with all of
the above criteria.
Any permit issued pursuant to this section shall be nontransferable and shall
terminate if the structure is devoted to a use other than an assisted living
facility for elderly persons or the structure fails to comply with all
building, safety, health, and zoning requirements of this code applicable to
similar structures. Violation of the requirements listed above shall be grounds
for terminating the permit and the owner/operator shall thereafter be required
to discontinue the use of the premises as an assisted living facility for
elderly persons. (Ord. 04-23-2013A, 4-23-2013)
10-5-35: APIARY REQUIREMENTS:
An apiary is allowed in any zone which allows single-family residential, with
the following requirements:
   A.   Lots may contain two (2) colonies per five thousand (5,000) square
feet, but not more than eight (8) colonies. Colonies must be located in the
side or rear yard. This applies to all zones other than RR-1-20,000.
   B.   Each beekeeper shall be registered with the Utah department of
agriculture and food.
   C.   Colonies shall be kept in boxes with removable frames which shall be
kept in sound and usable condition.
   D.   Colonies shall be placed at least five feet (5') from any property line
and six inches (6") above the ground, as measured from the ground to the lowest
portion of the colony, provided, however, that this requirement may be waived
if revocable permission is attained in writing by the adjoining property owner.
   E.   Colonies shall be operated and maintained as provided in the Utah bee
inspection act.
   F.   Each colony shall be conspicuously marked with the owner's name,
address, telephone number, and state registration number.
   G.   Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is
available to the colony continuously between March 1 and October 31 of each
year. The water shall be in a location that minimizes any nuisance created by
bees seeking water on neighboring property. (Ord. 1-17-2012A, 1-17-2012)
10-5-36: FLAGPOLES:
Flagpoles are allowed on all lots and in all zones subject to the following
conditions:
   A.   Maximum height is thirty five feet (35') from finished grade.
   B.   May be placed no closer than ten (10) linear feet from the sidewalk,
curb, or street (whichever is furthest), ten (10) linear feet from the edge of
the lot, and ten (10) linear feet from the neighboring lot.
   C.   Parks, public buildings, and commercial buildings may have an increase
in height with approval of a site plan by the city council. (Ord. 3-20-2012B,
3-20-2012)
10-5-37: CONDITIONAL USES AND ZONES:
   A.   Purpose Of Conditional Use Provisions: An application for a conditional
use permit may be granted by the land use authority, subject to the provisions
of this code. The purpose of a conditional use permit is to allow the proper
integration into the city of certain uses which may have a detrimental effect
within the city. Certain uses which may be harmonious under special conditions
and in specific locations within a zone, but may be improper under general
conditions and in other locations, are classed as conditional uses within the
various zones and require conditional use permits for approval as authorized by
the land use authority.
   B.   Permit Required: A conditional use permit shall be required for all
uses listed as conditional uses in the zoning regulations or elsewhere in this
title. A conditional use permit may be revoked upon failure of the original
applicant or any successor, owner, or occupant to comply with conditions
precedent to the original approval of the permit.
   C.   Application:
      1.   A conditional use permit application shall be made to the planning
department as provided in this title. The completed application shall be
submitted to the land use authority as designated in the conditional use table
below:
 
Conditional Use Land Use Authority Public Hearing
Accessory apartment                            Admin               No
Assisted living facility in a residential zone Planning commission Yes
Bed and breakfast facility                     Planning commission Yes
Change in primary use of residential dwelling  Planning commission Yes
Conventional subdivision projects              PC/city council     Yes
Fences, walls, and hedges                      Admin               No
Flexible design subdivision projects           PC/city council     Yes
Home occupations                               Admin               No
Large animal units                             Admin               No
Minor utility transmission lines               Admin               No
Motor vehicle roads and rights of way          City council        No
Planned residential developments               PC/city council     Yes
Premises occupations                           Admin               No
Shopping center zone (SC-1) commercial uses    City council        Yes
Single-family dwellings (H-1)                  Admin               No
Small animal units                             Admin               No
Town site residential projects                 PC/city council     Yes
Water, sewer and utility transmission lines    Admin               No
 
Where the planning commission and city council are both listed in the table
above, the city council is the land use authority and shall make a decision
based on a planning commission recommendation.
The specified land use authority, according to the table, shall review the
application with the requirements of this title and take final action.
      2.   Applications for a conditional use permit shall be accompanied by
maps, drawings, statements, reports, studies or other documents, as required by
the land use authority and planning staff.
   D.   Fee: The application for any conditional use permit shall be
accompanied by an applicable fee, and applicants shall pay the cost to post and
mail public hearing notices.
   E.   Approval Process: The approval process for a conditional use permit
shall be as follows:
      1.   Conditional use permit for a use in a new or expanded structure or
site, or change in primary use of the structure:
         a.   Upon receipt of a completed application and subsequent review for
application completeness by the planning department, the planning department
shall place the conditional use application and related site plan application
on the next available land use authority agenda, if applicable, for a public
hearing as required.
         b.   The land use authority shall review each application, approve
with conditions, or deny the application, or the land use authority may defer
action if an applicant fails to appear at the public hearing or meeting or
there is insufficient application information provided.
         c.   When acting as the land use authority, the planning commission
and/or city council shall review each application at a public meeting and
approve with conditions, or deny the application, or may defer action if an
applicant fails to appear at the public meeting or there is insufficient
application information provided to determine whether city ordinances and
regulations are met.
      2.   Conditional use permit for a use in an existing structure or site:
         a.   Upon receipt of a completed application and subsequent review for
application completeness by the planning department, the planning director
shall review the application for compliance with the standards in this title.
         b.   If the application does not include external changes to the site,
the designated land use authority shall approve with conditions, or deny the
application, or may defer action if there is insufficient application
information provided.
         c.   If the application includes external changes to the site, a site
plan amendment shall be required, the conditional use permit shall follow the
same process as the related site plan, and the land use authority for the site
plan shall become the land use authority for the conditional use permit.
   F.   Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be held for conditional uses
identified in the conditional use table as requiring a public hearing. However,
a public hearing may be held for any conditional use application when the land
use authority shall deem such a hearing to be necessary in the public interest
to gather information on a specific application. The land use authority shall
schedule and hold a hearing at the nearest available meeting date upon
submission of a properly completed and filed application form. At all times,
including at a public hearing, the applicant has the burden of proof, by a
preponderance of the evidence, to convince the land use authority that the
requirements of this chapter have been satisfied with respect to the
applicant's proposed conditional use.
   G.   Standards For Granting A Conditional Use:
      1.   Authorization: The land use authority may permit a conditional use
to be located within any zone in which the particular conditional use is
permitted by the use regulations of this title. In authorizing any conditional
use, the land use authority shall impose such requirements and conditions as
are necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and the public welfare.
The land use authority shall not authorize a conditional use permit unless the
evidence establishes:
         a.   That such use will not, under the circumstances of the particular
case, be detrimental to the health, safety or general welfare of persons
residing or working in the vicinity, or injurious to property or improvements
in the vicinity.
         b.   That the proposed use will stress quality development with
emphasis toward adequate buffering, landscaping, proper parking and traffic
circulation, use of appropriate gradation of building height away from single-
family zones and density to create privacy and compatibility with surrounding
uses, use of building materials which are in harmony with the area, to minimize
the impact on schools, utilities and streets.
         c.   That the applicant may be required to provide such reports and
studies which will provide information relating to adequate utilities, traffic
impacts, school impacts, soil and water target studies, engineering reports,
financing availability, and any other information which may be needed in order
to render a proper decision.
         d.   That the proposed use will promote health and sanitation by
controlling outdoor storage, disposing of waste properly, controlling dust,
gases, dirt, odors, noxious matter, heat, glare, electromagnetic disturbances,
radiation, or other types of air pollution.
         e.   That the use will be compatible with the general plan of the City
of Cedar Hills and permitted zoning. The use will protect the quality of the
underlying zone and all lighting, aesthetics, noise, signs, landscaping,
general use, and design will comply with the standards of the zone.
         f.   That the applicant has demonstrated that there is sufficient
utility capacity and emergency vehicle access.
      2.   Detrimental Or Injurious Conditional Use: A proposed conditional use
shall be considered as detrimental or injurious to the health, safety, or
general welfare of persons or properties within the vicinity of the proposed
conditional use if:
         a.   The proposed conditional use will cause unreasonable risks to the
safety of persons or properties because of vehicular traffic, parking, or large
gatherings of people;
         b.   The proposed conditional use will unreasonably interfere with the
lawful use of properties within the vicinity of the proposed conditional use;
         c.   The proposed conditional use will create an additional need for
essential city or public services (e.g., utilities, law enforcement, fire
prevention, etc.) which cannot be met without unreasonable efforts or
expenditures of city or public resources;
         d.   The proposed conditional use will otherwise present an
unreasonable detriment or injury to the health, safety, or general welfare of
persons or properties in the vicinity of the proposed conditional use; or
         e.   The proposed conditional use will not be in harmony with the
general plan of the City of Cedar Hills.
      3.   Conditions: In granting a conditional use permit, the land use
authority may impose such requirements and conditions which the land use
authority, based on the standards set forth, deems necessary for the protection
of persons and properties in the vicinity of the proposed conditional use, as
well as the preservation of the integrity of the general plan. Said
requirements and conditions may include (but are not limited to) location,
construction, size, maintenance, operation, site planning, traffic control and
parking, relocations, dedications, installation and upgrading of public
services and roads, hours of operation and time limits for the proposed
conditional use.
The land use authority may require guarantees, bonds, or other assurances that
such requirements and conditions are being met.
   H.   Appeals Of Decisions: Any person for which any application for approval
of a conditional use permit has been filed or any person who may be affected by
the proposed use shall have the right to appeal the decision of the land use
authority to the appeal authority. An appeal must be presented in writing
within thirty (30) days after the date of the final decision of the land use
authority.
   I.   Inspection: Following the issuance of a conditional use permit, the
planning office shall approve an application for a building permit upon
compliance of construction plans meeting such conditions and requirements as
established by the land use authority. Representatives of the code enforcement/
planning department shall inspect the project to ensure that all required
improvements meet the conditions of the conditional use permit and this title
before a certificate of occupancy is issued by the building inspection
division.
   J.   Revocation:
      1.   Written Complaint: Upon receiving a written complaint alleging a
violation or failure to comply with any condition prescribed in a conditional
use permit, the planning department shall investigate the complaint. If the
complaint has merit, and attempts to remedy the complaint fail, the planning
department may place the complaint on the agenda of the regular meeting of the
appeal authority, provided, that the permittee shall have at least fourteen
(14) days' notice of the meeting.
      2.   Hearing Procedure: Permittee shall be given written notice of the
exact nature of the complaint and the date and time of the hearing before the
appeal authority. The hearing shall be held in accordance with customary
administrative hearings procedures.
      3.   Action; Complaint Dismissal: The appeal authority, after hearing the
evidence presented regarding the complaint, may continue the hearing from time
to time, modify or rescind any condition or requirement of the conditional use
permit as it deems necessary, revoke the conditional use permit, or take no
action and dismiss the complaint.
      4.   Notices: All notices required herein shall be provided by personal
service or by certified mail.
      5.   Effective Date And Scope: This section shall apply to all
conditional use permits issued after the effective date hereof, regardless of
change in ownership or occupancy.
      6.   Revocation: A conditional use permit may be revoked if the land use
authority finds, by a preponderance of the evidence that one or more of the
following exist:
         a.   The conditional use permit was obtained in a fraudulent manner.
         b.   The use for which the conditional use permit was granted has now
ceased for at least six (6) consecutive calendar months.
         c.   One or more of the conditions of the conditional use permit have
not been substantially met.
   K.   Time Limit:
      1.   A temporary conditional use permit may be issued by the land use
authority for a period of six (6) months. This permit may be renewed by the
planning staff for a total of three (3) successive six (6) month time periods,
allowing a total of two (2) years for the temporary conditional use permit.
Where hardship or unusual circumstances exist, the land use authority may
extend the temporary permit for one additional year. These extensions shall be
granted in two (2) separate six (6) month increments. A temporary conditional
use permit shall not be issued for a use which is not incidental to or directly
related to an intended permanent use on the property.
Mobile offices, homes or trailers which are used for business purposes shall
only be allowed for a six (6) month time period as authorized by the land use
authority. The land use authority may extend the time period for the temporary
structure up to one additional year providing that plans for a permanent
structure have received land use authority approval.
Temporary structures shall be removed from the property upon occupancy of the
permanent structure. Premanufactured structures which meet all building code
regulations and construction trailers shall be exempt from this regulation.
      2.   A temporary conditional use occupancy permit shall not be issued nor
shall the building structure or other facility be occupied until all water,
sewer, and electrical permits have been issued and all appropriate inspections
performed.
      3.   Unless there is substantial action under a conditional use permit
within a maximum period of two (2) years of its issuance, the conditional use
permit shall expire. The land use authority may grant a yearly extension, when
deemed in the public interest.
   L.   Reapplication After Denial: Denial of an application for a conditional
use permit regarding any parcel of property shall prohibit the filing of
another application for a conditional use permit for the same parcel of
property or any portion thereof, within one year of the date of the final
denial of the previous application unless the land use authority finds that
there has been a substantial change in the circumstances or sufficient new
evidence as submitted by the applicant in writing since the denial of the
previous application to merit consideration of a second application within the
one year time period.
   M.   Continuing Effect: A conditional use permit, once approved, affects
real property regardless of change in ownership and all subsequent owners are
subject to those conditions so long as that conditional use is being conducted
on the property. The conditional use may be conducted either intermittently or
continuously, provided, however, that if the conditional use becomes a legal
nonconforming use due to a later amendment to this title, the provisions of
section
10-1-8 of this title relating to nonconforming buildings and uses shall apply.
   N.   Reporting Requirements: Prior to the annual renewal date each year, the
owner or occupant of a property which has been approved for the following land
use under a conditional use permit shall provide written evidence to the
planning department that the property use complies with this title:
Accessory apartment.
Assisted living facility.
Bed and breakfast facility.
Home occupations.
Premises occupations.
Shopping center zone, commercial uses. (Ord. 05-17-2016A, 5-17-2016)
10-5-38: RENEWABLE ENERGY SYSTEMS:
   A.   Purpose Of Renewable Energy Systems: The purpose of this section is to
allow renewable energy systems such as wind and solar within the city while
protecting residential areas and other land uses from potential adverse impacts
of these systems.
   B.   Submittal Requirements For All Wind And Solar Energy Systems:
      1.   Review Criteria: The zoning administrator shall consider the
following criteria in determining whether to approve a permit for any wind and/
or solar energy system:
         a.   Proximity of the system to residential structures and residential
district boundaries;
         b.   Possible negative impacts on surrounding properties, including,
but not limited to, noise, shadow flicker, low frequency vibrations and the
disruption of scenic views or other visual impacts;
         c.   Aesthetics of the system, including, but not limited to, height,
wind vanes, color, type, size and the visibility of the system.
      2.   Utility Notification: All applicants shall submit evidence to the
city that the relevant electric utility company has been informed of the
customer's intent to install an interconnected customer owned wind and/or solar
energy system. Off grid systems shall be exempt from this requirement.
      3.   Cables: Any cable connected to the wind and/or solar energy system
must be undergrounded except for properties which obtain electric power service
from aboveground lines and who are not otherwise required to underground.
      4.   Permit: All applicants shall make application by fulfilling all
requirements of the city building permit application.
   C.   Wind Energy Systems:
      1.   Design Standards For All Wind Energy Systems:
         a.   Sound: Sound produced by the turbine under normal operating
conditions shall be limited to sixty five (65) decibels measured at the
property line, except during naturally occurring short term events like severe
storms.
         b.   Shadow Flicker: The tower shall be located so as to eliminate the
occurrence of shadow flicker on inhabited structures located on adjacent
properties.
         c.   Signage: Signage is prohibited on the tower, blades, or accessory
structures except for appropriate warning signs. Manufacturer identification
may be placed on the turbine; however, advertising signs of any kind are
prohibited.
         d.   Lighting: No illumination of the turbine or tower shall be
allowed unless required by the federal aviation administration. When lighting
is required, it shall be done in such a way as to reduce the effects on birds.
         e.   Signal Interference: The owner or operator shall make reasonable
efforts to avoid all disruption or loss of radio, telephone, television,
internet or similar wireless signals, and shall mitigate any harm caused by the
wind energy system. Such owners may be subject to a notice of violation and
administrative penalties if violation persists.
         f.   Accessory Buildings And Support Equipment: Buildings and support
equipment associated with towers shall be defined as accessory structures and
must comply with chapter 4 of this title.
      2.   Small Wind Energy Systems:
         a.   Tower Height:
            (1)   Residential Zones: The maximum tower height for small wind
energy systems, including the blade, shall not exceed twenty feet (20')
measuring from the adjacent finished grade to the tip of the blades at their
highest point.
         b.   Blade Height: The minimum height of the lowest point of a turbine
blade shall be fifteen feet (15') above ground.
         c.   Setback:
            (1)   The base of the tower shall be set back from all property
lines, public rights of way, and aboveground public utility lines a distance
equal to the tower height plus the length of one blade.
            (2)   The base of the tower shall not be located within any
required front, side, or corner side yard area.
            (3)   The base of the tower and turbine blades shall be set back
from all structures on the same property a minimum of ten feet (10').
            (4)   Wind energy systems shall not be allowed in street side yard
setback area.
         d.   Access:
            (1)   Freestanding Tower: No climbing apparatus including foot pegs
or rungs shall be within twelve feet (12') of the ground on a freestanding
tower.
            (2)   Lattice Tower: The towers shall be wrapped by a protective
cover, including sheets of metal, wood or similar barrier on the bottom of the
lattice tower so that it cannot readily be climbed. Latticed towers shall be
fenced according to the provisions of section
10-5-18 of this chapter.
      3.   Rooftop Mounted Wind Energy Systems:
         a.   Roof mounted wind energy systems are prohibited in all
residential zones.
   D.   Solar Energy Systems:
      1.   Design Standards For All Solar Energy Systems:
         a.   Reflection: Steps shall be taken to minimize the amount of
reflected sunlight onto neighboring structures and rights-of-way in order to
reduce safety hazards. This includes, but is not limited to, altering system
angles and locations, utilizing antireflective coatings, etc.
         b.   Screening: All ground mounted solar energy systems shall screen
utility and mechanical equipment as required in section
10-5-18 of this chapter related to fencing.
      2.   Building Mounted Solar Energy Systems:
         a.   Setback: Building mounted solar energy systems shall meet the
same setbacks as are required for the building the system is mounted to, but
are not allowed to extend beyond the surface to which they are attached.
         b.   Height: Building mounted solar energy systems are allowed to
extend to the peak of any existing roof, regardless of height, subject to the
restrictions of subsection D2b(1) of this section.
            (1)   Building mounted solar energy systems that are not visible
from the public right-of-way may be bracket mounted or tilted on a roof to a
maximum of not more than seven feet (7') above the surface of the roof at the
highest finished pitch of the system but shall maintain one side of the array
within twelve inches (12") of the roof surface. Roof mount systems that are
visible from the street frontage right-of-way shall not have a highest finished
pitch more than five percent (5%) steeper than the roof pitch on which the
system is mounted, and shall be mounted not higher than twelve inches (12")
above the roof.
      3.   Ground Mounted Solar Energy Systems:
         a.   Setback: Setbacks for ground mounted solar energy systems shall
be the same as accessory structures found in chapter 4 of this title and are
prohibited within the front yard area and street side yard enclosure areas.
         b.   Height: The maximum height allowed for ground mounted solar
energy systems is twenty feet (20') measured from the surrounding natural grade
to the highest point of the system.
         c.   Fencing: Ground mounted solar energy systems shall be enclosed by
a fence according to the provisions of section
10-5-18 of this chapter.
      4.   Solar Easement: Solar easements are not a requirement for City
approval; nonetheless, a property owner who has installed or intends to install
a solar energy system may negotiate a solar easement with adjacent property
owners to ensure perpetual sun on the property. Any easement agreed upon must
be recorded by the County Recorder, with a copy provided to the City.
   E.   General Provisions:
      1.   Abandonment:
         a.   An inoperable system must be dismantled and removed promptly. If
a system is not operated for twenty four (24) consecutive months it will be
presumed that the system is inoperable.
         b.   The homeowner is responsible for reclaiming the land using
natural vegetation and to the greatest extent possible the land shall be fully
restored within sixty (60) days of the removal and decommissioning of the
system.
      2.   Small Decorative Systems: Small systems less than three feet (3') in
diameter or width that use direct current solely for decorative or yard
lighting are exempt from permit requirements and restrictions of this section.
      3.   Prohibited: This section does not permit large scale projects which
include multiple wind and/or solar energy systems designed to produce energy
for wholesale purposes. (Ord. 11-15-2016A, 11-15-2016)
10-5-39: TOBACCO SALES, TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA AND TOBACCO SPECIALTY BUSINESSES:
   A.   Applicability: No individual, entity or organization shall:
      1.   Conduct or operate a retail tobacco specialty business; or
      2.   Sell, furnish, or otherwise distribute a "tobacco product" as
defined in this chapter and section 10-8-41.6 of the Utah Code, unless it
satisfies the requirements set forth in this chapter.
   B.   Definitions:
    RETAIL TOBACCO SPECIALTY BUSINESS: As used herein, this term/phrase shall
have the same definition as set forth in section 10-8-41.6(1)(b) of the Utah
Code, and shall include vape shops.
   TOBACCO PARAPHERNALIA: As used herein, this term/phrase shall have the same
definition as set forth in section 76-10-104.1(1)(b) of the Utah Code.
   TOBACCO PRODUCT: As used herein, this term/phrase shall have the same
definition as set forth in section 10-8-41.6(1)(c) of the Utah Code.
   TOBACCO SALES BUSINESS LICENSE: A business license issued by the City of
Cedar Hills, which permits the licensee to sell tobacco products and tobacco
paraphernalia from its validly licensed business.
   C.   Tobacco Sales Business License Required:
      1.   Tobacco Products And Tobacco Paraphernalia: No individual, entity,
organization, or business shall sell tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia
unless it has obtained a tobacco sales business license. A tobacco sales
business license shall only be issued as a secondary license to a business
license for one of the following:
         a.   A business that is primarily engaged in the sale of food and
beverage products and is located in a building which is ten thousand (10,000)
square feet or larger;
         b.   A business that is primarily engaged in the sale of gasoline or
diesel fuel and is located in a building which is two thousand (2,000) square
feet or larger;
         c.   An on-premises alcoholic beverage sales license;
         d.   A business license for a pharmacy under Utah Code and is located
in a building which is ten thousand (10,000) square feet or larger; or
      2.   Application For License:
         a.   An application for a license shall be made in writing on the form
provided by the City's licensing officer. The form must be completed in its
entirety. The application must be accompanied by:
            (1)   The business license required in title 3 of this Code;
            (2)   Documentation showing the square footage of the building;
            (3)   Proof of the operation of a business specified in subsection
C1a or C1b of this section, if the application is to qualify as such a
business.
   D.   Retail Tobacco Specialty Businesses Not Permitted:
      1.   The City shall not issue tobacco sales business licenses for the
operation of retail tobacco specialty businesses or vape shops.
   E.   Revocation Of A Tobacco Sales Business License: Pursuant to and
consistent with the City's business licensing process in section
3-1-11, "Denial, Suspension Or Revocation Of A License Or Registration", of
this Code, the City may suspend, revoke, or terminate the business license of a
business which is operating as a tobacco sales business (including those
businesses operating under a retail tobacco specialty business license) if:
      1.   The tobacco sales business license is not renewed continuously
without relapse or revocation;
      2.   The tobacco sales business is closed for business or otherwise
suspends the sale of tobacco products or tobacco paraphernalia for more than
sixty (60) consecutive days; or
      3.   The tobacco sales business substantially changes the business
premises or its business operation without complying with and obtaining
approval for/from applicable City zoning ordinances, building permit processes,
conditional use permit processes (including the process for amendment of an
existing conditional use permit), and business licensing processes (including
the amendment of an existing business license).
   F.   Penalty: Any violation of this chapter is a Class B misdemeanor and
punishable by a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), not including any
mandatory fees and surcharges imposed by law or a court of competent
jurisdiction.
      1.   If any provision or clause of this chapter or application thereof to
any person or entity or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or
otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall
not affect other sections, provisions, clauses or applications thereof which
can be implemented without the invalid provision(s), clause(s) or application
(s) hereof, and to this end the provisions and clauses of this chapter are
declared to be severable.
      2.   This chapter supersedes or repeals the provision(s) of any ordinance
(s) or resolution(s) that is (are) inconsistent with the provisions of this
chapter.
      3.   This chapter shall take effect immediately upon publication or
posting, as required by law. (Ord. 05-01-2018A, 5-1-2018)
CHAPTER 6
LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
10-6-1: Legislative Intent
10-6-2: Large Scale Developments Permitted
10-6-3: Procedure Leading To Approval
10-6-4: Planning, Design And Documentation
10-6-5: Construction Requirements
10-6-6: Continuing Obligation
10-6-7: Qualification
10-6-8: All Regulations Essential
10-6-9: Requirements Considered Minimum
10-6-10: Regulations Not Severable
10-6-11: Standards May Be Increased
10-6-12: Sale Of Property Under Condominium Ownership Act
10-6-13: Recording Unapproved Plat, Documents, Statements Or Agreement Unlawful
10-6-14: Standards And Specifications To Be Prepared
10-6-15: Planning Commission May Specify Design
10-6-16: Water Rights To Be Conveyed To City; Exceptions
10-6-17: As Constructed Plans Required
10-6-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
The intent and purpose of the large scale development provisions of this title
shall be to:
   A.   Facilitate the orderly development of the city in accordance with the
city general plan.
   B.   Permit developers to vary density, architectural styles and building
forms on a project by project basis, rather than on the basis of traditional
zoning concepts.
   C.   Reduce the tax burden for special services, the costs of which can be
more appropriately charged to property owners within the developments.
   D.   Facilitate a more economical arrangement of buildings, circulation
systems, land use, drainage and utilities than would otherwise be possible.
   E.   Promote superior maintenance of buildings and jointly owned open space
and facilities within the development, through the use of agreements between
the city and homeowners' or property owners' associations.
   F.   Facilitate proper development of otherwise derelict and inaccessible
land in the centers of blocks.
   G.   Establish more definitively the rights, duties and responsibilities of
land developers and lot owners with respect to the development and maintenance
of land.
   H.   Coordinate the requirements of the condominium enabling act and the
planning enabling act. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995)
10-6-2: LARGE SCALE DEVELOPMENTS PERMITTED:
The following types of large scale developments may be constructed, but may be
located only in the zone in which such development is listed as a permitted
use:
   A.   Planned commercial development projects.
   B.   Planned residential developments.
   C.   Condominium projects.
   D.   Condominium conversion projects.
   E.   Flexible design subdivision projects.
   F.   Planned townsite projects. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
10-6-3: PROCEDURE LEADING TO APPROVAL:
   A.   Developer Confers With Site Plan Review Committee:
      1.   The developer shall meet with the site plan review committee to
discuss the basic concept of the proposed large scale development and to obtain
information concerning the city requirements for approval and construction.
      2.   The purpose of the conference is to acquaint the developer with the
range of opportunities for development under the large scale development
provisions, and also to ensure that the developer is fully aware of the
approval procedure and the requirements and standards for design and
construction of the project, and the content of the required documents and
statements.
   B.   Preapplication Conference:
      1.   The developer shall prepare and present to the site plan review
committee:
         a.   A sketch plan and general written description of the project.
(See city design standards and public improvement specifications.)
         b.   A statement indicating the present ownership status of the land.
      2.   The purpose of the conference is to provide informal assistance to
the developer in the preparation of the plans early in the process. The staff
may suggest changes in the proposed layout in order that the project may be
more fully consistent with the city general plan and also with the city
development regulations and policies. The recommendations from the staff shall
be purely advisory and in no way shall the conference be construed to
constitute approval of the plan.
   C.   Developer Prepares Preliminary Plans, Documents And Statements And
Submits To Staff:
      1.   After the preapplication conference, the developer shall prepare and
submit to the planning commission:
         a.   An application for approval of the large scale development.
         b.   Copies of all required preliminary plans, documents and
statements.
         c.   Evidence of payment of the required review fee.
         d.   Evidence of water right proposed to be conveyed to the city.
      2.   The number of copies to be submitted and the period of time prior to
the date of consideration of a proposal shall be as set from time to time the
city engineer.
   D.   Staff Reviews Preliminary Plans, Documents And Statements: Upon receipt
of the submission from the developer, the staff shall:
      1.   Review the plans, documents and statements for completeness and for
conformance with the city general plan and standards.
      2.   Submit said plans, documents and statements or portions thereof to
the city engineer, city attorney, fire chief and other appropriate public
agencies for their review and recommendation.
   E.   Staff Submits Preliminary Plans, Documents And Statements To Planning
Commission: Upon completion of the review by the staff, the preliminary plans,
documents and statements shall be submitted to the planning commission,
together with a verbal or written report summarizing the results of the review
process and making recommendations for further action.
   F.   Planning Commission Reviews And Takes Action On Preliminary Plans,
Documents And Statements:
      1.   The planning commission shall review the preliminary plans,
documents and statements, together with the findings of the staff review
process and shall act to recommend or not recommend the proposal, or recommend
it subject to modification.
      2.   Action by the planning commission shall not constitute final
approval of the project but shall be deemed as a positive recommendation to the
city council that a public hearing on the proposed project be advertised and
held and the project approved.
   G.   Planning Commission Submits Plans To City Council: Upon review and
recommendation of the preliminary plan, documents and statements by the
planning commission, copies shall be submitted to the city council for its
review.
   H.   City Council Reviews Plans, Documents And Statements; Public Hearing:
The city council shall review the preliminary plans, documents and statements
and shall advertise and hold a public hearing on the proposed project. Said
hearing shall be called in the same manner as an amendment to the zoning
ordinance.
   I.   City Council Takes Action On Preliminary Plans, Documents And
Statements:
      1.   Following the public hearing, the city council shall act upon the
preliminary plans, documents and statements to approve, disapprove or approve
subject to modification. If disapproved, no further action is required. If
approved subject to modification, the plans, documents and statements shall be
returned to the planning commission with instructions that the developer should
modify the plans, documents and statements in accordance with required changes
and to resubmit the modified proposal to the planning commission for its
further review and recommendation.
      2.   If approved, the preliminary plans, documents and statements shall
be returned to the staff with instruction to authorize the developer to proceed
to prepare and submit the final plans, documents and statements through the
planning commission.
      3.   Upon passage of a motion by the planning commission and city council
to approve the preliminary plans, documents and statements, the city shall be
committed to grant final approval of the final plans, documents and statements
upon compliance with all procedures, standards, requirements and any conditions
attached to said approval relating to the applicable large scale development.
The preliminary plans and documents shall be valid for twelve (12) months from
the date of action by the city council. The time limit may be extended for an
additional year upon approval by the planning commission. Any extension of time
shall be officially requested in writing, and submitted to the planning
commission thirty one (31) days prior to the end of the twelve (12) month
preliminary approval period. No construction shall be permitted until final
approval of the development has been obtained.
   J.   Developer Prepares And Submits Final Plats, Plans, Documents And
Statements:
      1.   After receiving authorization to proceed, the developer shall
prepare and submit to the planning commission:
         a.   Application for final approval.
         b.   A linen or reproducible tracing and such number of paper copies
as are determined necessary for distribution for review.
         c.   Copies of the final engineering plans.
         d.   Copies of the final documents and statements.
         e.   Copies of an itemized estimate of the cost of constructing the
required improvements.
         f.   Evidence of payment of review and recording fee.
         g.   Documents conveying water rights to the city.
         h.   Evidence of ownership of the land proposed verifying that the
applicant has sufficient control over the premises to effectuate said
dedication without boundary exceptions.
      2.   All submissions shall be prepared in accordance with city standards.
The number of copies to be submitted and the period of time prior to the date
of consideration of a proposal shall be as set from time to time by the city
engineer.
   K.   Planning Commission Acts On Final Plats, Plans, Documents And
Statements:
      1.   When the plans, plats, documents, cost estimates, and other
materials required for approval have been completed in final form, the
developer may make application to the planning commission and the planning
commission will grant final approval after reviewing the final plan and
ascertaining that:
         a.   The final plans conform substantially with those given
preliminary approval.
         b.   The final plat complies with the requirements and standards
relating to the applicable type of large scale development.
         c.   The final documents and statements comply with the standards
relating to the applicable type of large scale development.
         d.   The estimates of cost of constructing the required improvements
are realistic.
         e.   Tax liabilities of the common open space (wherever a large scale
development involves the reservation of common open space) have been
determined.
      2.   Upon a finding of approval, the planning commission chair shall be
authorized to sign the required final plats.
   L.   Developer Posts Performance Guarantee: Upon a finding of approval of
the final plans, plats and documents by the planning commission, the developer
shall post performance guarantees in accordance with the provisions of title 9,
chapter 2 of this code. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995; amd. 2004 Code)
   M.   City Council Acts On Final Plans, Plats And Documents:
      1.   After the planning commission recommends approval of the final
plans, plats, documents, cost estimates and tax liabilities of the common open
space, where applicable, a copy of the same shall be submitted to the city
council for its approval. The city council will review said plans, plats,
documents, cost estimates, tax liabilities, together with the recommendations
of the planning commission, and, subject to a properly presented motion by a
member of the city council, act to approve said plans, execute all appropriate
documents and agreements, and final plats, and accept all public dedications.
Final approval by the city council shall be by adoption and publication of an
ordinance amending the official zone map to show and identify the area included
within the development. Upon adoption and publication of the ordinance, the
specific requirements of the underlying zone shall be considered modified in
conformance with the said plans, plats, documents and agreements as approved by
the city council.
      2.   Preliminary and final approval of a large scale development project
may be combined (subsections F through M of this section), provided: a) the
project plan does not include a division of property or the dedication of
property for public purposes; and b) all requirements for preliminary plan and
final plat approval shall have been complied with. (Ord. 3-4-2003C, 3-4-2000)
   N.   City Records Plats And Documents: Upon passage and publication of the
amending ordinance, the city recorder shall record all final plats,
documentation and agreements in the office of the county recorder and shall
notify the developer to proceed with construction upon the payment of all
review and permit fees.
   O.   Amendments: The plans, plats, documents and statements may be amended
by following the same procedure required for initial approval. No change shall
be made that is contrary to the intent of the city general plan or the
standards and requirements of this title. Any amendment of a recorded final
plat that also qualifies as a subdivision shall not be approved or recorded
until the existing recorded plat has been vacated in accordance with the
provisions of state law. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995; amd. 2004 Code)
10-6-4: PLANNING, DESIGN AND DOCUMENTATION:
The layout and design of all large scale developments and all plans, plats,
documents, agreements, brochures, statements and other required submissions
shall be prepared in accordance with the provisions of the applicable ordinance
and any city standards that may have been adopted. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995)
10-6-5: CONSTRUCTION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Developer Must Construct Improvements In Accordance With Plans: All
large scale developments shall be constructed in accordance with the approved
final plans and all final plans, plats, documents and agreements shall be
binding on the developer, his successors, grantees and assignee, and shall
limit the use of the land in the development as set forth in the approved
plans, documents and agreements. In the event that the developer performs
construction work that is not in accordance with approved final plans, the city
engineer or other authorized representative shall cause further work to be
discontinued and the city council shall obtain compliance or shall revoke all
permits relating thereto.
   B.   Developer Must Construct Improvements Within Permitted Time Period: All
improvements required under the terms of the applicable type of large scale
development shall be constructed within the time period specified for the
duration of the guarantee of performance, except that the city council, upon
recommendation of the planning commission, may require the developer to install
the landscaping on all or part of the common open space or to construct other
specific required improvements on all or part of an approved large scale
development within a time period that is less than the maximum time period
specified, but that shall not be less than six (6) months from the date of said
approval. If no development has occurred pursuant to the adopted plan within
twelve (12) months after the date of final approval, the city council may
revoke any building permits issued and may repeal all prior approvals of the
development.
   C.   Staged Construction Permitted: Development may be carried out in
progressive stages, provided assurance is given to the city council that the
requirements and intent of this title with respect to each stage, shall be
fully complied with. Each stage shall be considered as a separate application.
   D.   Developer Responsible For Quality Of Construction: The developer shall
be responsible for the quality of all materials and workmanship. (Ord. 10-11-
95A, 10-11-1995)
10-6-6: CONTINUING OBLIGATION:
It shall be the obligation and duty of the developer or his successors or
assignees to carry out the conditions made applicable to the development plans,
documents and agreements. In case of failure or neglect to comply with any of
the conditions and regulations as herein established, and as specifically made
applicable to a large scale development, neither the city engineer, chief
building official, zoning administrator, nor the planning commission shall
issue a certificate of zoning compliance therefor. Such failure or neglect to
comply with the construction and ongoing requirements as herein set forth or to
maintain the buildings and premises in accordance with conditions of approval
of the plans, documents and agreements required shall also be deemed to be a
violation of this title and a breach of the agreement between the developer,
his successors or assignees, and the city. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995; amd.
2004 Code)
10-6-7: QUALIFICATION:
Any person wishing to construct a large scale development in the city shall
make application to the planning commission and city council for approval of
such development and shall comply with all the requirements set forth herein.
(Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995; amd. 2004 Code)
10-6-8: ALL REGULATIONS ESSENTIAL:
All of the regulations relating to large scale developments are the minimum
regulations that are needed to carry out the purpose and intent of this
chapter. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995)
10-6-9: REQUIREMENTS CONSIDERED MINIMUM:
The requirements and conditions set forth in this chapter pertaining to each
type of large scale development are the minimum requirements that must be
imposed in order to achieve the intent and purposes as herein set forth. In the
event that a developer does not desire to comply with the requirements and
conditions relating to a large scale development, he may develop his land in
accordance with the regulations and restrictions that apply to land within the
underlying zone, except that all developments within shopping center zones
shall be limited to development that has been approved under the provisions of
article A of this chapter. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995)
10-6-10: REGULATIONS NOT SEVERABLE:
Should any of the provisions of this chapter relating to large scale
developments be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent
jurisdiction, such declaration shall invalidate all provisions relating to
large scale developments. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995)
10-6-11: STANDARDS MAY BE INCREASED:
The planning commission may increase standards where it is determined that such
increased standards are necessary in order to ensure that the development will
mesh harmoniously with adjoining or nearby uses of property and are necessary
to carry out the intent of this title. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995)
10-6-12: SALE OF PROPERTY UNDER CONDOMINIUM OWNERSHIP ACT:
Where all or part of a large scale development is to be sold under the
provisions of the condominium ownership act, as set forth in Utah Code
Annotated title 57, chapter 8, as amended, said development shall be submitted
and approved in accordance with the provisions of this title. This requirement
shall be in addition to all other requirements. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995;
amd. 2004 Code)
10-6-13: RECORDING UNAPPROVED PLAT, DOCUMENTS, STATEMENTS OR AGREEMENT
UNLAWFUL:
It shall be unlawful to record any plan, plat, document, statement or agreement
for a large scale development, or any amendment thereto, in the office of the
county recorder unless the same shall bear thereon final approval of the
planning commission and city council as required by the terms of this title.
Any owner, or agent of any owner, of land that is located within a purported
large scale development who transfers or sells any land or structure in such
purported large scale development before the plan is given final approval by
the planning commission and city council and recorded in the office of the
county recorder shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction,
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for each lot or parcel of land or structure so transferred
or sold. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995; amd. 2004 Code)
10-6-14: STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS TO BE PREPARED:
The planning commission shall have the responsibility for preparing standards
and specifications for the design and quality of all required improvements.
Said standards and specifications shall be adopted by resolution by the city
council. Said requirements shall be considered minimum and shall apply to all
large scale developments under all ordinary circumstances; provided, however,
that where the developer can show that a provision of these standards and
specifications would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to and
where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, the
city council may after receiving recommendation from the planning commission on
the matter, authorize a departure from said standards, provided such departure
may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions. Any departure so
authorized shall be stated on the final plat and the reasons for such departure
shall be entered in writing in the minutes of the city council. (Ord. 3-4-
2003C, 3-4-2003)
10-6-15: PLANNING COMMISSION MAY SPECIFY DESIGN:
As a means of harmonizing development within the project with existing and
planned development within the surrounding area, the planning commission may,
as a condition of its approval, specify or require changes in the minimum and
maximum height of buildings and structures, the type and style of architecture,
the character and nature of landscaping, the choice of building and plant
materials, the pattern of circulation, the location and siting of buildings,
fences, walls, utilities, lighting and sprinkling facilities and other
structures, as well as the nature and extent of drainage facilities. (Ord. 10-
11-95A, 10-11-1995)
10-6-16: WATER RIGHTS TO BE CONVEYED TO CITY; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Requirements:
      1.   All developers of large scale developments shall, as a condition of
approval, convey to the city title to water rights in an amount capable of
producing (in a normal water year) one of the following:
         a.   For single- and two-family residential developments, the
following formula shall be used: (2.58 x exact lot size in acres) + (0.5 x
number of dwelling units) = water rights in acre-feet to be dedicated.
         b.   For multiple-family residential developments (2.58 x exact lot
size in acres) + (0.3 x number of dwelling units) = water rights in acre-feet
to be dedicated.
         c.   For commercial, industrial and other similar nonresidential
developments, sufficient water rights to satisfy the needs of the proposed
development as determined by the city; provided, that said requirement shall be
not less than three (3) acre-feet per acre of land in the project.
      2.   Said rights shall be of a type acceptable to the city (i.e.,
irrigation stock, well rights, stock in culinary water company) and shall be
conveyed prior to final approval of said project by the city council. (Ord. 2-
19-2008A, 2-19-2008)
   B.   Previously Conveyed Rights: All water rights previously conveyed or
placed in escrow as part of the annexation process shall be considered as a
credit toward satisfying the requirements of this section. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-
11-1995)
   C.   In-Lieu Purchase Of Available City Water Rights: In the event that the
city shall have acquired water rights in an amount greater than needed to meet
the current demand, the city may accept a cash payment in-lieu of the actual
conveyance of water rights. The amount of the in-lieu payment shall be as
established by action of the city council. (Ord. 3-4-2003C, 3-4-2003)
10-6-17: AS CONSTRUCTED PLANS REQUIRED:
As constructed plans, showing the location, size, grade and depth of all water
and sewer mains, valves, manholes, and other subsurface utility and service
lines and facilities, shall be required prior to the release of performance
guarantees. Also, the location of required survey monuments shall be submitted
and approved by the city engineer before required performance guarantees are
released. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995)
ARTICLE A.  PLANNED COMMERCIAL DEVELOPMENT PROJECTS
SECTION:
10-6A-1: Legislative Intent
10-6A-2: Districts
10-6A-3: Permitted And Conditional Uses
10-6A-4: Site Requirements
10-6A-5: Building Requirements
10-6A-6: Residential Use Requirements
10-6A-7: Impacts
10-6A-8: Improvements, Documents And Other Requirements
10-6A-1: LEGISLATIVE INTENT:
   A.   Intent: The intent of these provisions shall be to:
      1.   Facilitate the development of commercial and related buildings and
activities in the SC-1 Zone in a harmonious, integrated, safe and convenient
environment and in a manner consistent with the intent of the General Plan and
chapter 4, article E of this title; and
      2.   Establish requirements pertaining to the design, approval,
construction and maintenance as are considered essential to the accomplishment
of the intent of the SC-1 Zone.
The City of Cedar Hills values the tranquil environment that currently exists
within the community and would like to preserve the small town atmosphere that
exists. Design and planning of and operation within the commercial district
shall be primarily for the benefits of the residents of the City of Cedar Hills
and shall be conducive to community gathering. Restrictions may be placed on
development within the community to protect the residents from noise, light,
air, traffic and other forms of pollution while fostering a viable, walkable
commercial zone. Considerations shall include density, diversity and design.
   B.   Quality Of Life Values: The City of Cedar Hills recognizes the value of
having a neighborhood commercial shopping center in close proximity to existing
housing to reduce vehicle trips and travel time. Additionally, development
within the zone is intended to mix retail, professional office, residential and
public facilities and to promote pedestrian access and active transportation.
Active transportation refers to any form of human powered transportation -
walking, cycling, using a wheelchair, in-line skating or skateboarding. There
are many ways to engage in active transportation, whether it is walking to the
bus stop, or cycling to school/work.
   C.   Vision Statement: The SC-1 Zone will develop as an integrated,
architecturally harmonious mixed use development. Particular emphasis shall be
placed on creating a pedestrian friendly atmosphere where residents will desire
to shop and gather. Design elements including architecture, landscaping, signs,
and lighting shall create a commercial district that is of higher quality and
value than the typical suburban "strip" mall. Land development shall minimize
adverse impacts to adjacent single-family housing.
   D.   Goals: The goals of the SC-1 Zone are:
      1.   To create a commercial City center,
      2.   To create a place conducive to community gathering,
      3.   To provide a place for convenient, community services,
      4.   To provide for mixed land uses, and
      5.   To expand the City's Sales Tax base. (Ord. 05-03-2016A, 5-3-2016)
10-6A-2: DISTRICTS:
The SC-1 Zone is divided into districts that are intended to differentiate
between three (3) levels of land-use intensity, where intensity is
characterized by average daily automobile trips and building size, height, and
density. The most intense land uses are planned along the frontage of 4800 West
where there exists the greatest separation from residential uses and where
there is the most significant commercial potential. The least intense land uses
are intended to be located to the east, adjacent to the elementary school and
the neighboring residential area.
The districts in the SC-1 Zone are shown on the map below. These consist of
Retail (shown in red), Mixed-Use (shown in blue) and Office (shown in yellow).
An overlay zone of the Retail and Mixed-Use as shown exists in areas within
three hundred feet (300') of certain residential property lines (shown in
purple). The green area is not a part of the SC-1 Zone and is zoned public
facilities.
[image]
   A.   Retail: The Retail District is intended to be a retail commercial
center for the City. The main focus of the Retail District is to provide an
area for those Sales Tax generating commercial entities that benefit from the
frontage of a major collector (i.e., 4800 West and Cedar Hills Drive). Aside
from public facilities, this district shall only include uses that
predominantly generate on-site sales. The Retail District is intended to
accommodate the most intense land uses of the SC-1 Zone.
   B.   Mixed-Use: The Mixed Use District is intended to have a mix of retail,
office, and residential uses. It shall generally have lower intensity uses than
the Retail District. Lower intensity is defined as uses that generate fewer
automobile trips and buildings that have smaller size and scale.
The boundary between the Retail District and the Mixed Use District south of
Cedar Hills Drive is defined as: Beginning at a point which is N 89°49'37" E
661.38 feet and N 89°53'43" E 143.68 feet from the west 1/4 corner of Section
6, Township 5 South, Range 2 East, Salt Lake Base and Meridian, said point also
being the northwest corner of Lot 6, Apple Blossom Park Plat A Subdivision,
thence due north approximately 610 feet to the south right-of-way limit of
Cedar Hills Drive.
   C.   Office: The Office District is intended to provide services that
require office space. It shall generally have the least intense land uses and
provide a buffer to existing or future single-family residential areas through
landscaping, setbacks, building size and scale, and land uses. In addition, any
retail uses in this area shall help create a transition from the more intense
uses in the other areas to the surrounding residential neighborhoods. The
general appearance of buildings within this district shall use rooflines and
slopes and window coverage and sizes that are more residential in appearance
than commercial in appearance.
   D.   Retail/Mixed-Use Overlay: The Retail/Mixed-Use Overlay Zone is intended
to provide a buffer zone between residential properties and commercial
development, while at the same time allowing for additional flexibility for
development. Uses in either the Retail or Mixed-Use Sub-Districts are allowed
per their classification in chapter 3 of this title. Certain uses identified in
the table as being designated as conditional uses in the Retail/Mixed-Use
Overlay shall only be allowed in the overlay portion of the zone, and not the
individual sub-districts. (Ord. 03-06-2018A, 3-6-2018)
10-6A-3: PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES:
All uses shall be consistent with the character and purpose of the district
within which they are located. No building, structure or land shall be used and
no building or structure shall be hereafter erected, except as allowed in the
districts as shown in the SC-1 land use table below. Uses listed in the Cedar
Hills Land Use Code Numbers document that are not listed in the SC-1 land use
table are prohibited.
The SC-1 land use table lists permitted, conditional, and exceptional uses. The
numbers in the use column and the description of the use are listed in the
Cedar Hills Land Use Code Numbers document. The most specific match for a given
number shall be used. If a use is not specifically designated, or if the cell
for a use and district is blank, that use is prohibited in that district. "P"
means the use is permitted, "C" means the use is conditional, and "E" means the
use is exceptional, meaning not permitted except for existing approved uses or
those that have been approved prior to the year 2016.
Regardless of the entries in the SC-1 land use table, all uses for land within
one hundred feet (100') of residential uses in adjoining zones shall be
conditional.
Conditional uses listed in the Retail District in the SC-1 land use table shall
only be permitted if they predominantly generate on-site sales, unless approved
by the City Council after a recommendation by the Planning Commission. Public
facilities are excepted from this requirement.
For the process and standards used in the granting of conditional uses see
section
10-5-37 of this title.
   SC-1 LAND USE TABLE
 
Use Description Retail Mixed-Use Office
1121              Two family dwelling (duplex) detached                    C  
1122              Two family dwelling (duplex), attached to 1 or more      C  
                  duplexes
1123              Two family dwelling (duplex), attached to a commercial   C  
                  use
1131              Multiple family dwelling containing three or four        C  
                  family residences, detached
1133              Multiple family dwelling containing three or four        C  
                  family residences, attached to a commercial use
1292              Disabled assisted living facility                        C C
1293              Senior housing or congregate care                        C C
1294              Senior assisted living                                   C E
5230              Paint, glass, and wallpaper                             C C  
5240              Electrical supplies and lighting stores                 P P  
5251              Hardware stores                                         P P  
5310 - 5312       Shopping centers, department stores, and discount       P P  
                  department stores
5330              Variety stores (dollar stores)                           P  
5391 - 5392       Dry goods and general stores (yarn shops, linen shops,  P P  
                  boutiques, craft stores, fabric stores)
5400              Food (groceries, meat and fish, fruits and vegetables,  P P  
                  candy and confectionery, dairy products, bakeries)
5520              Tires, batteries and accessories                        C   
5530              Gasoline service stations                               C   
5600              Apparel and accessories (clothing, shoes, tailoring,    P   
                  cosmetics, leather goods)
                  Furniture, home furnishings, and equipment (furniture,
5700              household appliances, musical instruments, office       P P  
                  equipment)
5810              Restaurants (food consumed on premises)                 P P  
5813              Drive-through and fast food restaurants                 C   
5910              Drug stores and pharmacies                              P P  
5930              Antiques and secondhand merchandise                     P P  
5940              Books, stationery, art and hobby stores                 P P  
5950              Sporting goods, bicycles and toys                       P P  
5969              Farm and garden supplies                                C C  
5970              Jewelry                                                 P P  
5991              Florists                                                P P P
5992 - 5999       Miscellaneous retail (newspapers, cameras, gifts,       P P  
                  optical, paper products, pet supplies)
6111              Banking services                                        E   
6121              Savings and loans associations                          E   
6122              Credit unions                                           E   
6130 - 6190       Security brokers, insurance agents, real estate          P P
                  services
6221              Portrait photography                                     P P
6230              Beauty and barber services                              P P P
6250              Apparel repair, alteration and cleaning pickup          C P  
                  services, shoe repair services
6297              Gymnasiums, athletic clubs, body- building studios,      C  
                  spas, health clubs, aerobic centers, etc.
6375              Indoor climate controlled storage (only allowed in the  C C  
                  Retail/Mixed-Use Overlay)
6416 - 6417       Auto washing                                            C   
6511              Physicians' offices and services                         P P
6512              Dental offices and services                              P P
6520              Legal services                                           P P
6530              Engineering, architectural, and planning services        P P
6540              Research services                                        P P
6550              Data processing services                                 P P
6590              Professional services                                    P P
7110              Cultural activities (libraries, museums, art galleries) C P C
7212              Motion picture theaters (indoors)                       C   
7392              Miniature golf                                          C   
7413              Tennis courts                                            C  
7414              Ice skating                                             C C  
7417              Bowling alleys                                          C C  
7424              Recreation and community centers                        C C  
7430              Swimming pools                                          C C  
7611              Developed park land, general recreation                 C C  
7621              Developed park land, leisure and ornamental             C C  
8110 - 8130, 8180 Agriculture                                             E E  
8221              Veterinarian services                                    C  
 
(Ord. 03-06-2018A, 3-6-2018)
10-6A-4: SITE REQUIREMENTS:
It is intended that these requirements and standards will promote consistent,
quality development within the SC-1 Zone.
   A.   Area:
      1.   Site Area: Each proposed development shall contain an initial site
size of ten (10) contiguous acres, which shall be considered as the minimum
amount necessary to constitute a logical design area; provided, however, that
in the instance of lots of record containing less than ten (10) acres, the
minimum initial site size shall be the entire parcel.
      2.   Additions: Subsequent additions to the site area containing less
than the amount set forth under subsection A1 of this section may be permitted,
upon a determination that the area to be added constitutes a logical extension
of the initial site plan.
      3.   Phased Construction: A proposed development may be constructed in
phases upon approval by the City Council and upon a finding that the proposed
phase is consistent with the overall plan for the project, constitutes a
significant portion of the total project, and is consistent with other
requirements specified in this Code.
   B.   Landscaping: The following requirements shall be followed for
landscaping within the SC-1 zone:
All planter areas shall be edged with a concrete mow strip and landscaped. All
planter shapes and walks shall be curvilinear. Landscape boulders may be used
on site, but must be over two feet (2') in size. Each building shall have
flowering crab (malus species) trees planted near the building. Trees may be
placed on any or all sides of the building. The minimum number of these trees
required for each building shall be determined by adding up the length of all
building facades (linear feet), dividing by forty (40) and rounding up. All
landscape shall be appropriately maintained throughout the year.
Other plants near buildings can be selected by a licensed landscape architect
for compatibility to microclimate (north, south, east, west building faces).
Shrubs shall be selected for color in all seasons, including winter. Trees near
buildings are encouraged to have spring and/or fall color. Evergreen trees are
encouraged where practical for positive aesthetic effects in winter.
To ensure consistency throughout the zone, all plants used within the zone
shall be found within the following plant list:
 
Evergreen trees:   
 Abies concolor            White fir                  8' height minimum
 Abies lasiocarpa          Alpine fir                 8' height minimum
 Picea engelmannii         Engelmann spruce           8' height minimum
 Picea pungens             Colorado green spruce      8' height minimum
Deciduous trees:                                       
 Acer platanoides          Norway maple               21/2" caliper minimum
 Fraxinus pennsylvanica    Patmore ash                21/2" caliper minimum
 Koelreuteria paniculata   Golden rain tree           2" caliper minimum
 Prunus blireana           Blireana plum              2" caliper minimum
 Acer palmatum bloodgood   Bloodgood Japanese maple   6 - 8' height minimum
 Prunus subhirtella        Weeping flowering cherry   2" caliper minimum
Shrubs:                                                
 Euonymus alatus compacta  Burning bush               5 gallon minimum
 Potentilla fruticosa      Shrubby cinquefoil         5 gallon minimum
 Prunus glandulosa         Dwarf flowering almond     5 gallon minimum
 Mahonia aquifolium        Compact Oregon grape       5 gallon minimum
 Prunus laurocerasus "Otto English laurel Otto Luyken 18 - 24" minimum
  Luyken"
 Cornus sericea "Kelseyi"  Kelsey dwarf dogwood       5 gallon minimum
 Buxus koreana wintergreen Wintergreen boxwood        5 gallon minimum
 Berberis t.a. nana        Crimson pygmy barberry     5 gallon minimum
 
The following requirements shall apply:
      1.   No less than thirty percent (30%) of any individual site shall be
landscaped. Individually developed sites must provide the required thirty
percent (30%) landscaping within that individual site. Larger planned
developments must provide the required thirty percent (30%) landscaping for the
entire site but shall not be required to provide thirty percent (30%)
landscaping on individual pads or parcels within the planned development. So
that all of the building(s) within the proposed development may be seen within
a parklike setting by the community, the required thirty percent (30%)
landscaping shall be visible and accessible to the public way and shall not be
concealed by walls, fences, building layout, etc.
      2.   Planted areas such as yard space, planter boxes, flowerbeds,
shrubbery beds and other traditional landscaped features shall qualify toward
the landscaped requirement. Sidewalks shall not count toward the requirement.
      3.   Proposed fountains, plazas, or splash pads shall be included in the
site design. The city council, with a recommendation from the planning
commission, may approve a five percent (5%) reduction in landscaping area
requirements for these features when designed as a publicly accessible
gathering area. Public art features are encouraged.
      4.   Landscaping shall also be used as a screen, where other means are
less appropriate, to shield Cedar Hills Drive and 4600 West from large areas of
parking.
      5.   Landscaped areas shall not be residual in nature but shall create a
cohesive network from site to site and throughout the project. Specifically,
landscaped areas shall help create a parklike atmosphere with linked pedestrian
corridors designed to promote pedestrian activity.
      6.   Landscaping materials and details shall contribute to the
perpetuation of the established architectural theme.
      7.   As part of the site plan approval process, landscape plans shall be
required. Such plans shall be prepared by a professional landscape architect
licensed in the state of Utah. Landscape plans shall provide for landscape
treatments that are consistent with the architectural theme. All landscape
plans are subject to the approval of the city council, following a
recommendation by the planning commission.
      8.   Storm drainage shall be retained on site through landscaping or
other approved facilities.
      9.   Xeriscape plans are permitted and shall be prepared by a qualified
landscape architect, and shall not constitute more than one-third (1/3) of the
total landscaped area.
   C.   Streetscapes: Cedar Hills Drive is the main thoroughfare for the
community. As such, special attention and consideration shall be given to
creating an attractive, distinct entrance to the City of Cedar Hills. To
encourage continuity throughout the site and to provide appropriate ties to the
surrounding residential areas, 4600 and 4800 West shall receive the same
treatments as Cedar Hills Drive. Landscaped areas adjacent to public streets
shall conform to the landscaping requirements listed in subsection B of this
section.
      1.   Sidewalks shall be separated from Cedar Hills Drive, 4600 West and
4800 West so as to encourage pedestrian activity and other active
transportation. Separations shall include landscaped berms, shrubbery or other
elements that convey a sense of protection from the vehicular travel lanes.
Streetscapes shall be varied between grass and planter areas and be
appropriately maintained year round.
      2.   Sufficient planter strips shall be provided so as to allow for the
planting of trees as outlined in the plant list.
      3.   The landscaped areas adjacent to Cedar Hills Drive and 4600 West
shall serve, in part, to screen adjacent parking areas from the view of passing
motorists. Trees, berms and shrubbery shall be incorporated to provide the
above described screening.
At street intersections, a clear view of intersecting streets shall be
maintained. Clear view of intersecting streets shall be measured as follows:
extend lines along each street curb to a point of intersection and measure back
sixty feet (60') along each curb. Draw a line between those two (2) points.
This triangular area is the area that must have clear view of intersecting
streets.
Trees closest to intersections shall be capitol flowering pear with no less
than three (3) at each intersection. Trees on east-west streets between walks
and curbs or within ten feet (10') of street curbs shall be burr oak (Quercus
macrocarpa) with all branches pruned to five feet (5') from ground. Trees on
north-south streets shall be London plane trees (Platanus acerifolia) with all
branches pruned to five feet (5') from ground.
The number of trees along all streets shall be at least one tree for every
thirty feet (30') of street frontage. Trees shall be two and one-half inch (21/
2") caliper minimum. Additional trees are encouraged. These additional trees
shall be selected from the table below.
Berming shall be required along streets to screen parking areas and travel
lanes. Berms shall not exceed three to one (3:1) in steepness. Curvilinear
walks are encouraged where practical. Any planter areas shall have a
curvilinear concrete curb between plants and lawn. All planters shall be
mulched three inches (3") deep and maintained with shredded fir bark. Plants
for planters shall be selected from the table below.
 
Evergreen trees:   
 Abies concolor           White fir             8' height minimum
 Abies lasiocarpa         Alpine fir            8' height minimum
 Picea engelmannii        Engelmann spruce      8' height minimum
 Picea pungens            Colorado green spruce 8' height minimum
Deciduous trees:                                 
 Acer platanoides         Norway maple          21/2" caliper minimum
 Fraxinus pennsylvanica   Patmore ash           21/2" caliper minimum
Shrubs:                                          
 Euonymus alatus compacta Burning bush          5 gallon minimum
 Juniperus tamariscifolia Tam juniper           5 gallon minimum
 Prunus cistena           Cistena plum          5 gallon minimum
 Pinus mugo "mughus"      Dwarf mugo pine       18 - 24" minimum
 
   D.   Street Lighting: Street lighting should be designed to create an
attractive, crime free environment and to protect surrounding residents from
light pollution. Where practical, lighting in new developments shall match
lighting used in existing developments.
      1.   Lighting plans shall be prepared for each individual site. Adequate
lighting shall be provided to encourage pedestrian activity and to eliminate
shadowed areas that may contribute to poor visibility and the creation of dark
areas.
      2.   Wall mounted lighting shall not be located higher than twenty feet
(20') on any structure.
      3.   Pole mounted lighting along 4800 West and Cedar Hills Drive shall
not exceed thirty feet (30') in height.
      4.   Pole mounted lighting for the interior of the commercial development
shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height. Pole mounted lighting within any
residential areas shall not exceed fifteen feet (15') in height.
      5.   Directional lighting fixtures shall be used in all areas of this
development. Shields, covers, or other mechanisms shall be incorporated into
fixture design so as to prevent light pollution. Lighting levels shall diminish
to zero foot-candles at the development's property lines.
      6.   Cobra head and shoebox light fixtures are prohibited.
   E.   Signs: Sign standards are intended to ensure aesthetic quality and a
cohesive architectural theme. The below listed standards shall be followed by
all developments. Such incorporation must be consistent and harmonious with the
established architectural theme. Signs shall be limited to monument signs and
wall mounted signs. The following illustrations demonstrate the intent of this
subsection E. Signs shall be consistent with this intent.
[image]
[image]
[image]
      1.   Wall mounted signs shall consist of blade signs, pendant signs and
signs located on awnings.
      2.   Earth tones shall be the predominate colors used on signs.
      3.   Monument signs shall not exceed forty eight (48) square feet and
shall be multi-tenant signs. Monument signs on the same side of an
uninterrupted street shall not be located closer than two hundred feet (200')
to one another.
      4.   Monument signs shall not exceed six feet (6') above the top back of
curb.
      5.   Wall mounted signs shall be limited to ten percent (10%) of the wall
area on which the sign is mounted or seventy five (75) square feet, whichever
is less.
      6.   Signs on canopies, awnings or similar architectural features may be
permitted upon site plan review if it can be shown that it will not detract
from the architectural theme.
      7.   Blade signs shall be consistent with the architectural theme of the
overall development.
      8.   Pendant signs shall be consistent with the architectural theme of
the overall development.
      9.   Signs on awnings shall only be located on the valance of the awning.
Awnings must be consistent with the architectural theme of the overall
development and shall only be located above doors and windows. Awnings must be
kept in good repair at all times.
      10.   Backlit signs are permitted. Functional awnings shall not be
considered backlit signs. Backlit awnings are not permitted.
      11.   Roof signs shall not be permitted.
      12.   Statuary signs bearing the likeness of any product or logo shall
not be permitted.
      13.   Wind signs shall not be permitted.
      14.   Temporary signs shall not be permitted.
      15.   Placing handbills upon, painting or otherwise marking any trees,
sidewalks, walls, poles or other surfaces is prohibited.
      16.   Spotlights projecting into the sky are not permitted.
      17.   Vehicles and trailers shall not be used as signs.
      18.   Flashing, moving or audible signs are not permitted.
      19.   Neon lights are not permitted.
      20.   Pole signs are not permitted.
      21.   Off premises signs are not permitted.
   F.   Walkability And Active Transportation: The site layout shall foster
walkability and active transportation throughout all portions of the site.
      1.   Commercial space shall immediately front streets and parking areas
shall be located on the interior or in the underground of the property, unless
a recommendation by the planning commission to deviate from this requirement is
approved by the city council.
      2.   Site layout shall incorporate pedestrian paths throughout the
development, enabling safe and convenient access to and between each use.
      3.   Pedestrian paths shall be provided through parking areas. These
paths shall be separated from vehicular traffic by the incorporation of
landscaping, other grade separations and through the use of pavers, cobblestone
or stamped concrete.
      4.   Developments shall include bicycle racks located adjacent to
buildings.
      5.   Developments shall provide connectivity to other uses in the same
district and adjoining districts by way of a concrete paved trail or path and
open space.
   G.   Parking: The following apply to parking areas within the SC-1 zone:
      1.   Parking areas shall be situated so as to be screened from Cedar
Hills Drive, 4600 West and 4800 West. Appropriate screening would include
buildings, landscaped berms, shrubbery and groups of trees. Fencing is not
considered an appropriate screen.
      2.   Landscaping shall be dispersed throughout the parking areas. These
landscaped areas will be of sufficient size so as to accommodate landscaped
berms, and trees.
      3.   Parking spaces shall be nine feet (9') wide and eighteen feet (18')
deep if they front onto a landscaped area. Parking spaces that do not front
onto a landscaped area shall be nine feet (9') wide and twenty feet (20') deep.
      4.   For retail uses, a minimum of four (4) parking spaces shall be
provided for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
      5.   For restaurants or other eating establishments, a minimum of one
parking space shall be provided for every three (3) seats and a minimum of one
additional space shall be provided for each employee at the highest shift.
      6.   For office uses, a minimum of six (6) parking spaces shall be
provided for each one thousand (1,000) square feet of floor area.
      7.   For residential units with two (2) bedrooms or fewer, two (2) spaces
per unit. For residential units with more than two (2) bedrooms, one stall per
bedroom (maximum 4). For senior housing or congregate care housing, two (2)
spaces per unit. For assisted living, one stall per two (2) units. In all
cases, there shall be additional spaces for visitor parking computed as one per
four (4) units. No RV parking is allowed. No overnight customer parking is
allowed for commercial uses.
      8.   Shared parking for commercial uses is encouraged. When it can be
found that adjacent uses, or uses in close proximity to one another, have
substantially different peak hours of operation, the minimum number of parking
spaces required for the said uses may be reduced. It is intended that shared
parking will increase the attractiveness of the area by eliminating excess
parking without creating a parking deficiency.
      9.   Drive aisles shall be twenty four feet (24') wide unless they
provide only one-way access or access to angular parking. If the drive aisle
provides access to angular parking or is restricted to one-way travel, it may
be twenty feet (20') wide.
      10.   A separation shall be provided between parking spaces and occupied
structures. This separation must include no less than a four foot (4') sidewalk
and in most situations shall include a larger sidewalk and landscaping.
      11.   All parking islands shall be planted with at least one skyline
honey locust tree (Gleditsia triacanthos "skyline") per four hundred (400)
square feet of planter, with a minimum of one per planter. A tree ring of fir
bark (3 inch depth) shall be formed with at least a two foot (2') radius around
the tree. Trees shall be three inch (3") caliper minimum, having all branches
pruned within seven feet (7') of the ground. Islands shall be bermed slightly
and planted with Kentucky bluegrass (Poa pratensis) sod.
      12.   Reciprocal access shall be guaranteed from site to site. Stub
locations and cross access easements may be required to ensure the
establishment of perpetual reciprocal access.
   H.   Deliveries: Loading areas, including, but not limited to, loading
spaces, loading docks and service or maintenance areas shall be screened from
public view. In addition, loading areas that abut a residential zone shall
reduce noise associated with such use by providing a sound wall and/or berm
with screen plantings around the loading areas or at the property line abutting
the residential zone. Loading and delivery times shall be restricted to the
hours between seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on
weekdays and nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. and seven o'clock (7:00) P.M. on
weekends, unless different hours are recommended by the planning commission and
approved by the city council.
   I.   Outside Storage And Sales: Outdoor storage or sales shall only be
permitted in enclosed outdoor areas such as a garden center. Exceptions may be
made by obtaining a separate conditional use permit. The application for a
permit shall be made in the form of a written request that specifies the sales
area size, location, type of merchandise, and requested duration for the
permit. The City Council shall be the Land Use Authority for this permit. The
City Council shall be able to set parameters limiting the size, location,
duration and appearance of the outdoor sales area. The conditional use permit
shall otherwise be subject to section
10-5-37 of this title.
A business that utilizes grocery carts shall provide permanent cart storage
within a building. The business operator shall use customary business practices
to collect carts from parking lots, cart corrals, and other outdoor locations
periodically. The business operator shall use reasonable efforts to ensure that
carts do not leave the property.
   J.   Maintenance: As part of the site plan review process, applicants shall
provide a legal agreement describing how the site shall be maintained and
enforced by the City. (Ord. 05-03-2016A, 5-3-2016)
10-6A-5: BUILDING REQUIREMENTS:
The following shall apply to all buildings within the SC-1 Zone:
   A.   Architecture: Architecture, building materials, color schemes and
building location all play critical roles in setting a tone for any
development. These same elements are of the utmost importance in creating a
sense of place. As a mixed use commercial area, attention to scale is of
particular importance and will be considered throughout the design process. The
following illustration demonstrates the intent of this section. Buildings shall
be consistent with this intent.
[image]
Buildings in the SC-1 Zone shall use the American Colonial style. The American
Colonial motif is a symmetrical design (AB A, AB CB A, etc.) style. High
pitched tile or slate roofs, either side gabled or hipped, overhang the front
facade and are often capped with a cupola. A central door, often a French door,
is sided by large windows on the sides. Buildings may use the classic temple
front, or contain pillars, pilasters and the Palladian window. Exterior
construction is normally of brick in traditional colors like red and brown, and
makes use of substantial exterior moldings. Wrought iron or copper accents are
also used. It is expected that this theme will create intimacy and interest by
limiting the use of those architectural elements that only cater to the
widespread domination of the automobile. That is to say, architectural designs
should be kept in such a scale so as to maintain a human, rather than
automobile, orientation. The inclusion of street level windows, wide walks and
appropriate signs are a few of the elements that must be considered in
maintaining consistency with this theme. The appropriate selection of materials
and colors are also essential in maintaining consistency with this theme and in
meeting the goals of this requirement.
It is required that the established architectural theme will be used
consistently throughout the entire zone. Designers will use this theme when
developing plans for all types of structures that may be found within this
development.
      1.   Earth tones shall dominate the color schemes of individual buildings
and all color schemes shall be developed so as to conform to the established
architectural theme. Additionally, color schemes shall be consistent with those
found in the surrounding areas.
      2.   Structures shall be situated so as to screen parking areas and to
aid in the creation of a parklike atmosphere.
      3.   Entrances to structures shall orient to parks, plazas or pedestrian
friendly pathways.
      4.   Structures shall be situated so as to provide appealing vistas at
the terminus of drive aisles, pathways or other open areas.
      5.   Structures shall be massed so as to conform to the established
architectural theme and to maintain a human scale.
      6.   Building facades shall be varied and shall not consist of vast
expanses of blank walls.
      7.   Building materials shall be limited to those materials traditionally
associated with the established architectural theme. Structures constructed
largely of glass or other reflective materials are not acceptable for this
area.
      8.   Structures having overhead doors and loading docks; all buildings
listed as either a conditional or permitted use within SC-1 Commercial Zone may
not incorporate any overhead doors or loading docks of any kind along the front
elevation of any building. Overhead doors shall not be visible from North
County Boulevard. Overhead doors and loading docks shall be located on side and
rear elevations of any structure and are subject to conditional use approval by
the City Council after a Planning Commission recommendation. All overhead doors
and loading docks on any use listed in section
10-6A-3 of this article shall be screened from view using landscaping, fencing,
and other approved methods. Exceptions may be granted for commercial uses with
pass through overhead doors for vehicle maintenance and vehicle service. The
general appearance of buildings shall maintain an architectural theme
consistent throughout the Commercial Zone. For buildings over five thousand
(5,000) square feet, the number of exterior overhead doors shall be limited to
one per one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of building footprint.
   B.   Building Height And Size: One- or two-story buildings are permitted.
Buildings may be erected to a maximum height of thirty five feet (35'). Height
is measured from average finished grade to the top of cornice or parapet for
flat roofs, and the midpoint of rake for sloped roofs.
The building size shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and City Council
and potentially approved based on such items as building placement, aesthetics,
noise control, lighting design, traffic control, etc., to give the feel
consistent with the overall commercial development, as well as the community as
a whole. Building size shall be limited by the total building area, meaning the
square footage of the building footprint. In the Mixed Use and Office Districts
building size shall be limited to no more than twenty five thousand (25,000)
total square feet. In the Retail District building size shall be limited to no
more than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet. (Ord. 03-05-2019A, 3-5-2019)
Developments composed of strip malls are prohibited. Smaller, individual
buildings that tend to break up parking areas and create visual interest are
required. Long and monotonous walls and roof planes are prohibited. Building
mass and scale shall be minimized by manipulating the building form using
offsets and recesses and variations in height.
   C.   Building Setbacks: All buildings shall be set back a minimum of thirty
feet (30') from any residential uses. The following standards shall apply:
      1.   There shall be provided a landscaped side yard of at least fifteen
feet (15') in width along such property line, containing trees or groupings of
trees spaced no more than twenty five feet (25') apart.
      2.   A precast concrete or decorative masonry wall, at least six feet
(6') in height, shall be erected along all property lines which lie adjacent to
a Residential Zone.
      3.   All lighting is to be arranged so that there will be no glare
visible to the occupants of residential uses.
      4.   Uses will be strictly prohibited next to adjoining Residential Zones
that involve open storage of merchandise or equipment, trade or industry that
is noxious or offensive by reason of the emission of odor, smoke, gas,
vibration or noise.
      5.   No loading docks, delivery pick up areas, etc., may be located
within fifty feet (50') of residential uses. These areas must be screened from
the public's view with an eight foot (8') masonry wall.
      6.   No trash container shall be located closer than twenty five feet
(25') to a Residential Zone, and must be located to the rear of the main
building. (Ord. 05-03-2016A, 5-3-2016)
10-6A-6: RESIDENTIAL USE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   All Residential Uses: Residential use is permitted in the SC-1 Zone
only as set forth herein. These requirements pertain to uses 1121 - 1123 (two-
family dwellings), 1131 and 1133 (multiple- family dwellings), 1292 (disabled
assisted living), 1293 (senior housing or congregate care), and 1294 (senior
assisted living) listed in the SC-1 land use table in section
10-6A-3 of this article.
The purpose of residential development in the SC-1 Zone is to provide for mixed
use, which combines residential and commercial uses in order to provide housing
opportunities in close proximity to retail, office, civic and related uses.
Mixed use development promotes a pedestrian friendly environment, and more
compact development. Mixed use development projects shall follow the following
process, and meet the following requirements:
      1.   Submission Of Site Plan: All development projects seeking approval
for residential use must be new construction, and must submit a detailed site
plan pursuant to section
10-6-3 of this chapter showing the entire development project, and showing the
added requirements of this section.
      2.   Commercial Uses: The entire ground floor of any building in the
project shall only have commercial uses (land use codes 5000 through 6999
listed in the SC-1 land use table, section
10-6A-3 of this article), except as provided within this section.
      3.   Residential Use: Residential use shall be located above the ground
floor commercial use, except as provided within this section. Allowed
residential density shall be eight (8) units per acre, with no more than four
(4) units per building. For this requirement, attached structures are
considered part of the same building. No more than fifty (50) total units may
be built within the mixed use district.
      4.   Residential Use Conditions: The requirement that all residential use
be situated above a commercial ground floor may be altered to allow residential
use on the ground floor only if all of the following conditions are met:
         a.   The residential building is located in the southern half of the
mixed use district;
         b.   A minimum of fifty percent (50%) of the ground floor area within
the project shall be for commercial uses (land use codes 5000 through 6999
listed in the SC-1 land use table, section
10-6A-3 of this article);
         c.   If the project is completed in multiple phases, each phase shall
independently meet the fifty percent (50%) requirement, provided, however, that
residential use may exceed fifty percent (50%) of any phase if, taken as a
whole and including the proposed phase, the project meets the fifty percent
(50%) requirement; and
         d.   This alteration is approved by the city council following a
recommendation from the planning commission.
      5.   Commercial Use Minimum Height: The minimum height of ground level
commercial use shall be twelve feet (12') floor to ceiling.
      6.   Parking: Parking lots, garages, and carports shall be located in the
interior of a project and not adjacent to a public street, except that access
driveways with parking spaces on one or both sides, with a maximum width of
seventy feet (70'), are permitted. For buildings fronting a public street, all
parking shall be located to the rear or side of buildings, or may be located
below grade (underneath building). Buildings located in the interior of the
project may have the parking area on any side of the building, as per the
approved site plan. Underground parking will be permitted provided that such
parking is accessible from the side or rear of the development and not from the
primary street. All projects must comply with the parking requirements for
commercial and residential uses specified in subsection 10-6A-4G of this
article.
      7.   Open Space: Residential developments shall provide a minimum of
thirty percent (30%) of the net developable site area for open space. At least
seventy five percent (75%) of that open space must be usable, contiguous open
space, available for recreational uses not located within required buffer
areas. Open space may include parks, walkways, natural areas, and landscaped
areas. Open space may not include leftover space between buildings, or narrow
space under ten feet (10') in width that is immediately adjacent to buildings,
where the space is between the building and parking areas, drive aisles or
inner development roads. Open space shall be visible from streets and
sidewalks.
      8.   CC&Rs: The applicant (developer) of any residential development in
the SC-1 zone shall, prior to the recording of the plat, submit to city staff a
declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions (CC&Rs) relating to the
project, which are to be reviewed by the planning commission and given final
approval by the city council, and shall be recorded to run with the land. Said
CC&Rs shall include management policies, which shall set forth the quality of
maintenance that will be performed, and who is responsible for said maintenance
within the development. As a minimum, the said document shall include the
following:
         a.   The care and maintenance of all common or limited common areas,
facilities, and private streets shall be ensured by the developer by
establishing a private homeowners' association.
         b.   A professional property management company is to be hired by the
HOA to govern the responsibility for all maintenance. Maintenance of the
common/limited common areas, facilities, and private streets shall be managed
by an established property management company where there is adequate expertise
and experience in property management, to assure that said maintenance is
sustained and accomplished efficiently, and at a high standard of quality.
Contact information and a copy of the governing contract for the current
property management company shall be submitted to be on file with the office of
the city clerk.
      9.   HOA Failure: In case of failure or neglect to comply with any and
all of the conditions and regulations established herein, and as specifically
made applicable to a development, such failure or neglect to comply with the
requirements and to maintain the buildings, amenities and premises in
accordance with the conditions or approval thereafter, shall also be deemed to
be a violation of this article. In the event the common areas and amenities are
not properly maintained, or the HOA is dissolved, the property management
company is to remain in place to govern the development, and enforce the CC&Rs.
The property management company is also to continue to follow all city
ordinances, in addition to those regulations specifically assigned to the
development in question. Responsibility for payment to the property management
company shall lie jointly and severally with the property owners.
      10.   Provisions Not Listed: For those provisions and regulations not
listed, specified or otherwise covered here, refer to provisions applying to
the underlying district.
   B.   Senior Housing Or Congregate Care: The following requirements, in
addition to those listed in subsection A of this section, apply to use 1293,
senior housing or congregate care facilities:
      1.   On site services shall be provided directly by the management of the
senior housing or congregate care facilities or under contract with qualified
third party vendors. These services shall include an on site restaurant/
cafeteria that provides three (3) meals per day, seven (7) days a week; home
healthcare services from qualified professionals, including help with
medications, bathing, dressing, and other resident needs; physical therapy;
other routine healthcare services; fitness classes; regular social activities;
and a shuttle to nearby destinations.
      2.   Each residential unit shall be occupied by at least one resident
that is fifty five (55) years of age or older, and there shall be no residents
younger than twenty five (25).
   C.   Assisted Living: The following requirements, in addition to those
listed in subsection A of this section, apply to uses 1292 and 1294, disabled
assisted living and senior assisted living facilities:
      1.   The facility shall conform to all applicable standards and
requirements of the Utah state department of human services and the owner/
operator has obtained all licenses required by the state to operate such a
facility.
      2.   The facility shall conform to all state and local building, safety,
health, and zoning requirements applicable to similar structures.
      3.   The facility shall be occupied only by individuals qualified by age
or disability to live in the facility and paid, professional staff members.
Occupancy by any staff member shall only be allowed if such occupancy is
primarily for the purpose of serving the elderly persons and not primarily a
benefit of employment to the staff member.
      4.   The facility is operated for the primary purpose of providing a
living arrangement for senior or disabled persons in a group home setting.
      5.   Residency in the facility shall be on a strictly voluntary basis and
not a part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a
correctional facility. An assisted living facility shall not include any
persons referred by the Utah state department of corrections or any court.
(Ord. 05-03-2016A, 5-3-2016)
10-6A-7: IMPACTS:
   A.   Developments shall blend harmoniously with the surrounding
neighborhoods so that the use does not change the intent and characteristics of
the adjacent zones and districts. The following standards must be met to
mitigate impacts on surrounding neighborhoods:
      1.   Noise: Developments in the SC-1 zone shall not impose excessive
noise on surrounding uses. "Excessive noise" generally means noise that is
prolonged, unusual, or a level of noise that in its time, place and use annoys,
disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of
others. Any mechanical apparatus (i.e., air conditioner, fans, pumps, etc.)
capable of producing noise that is located on the outside of the building must
have sound barrier mitigation. Commercial sound levels at the property line
during daytime hours shall meet levels L1, L10, and L90 of sixty eight (68)
dBA, sixty (60) dBA, and fifty two (52) dBA respectively. Commercial sound
levels at the property line during nighttime hours shall meet levels L1, L10,
and L90 of fifty five (55) dBA, fifty five (55) dBA, and fifty (50) dBA
respectively.
      2.   Dust And Odors: Developments shall comply with all air quality
standards, state, federal and local, and use shall not create unusual or
obnoxious dust or odors beyond the property line.
      3.   Trash: No trash, used materials or wrecked or abandoned vehicles or
equipment shall be stored in an open area. All trash is to be stored within a
dumpster and the dumpster is to be enclosed within a solid metal gate, and
walls matching the masonry used for the buildings, or must be stored in a fully
enclosed building. The dumpster enclosure shall not have frontage on a public
street, and is to be located toward the rear of a development. Outside storage
of commercial goods or materials is expressly prohibited. Containers for trash
storage of a size, type and quantity approved by the city shall be screened by
a sight obscuring fence at least one foot (1') higher than the dumpster and
maintained in a location approved by the planning commission in conjunction
with approval of a site plan.
      4.   Safety: The developer shall take the necessary measures to avoid or
mitigate any safety problems created by the use, including problems due to
traffic, rockfall, erosion, flooding, fire, hazardous materials, or related
problems.
      5.   Traffic:
         a.   Traffic increases due to development shall not cause streets or
nearby intersections to fall more than one grade from the existing level of
service grade or fall below a level of service "D".
         b.   Uses shall follow city access management standards and not create
hazards to other drivers or pedestrians.
         c.   The developer may be required to submit a comprehensive traffic
impact study (CTIS) prepared by a professional transportation engineer licensed
to practice in the state of Utah that analyzes the impact of development of the
entire property zoned in any particular district at the time of the first site
plan application. The CTIS shall evaluate the vehicle, bicycle, and pedestrian
traffic both on site and in the general vicinity of the project. The CTIS shall
evaluate trip generations, turning movements to and from the property, street
geometrics, and traffic safety on and off the site. The CTIS shall also address
relevant items including, but not limited to, the following: surrounding street
and intersection levels of service (LOS) before and after the project is
completed, any mitigation efforts recommended to minimize project traffic
impacts, proposed public and private street widths and alignments, site
mobility, access management, potential traffic signal locations, street
striping, signs, etc. Each site plan shall reflect and incorporate the
recommendations of the CTIS and the individual traffic study and any other
requirements that the city may deem necessary based upon the CTIS and/or the
individual traffic study.
      6.   Public Health: Use shall comply with all sanitation and solid waste
disposal codes and use shall not create public health concerns. (Ord. 05-03-
2016A, 5-3-2016)
10-6A-8: IMPROVEMENTS, DOCUMENTS AND OTHER REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Single Ownership Or Control Required: All portions of a commercial
development project shall be in single ownership or in single control in order
to provide for effective integrated development. Following final approval of
the project plan, the city may approve plans for the subdivision of a portion
of the plan, provided that there is adequate assurance of the development of
the entire project and provision for the development and maintenance of common
elements (i.e., parking and landscaping) through the establishment of cross
easements, guarantees and covenants as provided for under subsection C,
"Required Documents", of this section.
   B.   Improvements: The following improvements shall be constructed by the
developer in each development in accordance with city standards, as directed by
the city engineer:
      1.   Streets, driveways and parking areas shall be graveled and hard
surfaced.
      2.   Curbs, gutters and walkways.
      3.   Drainage and flood control structures and facilities.
      4.   On site water and sewer mains.
      5.   Off site water and sewer mains.
      6.   Fire hydrants.
      7.   Permanent survey monuments.
      8.   Gas, electric, telephone and cable TV (which shall be placed
underground).
      9.   Landscaping in the common area and walkways.
      10.   Fences, walls and all other common areas, facilities, systems and
structures proposed for the development as shown on the final plans.
      11.   Project lighting and signs.
   C.   Required Documents: Where the development is to be retained by one
owner, required documents shall include:
      1.   Covenants, conditions, restrictions and management policies.
      2.   Management agreement.
Where the development has two (2) or more owners or where an existing
development is being divided among two (2) or more owners, required documents
shall include:
      1.   Articles of incorporation for property owners' association.
      2.   Corporation bylaws.
      3.   Covenants, conditions, restrictions and management policies.
      4.   Management agreement.
   D.   Additional Requirements: Additional requirements are set forth in this
chapter. (Ord. 05-03-2016A, 5-3-2016)
ARTICLE B.  PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENTS (PRD)
SECTION:
10-6B-1: Intent
10-6B-2: Permitted Uses
10-6B-3: Approval Procedure; Project Evaluation Guidelines; Compliance With
Related Requirements
10-6B-4: Density Of Development
10-6B-5: Dwelling Units Per Structure
10-6B-6: Minimum Project Area
10-6B-7: Design Criteria
10-6B-8: Open Space
10-6B-9: Improvement Requirements
10-6B-10: Water Rights Conveyance Requirements
10-6B-11: Documentation Requirements
10-6B-12: Project Evaluation Guidelines
10-6B-13: Water And Sewer Requirements
10-6B-1: INTENT:
It is hereby declared to be the intent and purpose of the city council in
authorizing and establishing provisions relating to planned residential
developments (PRD) to:
   A.   Provide an alternative form of development for residential housing
projects within the city that permits increased flexibility and encourages the
preservation of open space and ingenuity in design, while preserving a quality
of residential amenities equal or superior to that possible under conventional
subdivision requirements. In order to qualify for approval as a planned
residential development, it must be demonstrated that the proposed project
will:
      1.   Adequately recognize and incorporate natural conditions present on
the site;
      2.   Efficiently utilize the land resources and provide increased economy
to the public in the delivery of municipal services and utilities;
      3.   Provide increased variety in the style and quality of residential
dwellings available within the city;
      4.   Preserve open space to meet the recreational, scenic and public
service needs; and
      5.   Do all the above in a manner that is consistent with the objectives
of the underlying zone and under conditions that will result in the creation of
residential environments of sustained desirability.
   B.   Establish criteria and standards for the design of PRD projects by
developers and also guidelines for evaluation by the city.
   C.   Set forth the duties and responsibilities of developers and residents
with respect to the approval, construction and maintenance of such projects.
   D.   Clearly establish the relationship of the city and the developer with
respect to the review and approval of such projects. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-
1995)
10-6B-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land may be permitted within a
PRD:
Any use permitted within the underlying zone and those authorized under this
section.
Common areas and recreational facilities (public and private), including, but
not limited to, golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, club houses,
recreational buildings, landscape parks and similar recreational facilities for
the use and enjoyment of the residents.
Private driveways, streets, fences, walls, utility systems and facilities,
common storage areas, ponds, landscape features and similar uses and structures
incidental to the main use. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995)
10-6B-3: APPROVAL PROCEDURE; PROJECT EVALUATION GUIDELINES; COMPLIANCE WITH
RELATED REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   The procedure to be followed in securing approval of a planned
residential development shall be as set forth under section
10-6-3 of this chapter.
   B.   In addition to the requirements of this section, a PRD project that
includes the division of land into separate ownership shall also constitute a
subdivision and shall conform to all applicable requirements for subdivisions.
PRD projects that do not include the division of property shall be considered
as a condominium development and shall conform to all applicable requirements
for such projects. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995)
10-6B-4: DENSITY OF DEVELOPMENT:
   A.   H-1 Hillside Zone: The maximum density for a project within the H-
1 hillside zone area shall be determined by the city upon a detailed slope
analysis of the proposed project area, in accordance with the following
schedule:
 
Slope Category Density (DU/Net Acre)
               
0 - 13%        2.5
13 - 21%       2.0
21 - 30%       1.5
30%+           0.2
 
   B.   Other Zones: The maximum density for a project in other zone districts
shall be as set forth on the following schedule:
 
Zone District DU/Net Acre
              
R-1-15,000    2.9
PR 2.2        2.5
PR 3.4        4.0
 
For purposes of determining project density, the term "net area" shall be
construed to mean the total project area less the portion devoted to public
streets. (Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999)
10-6B-5: DWELLING UNITS PER STRUCTURE:
   A.   The maximum number of dwelling units per structure permitted within a
planned residential development and the maximum density of development within
any development cluster shall be as follows:
 
Zone District Maximum DU/Structure Maximum Number Of DU/Acre In Development
                                   Cluster
                                  
H-1           2                    6
R-1-15,000    1                    n/a
PR 2.2        4                    n/a
PR 3.4        6                    n/a
 
(Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999; amd. Ord. 4-3-2012A, 4-3-2012)
   B.   The city council, subject to the prior recommendation of the planning
commission, may approve an increase in the maximum dwelling units per structure
for one or more structures within a PRD project at variance with the above
standard, upon a finding that such variance is appropriate for the proper
development of the lot and that such increase will not result in the
establishment of a hazardous condition. (Ord. 4-3-2012A, 4-3-2012)
10-6B-6: MINIMUM PROJECT AREA:
The minimum base area required to qualify for a planned residential development
project shall be as follows:
 
Zone District Minimum Project Area (Acres)
              
H-1           20
R-1-15,000    8
PR 2.2        10
PR 3.4        10
 
(Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999)
10-6B-7: DESIGN CRITERIA:
   A.   Dwellings To Be Clustered: All lots and buildings shall be located
within a designated development cluster. A project may contain more than one
development cluster. Each cluster shall contain not less than five (5) separate
lots or building sites.
   B.   Dwellings On Required Open Space Prohibited: No lot or portion of a
project containing dwellings within a PRD shall be located on lands that are
required to be designated as open space in accordance with the provisions of
section
10-6B-8 of this article. (Ord. 4-21-98B, 4-21-1998)
   C.   Building Sites: Dwellings within the project may be placed on
individual lots (subdivision option), on land to be held in common with other
project owners (condominium option), or on parcels that correspond to the
building footprint only (footprint option), or a combination of the above as
required by the city.
      1.   Subdivision Option: Where the proposed plan provides for placement
of dwellings on individual lots, said lots shall conform to the following:
 
H-1 zone:
1 family dwellings 10,000 sq. ft.
2 family dwellings 12,000 sq. ft.
R-1-15,000 zone:
1 family dwellings 10,000 sq. ft.
PR 2.2
1 family dwellings 10,000 sq. ft.
2 family dwellings 12,000 sq. ft.
3 family dwellings 16,500 sq. ft.
4 family dwellings 20,000 sq. ft.
PR 3.4
1 family dwellings 10,000 sq. ft.
2 family dwellings 12,000 sq. ft.
3 family dwellings 16,500 sq. ft.
4 family dwellings 20,000 sq. ft.
5 family dwellings 23,000 sq. ft.
6 family dwellings 26,000 sq. ft.
 
      2.   Condominium Or Footprint Option: Where the proposed plan provides
for the placement of homes on common properties or parcels that correspond to
the dwelling footprint, the design shall provide for separation of structures
in accordance with the setback guidelines under subsection E of this section,
except that no occupied structure shall be located closer than fifteen feet
(15') to an adjacent structure. (Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999)
   D.   Buildable Area: Each individual lot or designated building site shall
contain a buildable area of not less than four thousand (4,000) square feet.
The location of each buildable area shall be designated on the preliminary and
final plans for the project and a notation placed on the recorded plat that all
main and accessory buildings shall be located within the designated buildable
area.
   E.   Setback; Building Separation:
      1.   Each dwelling in the project shall be set back from the lot boundary
line in accordance with the setback lines as shown on the approved plat
(designated setback envelope). The designated setback envelope shall be
established in accordance with the following:
         a.   Front and side setback adjacent to street, thirty feet (30').
         b.   Rear setback, thirty feet (30').
         c.   Interior side setback, twelve feet (12').
      2.   The city council, subject to the prior recommendation of the
planning commission, may approve a designated setback envelope for one or more
lots within a PRD project at variance with the above standard, upon a finding
that such variance is appropriate for the proper development of the lot and
that such reduction will not result in the establishment of a hazardous
condition.
      3.   Where no designated building envelope is provided, the setbacks
shall be the same as the minimum requirements within the underlying zone.
   F.   Accommodation Of Open Space: The design of the project shall
incorporate the open space and all other criteria applicable to PRD projects.
   G.   Streets To Conform To City Standards: All existing public streets and
all streets proposed to be dedicated to the public shall be improved in
accordance with city standards for public streets. All streets intended to be
developed and maintained as private streets shall conform to the city standards
for private streets.
   H.   Cul-De-Sacs; Dead End Streets: To the maximum extent possible, the
design of the road system shall provide for continuous circulation throughout
the project. Cul-de-sacs (dead end streets) shall be allowed only where unusual
conditions exist that make other designs undesirable. Cul-de-sac streets shall
be not longer than four hundred fifty feet (450') and shall be terminated by a
turnaround or loop road of not less than one hundred feet (100') in diameter;
except that longer cul-de-sac lengths and alternative turnaround facilities may
be approved by the city council where topographic conditions justify, subject
to the prior recommendation of the planning commission. (Ord. 4-21-98B, 4-21-
1998)
   I.   Cut And Fill Slopes; Street And Drive Grades: The grade of all public
or private streets, or common drives or private driveways within a PRD, shall
conform to the requirements for subdivisions. No public or private street
providing access to a development cluster or any common drive or private
driveway within the PRD shall be constructed in a location or in such a manner
that results in the creation of a slope face that exceeds the critical angle of
repose or is greater than five feet (5'). (Ord. 3-4-2003C, 3-4-2003)
   J.   Vehicular Access To Lots Required: Each lot or building site shall abut
upon and have direct access to a city street or approved private street. The
distance of the abutting side shall be not less than sixty feet (60'), except
that the length of the abutting side may be reduced to not less than thirty
feet (30') in instances where the lot fronts upon a cul-de-sac or curve and the
side lot lines radiate in such a manner that the width of the lot measured at a
point not less than thirty feet (30') from the front lot line will meet the
minimum width requirements of this section. (Ord. 4-21-98B, 4-21-1998; amd.
2004 Code)
   K.   Common Drives:
      1.   Where the project contains dwellings on common property or footprint
lots, the city may permit access to a portion of the dwellings over common
drives. Where access over a common drive is approved, said drive shall have a
paved surface not less than twenty four feet (24') in width and serve as the
primary access route to not more than four (4) dwelling units. Dead end common
drives shall not exceed three hundred feet (300'). All common drives shall
conform to minimum city standards for private common drives and shall be
approved in accordance with the applicable provisions of the adopted fire code.
(Ord. 4-21-98B, 4-21-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
      2.   On street parking on common drives shall be prohibited. The city may
require a design to include the construction of designated parking areas at
periodic locations along a common drive for the purpose of accommodating
visitors and extra parking.
   L.   Flag Lots Permitted: A PRD project design may contain one or more "flag
lots", subject to the following:
      1.   In the opinion of the city, the use of the flag lot option is
necessary in order to provide access to an area that is eligible for
development but not practically accessible by modification of the road system.
      2.   The building lot portion of the flag lot (flag portion) shall
conform to all applicable lot regulations, including, but not limited to, area,
width, setback, building separation and buildable area. For purposes of
determining setbacks, the lot line of the flag portion located closest to the
abutting public street shall be considered the front lot line and shall be so
designated on the final plat.
      3.   The access portion of the flag lot (flagpole portion) shall abut
directly upon and have direct access to a city street or approved private
street for a distance of not less than thirty feet (30'), shall have a minimum
width not less than thirty feet (30'), and be readily capable of meeting the
driveway slope requirements for a buildable area as set forth under subsection
I of this section.
      4.   The access portion of the flag lot (flagpole portion) shall be not
longer than two hundred feet (200') from the abutting street and the designated
building site shall be not less than two hundred fifty feet (250') from the
closest adequate fire hydrant. (Ord. 4-21-98B, 4-21-1998)
   M.   Design Guidelines: The applicant, in preparing the design for a planned
residential development project, and the planning commission and city council,
in conducting the reviews and approvals required by this title, shall be guided
by the terms of this title and that certain document entitled guidelines for
the design and review of planned residential development projects, when
adopted, which shall be adopted by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 4-21-
98B, 4-21-1998; amd. 2004 Code)
   N.   Easements: The plat shall provide adequate easements for the placement
of utility systems and facilities in locations approved by the city. In the
instance where the project plan proposes the placement of dwellings on
individual lots, the plan shall provide front, rear and side yard utility
easements of not less than ten feet (10'). (Ord. 4-21-98B, 4-21-1998)
10-6B-8: OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Common Open Space Requirement:
      1.   Each project shall provide for the designation of common open space.
The portion of a project to be designated and maintained as common open space
area shall be as follows:
 
Zone District Common Open Space (% Of Net Area)
H-1           30
R-1-15,000    25
PR 2.2        25
PR 3.4        25
 
      2.   For purposes of determining compliance with the common open space
requirement, the term "net area" shall be construed to mean the total project
area less the portion devoted to public streets.
      3.   Open space area designated as limited common area or required to
meet the building separation requirements and setback requirements shall not be
included in meeting the common open space requirements of this subsection.
(Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999)
   B.   Limited Common Open Space: Where the project contains dwelling units to
be developed under the common area or footprint option, the city may require
the designation of limited common area appurtenant to each dwelling. (Ord. 4-
21-98B, 4-21-1998)
   C.   Type Of Area Permitted Or Required As Open Space:
      1.   The designated common open space areas may include natural open
space (applicable to steep hillside, wetland, floodplain area, etc.), and
developed useable open space areas, or a combination thereof. Regardless of the
minimum percent set forth under subsection A of this section, the designated
open space area shall include and contain all 100-year floodplain areas,
defined floodways, all avalanche and rockfall hazard areas, all areas having a
slope of thirty percent (30%) or greater, or any other area of known
significant physical hazard for development. (Ord. 4-21-98B, 4-21-1998; amd.
Ord. 8-3-2010A, 8-3-2010)
      2.   When the project area is adjacent to an existing or planned park or
trail, the common open space shall include connections to those existing and
future parks or trails. (Ord. 8-3-2010A, 8-3-2010)
   D.   Common Open Space Area To Be Preserved: The designated common open
space area shall be maintained so that its use and enjoyment as open space is
not diminished or destroyed. To assure that all designated common open space
area will remain as open space, the applicants/owners shall either:
      1.   Dedicate or otherwise convey title to the open space area to the
city for open space purposes; or
      2.   Convey ownership of the open space area to the homeowners'
association established as part of the approval of the PRD or to an independent
open space preservation trust organization approved by the city.
In the event the alternative in this subsection D2 is used, the developer shall
also execute an open space preservation easement or agreement with the city,
the effect of which shall be to prohibit any excavating, making additional
roadways, installing additional utilities, constructing any dwellings or other
structures, or conducting or allowing the conduct of any activity that would
alter the character of the open space area from that initially approved,
without the prior approval of the city.
The appropriate method for ensuring preservation shall be as determined by the
city at the time of development approval; or
      3.   A combination of subsections D1 and D2 of this section.
   E.   Assessments For Maintenance Of Useable Common Open Space: Where the
proposed common open space includes developed or useable space or facilities
(tennis courts, pavilions, swimming pools) intended for the use by project
residents, the organizational documents shall include provisions for the
assessment of adequate fees and performance guarantees required to secure the
construction of required improvements, including the costs of installation of
all landscaping and common amenities.
   F.   Landscape Plan For Common Open Space Required: A detailed landscaping
plan showing the proposed landscape treatment of all portions of the project
proposed to be developed as useable, common open space shall be submitted as
part of the submittal documents. (Ord. 4-21-98B, 4-21-1998)
10-6B-9: IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The following improvements shall be constructed in all developments. All such
improvements shall meet minimum city standards and shall be completed within
one year from the date of approval of the final plat by the city council.
Financial assurances (bonds) guaranteeing the construction of all required
improvements shall be submitted and approved as a condition of final approval
and shall be administered in the same manner as for subdivisions.
   A.   Streets and travelways.
   B.   Water and sewerage mains and facilities.
   C.   Fire hydrants.
   D.   Any required drainage or flood control structures.
   E.   Any required restoration of cut and fill slopes.
   F.   The costs of installing landscaping and common facilities within any
common open space area. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995)
10-6B-10: WATER RIGHTS CONVEYANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Water rights shall be conveyed to the city in accordance with the
provisions of section
10-6-16 of this chapter.
   B.   Where the proposed development anticipates the buildings to be located
on common property (i.e., condominium ownership) the lot area used to determine
the amount of water right required to be conveyed pursuant shall include the
territory occupied by the dwelling and the area proposed to be occupied as
developed open space. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995)
10-6B-11: DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS:
The following documents and statements shall be submitted as part of the
application for approval, as applicable:
   A.   Organizational documents (articles of incorporation, bylaws, etc.).
   B.   Open space preservation documents.
   C.   Water rights conveyance documents.
   D.   A pro forma statement identifying the tasks to be performed by the
association and establishing the initial cost for providing the proposed
services, maintenance of common improvements and association dues, and
including adjustments for cost of living increases. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-
1995)
10-6B-12: PROJECT EVALUATION GUIDELINES:
   A.   Review; Findings: The planning commission shall review the proposal and
may recommend approval upon finding that:
      1.   All plans, documents and other materials required for consideration
have been submitted in a form suitable for evaluation.
      2.   The plan conforms in all respects to the design standards and
criteria applicable to the PRD.
      3.   The site is suitable for development of the PRD and that such a
project will be consistent with existing development in the vicinity and
compatible with the master plan for the area.
      4.   The arrangement of the buildings, roadways, open space and other
project elements will result in a safe and attractive living environment equal
or superior to that which would be provided under lot by lot development.
      5.   The project, if developed, will accomplish the objectives for PRDs
as stated under section
10-6B-1 of this article.
   B.   Changes: The planning commission may require changes in the plan in
order to more fully accomplish the intent of the PRD provisions. Such changes
may include, but are not limited to, adjustments in the density or the number
of structures, relocation of project elements, redesign of the road system,
increase in the amount of open space and provisions for the disposal of surface
water drainage. (Ord. 10-11-95A, 10-11-1995)
10-6B-13: WATER AND SEWER REQUIREMENTS:
All structures used for human occupancy shall be served by the city culinary
water system at a rate of flow and pressure sufficient for both culinary and
firefighting purposes. All structures used for human occupancy shall be served
by the city domestic sewage collection system. (Ord. 7-7-98A, 7-7-1998)
ARTICLE C.  FLEXIBLE DESIGN SUBDIVISION PROJECTS
SECTION:
10-6C-1: Intent
10-6C-2: Permitted Uses
10-6C-3: Approval Procedure
10-6C-4: Density And Lot Size
10-6C-5: Building Setbacks
10-6C-1: INTENT:
It is the intent of this article to establish an alternate form of development
of subdivision projects that permit increased flexibility in the layout of such
projects in order to better accommodate the varying needs and desires of lot
purchasers while preserving a quality of residential amenities equal or
superior to that within traditional lot subdivisions. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-
1998)
10-6C-2: PERMITTED USES:
The specific uses permitted within a flexible design subdivision project shall
be limited to those authorized within the zone district in which the project is
located. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
10-6C-3: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
The approval procedure shall be the same as set forth under section
10-6-3 of this chapter. In addition to the requirements of said section, the
project shall conform to the applicable requirements for subdivisions as set
forth under the city subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
10-6C-4: DENSITY AND LOT SIZE:
   A.   Without Common Open Space: The density and lot size requirements within
a flexible design subdivision that meets the open space by the payment of
impact fees shall be as follows:
 
Zone District Max Density (DU/Net Min Lot Area (Sq. Ft.) Max Lot Area (Sq. Ft.)
              Acre)
R-1-11,000    4                   9,000                  0.5 acres
R-1-15,000    2.9                 10,000                 1 acre
PR 2.2        2.5                 12,000                 2 acres
 
   B.   With Common Open Space: The density and lot size requirements within a
flexible design subdivision that meets the open space requirements by providing
common open space shall be as follows:
 
Zone District Max Density (DU/Net Min Lot Area (Sq. Ft.) Max Lot Area (Sq. Ft.)
              Acre)
R-1-11,000    4                   8,000                  0.5 acres
R-1-15,000    2.9                 9,000                  1 acre
PR 2.2        2.5                 11,000                 2 acres
 
   C.   Net Area: For purposes of determining project density, the term "net
area" shall be construed to mean the total project area less the portion
devoted to public streets. (Ord. 3-2-99D, 3-2-1999)
10-6C-5: BUILDING SETBACKS:
   A.   The setback for dwellings upon lots within a flexible design
subdivision project shall conform with the minimum setback requirements within
the zone in which the project is located; Except that the city may approve
setback distances on one or more lots within the project which do not conform
with the minimum requirements of the zone, upon a showing that such adjustment
is reasonably necessary to the proper development of the lots and will not
significantly alter the character of the subdivision or result in a hazardous
condition.
   B.   Each lot for which an adjustment is granted shall show the location of
the approved setback lines on the final plat (designated setback envelope) with
a note to the effect that all portions of the dwelling will be situated within
the boundaries of the designated setback envelope. (Ord. 2-17-98A, 2-17-1998)
ARTICLE D.  PLANNED TOWNSITE PROJECTS
SECTION:
10-6D-1: Intent
10-6D-2: Permitted Uses
10-6D-3: Approval Procedure
10-6D-4: Minimum Project Area
10-6D-5: Density
10-6D-6: Dwelling Mix
10-6D-7: Dwelling Style
10-6D-8: Design Criteria
10-6D-9: Open Space
10-6D-10: Improvement Requirements
10-6D-11: Water Rights Conveyance Requirements
10-6D-12: Documentation Requirements
10-6D-13: Project Evaluation Guidelines
10-6D-1: INTENT:
It is hereby declared to be the intent and purpose of the city council in
authorizing and establishing provisions relating to planned townsite projects
to:
   A.   Provide an alternative form of development of residential housing and
related uses within the city that provides a mixture of housing types in a
setting that encourages efficiency in the use of land; promotes ingenuity in
layout and design of residential neighborhood areas, including an appropriate
mixture of residential and compatible uses and facilities (schools, churches,
parks and recreation areas); encourages preservation of significant open space
area; and do all the above while preserving a quality of residential amenities
equal or superior to that possible under conventional subdivision requirements.
In order to qualify for approval as a planned townsite project it must be
demonstrated that the proposed project will:
      1.   Adequately recognize and incorporate natural conditions present on
the site;
      2.   Efficiently utilize the land resources and provide increased economy
to the public in the delivery of municipal services and utilities;
      3.   Provide a broad variety in the style and quality of residential
dwellings available within the city;
      4.   Preserve significant amounts of both natural and useable open space
area to meet the recreational, scenic and public service needs of project
residents and the general public; and
      5.   Do all the above in a manner that is consistent with the objectives
of the underlying zone and under conditions that will result in the creation of
residential environments of sustained desirability.
   B.   Establish criteria and standards for the design of planned townsite
projects by developers and also guidelines for evaluation of such projects by
the city.
   C.   Establish legal and financial mechanisms to ensure completion of all
elements of a project in accordance with the approved plan (if proposed to be
developed in phases), guarantee preservation of open space and recreation, and
provide a basis for awarding density bonus, where applicable.
   D.   Set forth the duties and responsibilities of developers and residents
with respect to the approval, construction and maintenance of such projects.
   E.   Clearly establish the relationship of the city and the developer with
respect to the review and approval of such projects. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-
2000)
10-6D-2: PERMITTED USES:
The following buildings, structures and uses of land may be permitted within a
planned townsite project:
Any use permitted within the underlying zone and those authorized under this
section.
Common areas and recreational facilities (public and private), including, but
not limited to, golf courses, swimming pools, tennis courts, club houses,
recreational buildings, landscape pond areas and features, and similar
recreational facilities for the use and enjoyment of the residents.
Common utility systems and facilities, recreational vehicle storage area,
private streets (when so provided in the plan), also private driveways serving
individual dwellings, fences, walls, accessory buildings, and similar
structures and uses incidental to the main use.
Public parks, recreation buildings and areas, water tanks and reservoirs,
schools and similar public facilities, when owned and operated by the city, or
if owned and operated by another public governmental agency, following approval
of the city. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
10-6D-3: APPROVAL PROCEDURE:
   A.   The procedure to be followed in securing approval of a planned townsite
project shall be as set forth under section
10-6-3 of this chapter.
   B.   In addition to the requirements of this section, a planned townsite
project that includes the division of land into separate ownership shall also
constitute a subdivision and shall conform to all applicable requirements for
subdivisions. Planned townsite projects that do not include the division of
property shall be considered as a condominium development and shall conform to
all applicable requirements for such projects. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
10-6D-4: MINIMUM PROJECT AREA:
The minimum base area required to qualify for a planned townsite project shall
be two hundred forty (240) acres. Subsequent additions to an existing planned
townsite project shall have no minimum area requirement, except that any such
addition shall constitute a logical design extension of the planned townsite
project. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
10-6D-5: DENSITY:
   A.   Maximum Total Density Of Project: The total number of dwelling units
permitted in a planned townsite project (maximum total density) shall be the
sum of the maximum base density units, determined in accordance with the
provisions of subsection B of this section, plus any density bonus units that
may be approved in accordance with the provisions of subsection C of this
section.
   B.   Base Density: The maximum base density for a project area shall be
determined by the city in accordance with the following criteria:
      1.   H-1 Hillside Zone Area: The maximum base density for a project, or
portion thereof, proposed to be located within the H-1 hillside zone area shall
be determined by the city upon a detailed slope analysis of the proposed
project area, in accordance with the following schedule:
 
Density Slope Category (DU/Net Ac)
0 - 13%       2.5
13 - 21%      2.0
21 - 30%      1.5
30%+          0.2
 
      2.   TR-1 Townsite Residential Zone Area: The maximum density for a
project, or portion thereof, proposed to be located within the TR-1 townsite
residential zone shall be 1.0 dwelling units per gross acre of area within the
project area.
      3.   For purposes of establishing maximum base density for any planned
townsite project, any portion of the project area reserved for commercial,
industrial or other nonproject purpose or proposed for purchase at fair market
value as a school site, church site, public park or a site for similar
nonproject use, shall be excluded when calculating density pursuant to this
section.
   C.   Density Bonus Units Permitted:
      1.   Amount Of Bonus Permitted: A density bonus may be granted by the
city council to a planned townsite project, subject to the prior recommendation
of the planning commission and a finding that the density bonus is justified.
The maximum bonus density (MBD) eligible for award for a specific project shall
be as set forth on the following schedule:
 
Maximum Bonus Amount
Zone District (% Of Base Density)
TR-1 zone     100%
H-1 zone      20%
 
      2.   Bonus Density Criteria: Any award of bonus density shall be as
determined by the city in accordance with one or a combination of the following
density bonus criteria:
 
Maximum Bonus Amount (% MBD) Criteria For Award Of Bonus
1% of MBD for each 1% of natural open By providing additional open space in
space                                 excess of the minimum required.
also           
3% of MBD for each 1% of developed     
usable open space area
                                      By providing significant unique common
                                      private facilities (i.e., tennis court,
                                      swimming pool, community building, etc.)
                                      for the use and benefit of the project
Up to 5% of MBD                       residents and/or public. For purposes of
                                      compliance with this provision, the
                                      providing of turf area or incidental play
                                      apparatus shall not qualify as meeting
                                      this requirement.
                                      By preserving or augmenting natural
                                      vegetation, providing additional land and
                                      vegetation reclamation or community flood
                                      control areas or facilities, in order to
                                      stabilize hillside areas, minimize flood
                                      hazards to the community, preserve
Up to 10% of MBD                      wildlife corridors and habitat and
                                      promote aesthetic value and natural
                                      character of the developed portions of
                                      the project (other than, and in addition
                                      to, the natural open space preservation
                                      areas provided pursuant to other
                                      provisions of this article).
                                      By promoting efficient and effective
                                      traffic patterns, minimizing adverse
Up to 5% of MBD                       traffic impacts, or extreme road cuts and
                                      fills and providing more adequate access
                                      for fire protection purposes or other
                                      substantial public benefit.
                                      By providing a superior project design
                                      and amenities. Where, in the opinion of
                                      the planning commission, the design of
                                      the project and the layout of the various
                                      project elements will result in the
                                      establishment of a spacious, convenient,
                                      safe and economic environment for the
Up to 5% of MBD                       residents, which is clearly consistent
                                      with the stated intent for planned
                                      residential developments and will result
                                      in the creation of a residential
                                      environment of sustained desirability,
                                      the planning commission may recommend
                                      approval of a density bonus amount for
                                      part or all of the amount allocated under
                                      this criteria item.
 
   (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
10-6D-6: DWELLING MIX:
The plan for the planned townsite project shall provide for a mix in the cost/
value of dwelling units (high/moderate income units). Not less than fifteen
percent (15%), nor more than thirty percent (30%) of all dwelling units within
the project shall meet the requirements and qualify as "low and/or moderate
income units", as defined by Utah Code Annotated section 10-9-307, as amended.
(Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
10-6D-7: DWELLING STYLE:
The plan for the townsite residential project shall provide for a mix in
dwelling style (detached single-family dwellings/duplex and twin homes/multi-
family dwellings). Not less than fifteen percent (15%), nor more than thirty
percent (30%) of all dwelling units within the project shall consist of duplex/
twin homes or multi-unit structures. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
10-6D-8: DESIGN CRITERIA:
   A.   Development Cluster Required: All lots and buildings shall be located
within a designated development cluster. A project may contain more than one
development cluster. Each cluster shall contain not less than five (5) separate
lots or building sites.
   B.   Location On Open Space Prohibited: No lot or portion of a project
containing dwellings within a planned townsite project shall be located on
lands that are required to be designated as open space in accordance with the
provisions of section
10-6D-9 of this article.
   C.   Setbacks: Each dwelling in the project shall be setback from the lot
boundary line in accordance with the setback lines as shown on the approved
plat (designated setback envelope). Where no designated building envelope is
provided, the setbacks shall be the same as the minimum requirements within the
underlying zone.
   D.   Open Space Requirements: The design of the project shall incorporate
the open space and all other criteria applicable to planned townsite projects.
(Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
   E.   Street Grade: The grade of all public or private streets, or common
drives or private driveways, shall conform to the requirements for
subdivisions. No public or private street providing access to a development
cluster or any common drive or private driveway within the planned townsite
project shall be constructed in a location or in such a manner that results in
the creation of a slope face that exceeds the critical angle of repose or is
greater than five feet (5'). (Ord. 3-4-2003C, 3-4-2003)
   F.   Road System Design: To the maximum extent possible, the design of the
road system shall provide for continuous circulation throughout the project.
Cul-de-sac streets shall be no longer than four hundred fifty feet (450') and
shall be terminated by a turnaround or loop road of not less than one hundred
feet (100') in diameter, except that longer cul-de-sac lengths may be approved
by the city council where topographic conditions justify, subject to the prior
recommendation of the planning commission. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
   G.   Driveway Slope: Any driveway providing access to a buildable area shall
have a slope of not greater than twelve percent (12%) with no cut or fill slope
greater than five feet (5'). (Ord. 3-4-2003C, 3-4-2003)
   H.   Access: Each lot or building site shall abut upon and have direct
access to a city street or approved private street.
   I.   Flag Lots: A planned townsite project design may contain one or more
"flag lots", subject to the following:
      1.   In the opinion of the city, the use of the flag lot option is
necessary in order to provide access to an area that is eligible for
development but not practically accessible by modification of the road system.
      2.   The building lot portion of the flag lot (flag portion) shall
contain sufficient area to accommodate a dwelling and also provide adequate
setback distances consistent with those in the immediate vicinity.
      3.   The access portion of the flag lot (flagpole portion) shall abut
directly upon and have direct access to a city street or approved private
street for a distance of not less than twenty feet (20'), shall have a minimum
width not less than twenty feet (20'), and be readily capable of meeting the
driveway slope requirements for a buildable area as set forth under subsection
G of this section.
      4.   The access portion of the flag lot (flagpole portion) shall be no
longer than one hundred fifty feet (150') from the abutting street and the
designated building site shall be not less than two hundred fifty feet (250')
from the closest adequate fire hydrant. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
   J.   Guidelines: The applicant, in preparing the design for a planned
townsite project, and the planning commission and city council, in conducting
the reviews and approvals required by this title, shall be guided by the terms
of this title and such guidelines for the design and review of planned townsite
projects, when adopted, which shall be adopted by resolution of the city
council. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000; amd. 2004 Code)
   K.   Easements: The plat shall provide adequate easements for the placement
of utility systems, trails and pedestrian walkways in locations approved by the
city. In the instance where the project plan proposes the placement of
dwellings on individual lots, the plan shall provide adequate front, rear and
side yard utility easements. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
10-6D-9: OPEN SPACE:
   A.   Schedule: A portion of each project area shall be set aside and
maintained as designated open space. The amount of a project area to be set
aside as designated open space shall be as set forth in the following schedule:
 
Zone District Minimum % Of Total Project Area As Common Open Space
H-1           30 percent of total project area
TR-1          30 percent of total project area
 
(Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
   B.   Type Of Open Space Areas:
      1.   The designated open space areas may include natural open space
(applicable to steep hillside, wetland, floodplain area, etc.) and developed
useable open space areas, or a combination thereof. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-
2000; amd. Ord. 8-3-2010A, 8-3-2010)
      2.   When the project area is adjacent to an existing or planned park or
trail, the common open space shall include connections to those existing and
future parks or trails. (Ord. 8-3-2010A, 8-3-2010)
   C.   Included Areas: Regardless of the minimum percent set forth under
subsection A of this section, the designated open space area shall include and
contain all 100-year floodplain areas, defined floodways, all avalanche and
rockfall hazard areas, all areas having a slope of thirty percent (30%) or
greater, or any other area of known significant physical hazard for
development.
   D.   Maintenance: The designated open space area shall be maintained so that
its use and enjoyment as open space is not diminished or destroyed. To assure
that all designated open space area will remain as open space, the applicants/
owners shall either:
      1.   Dedicate or otherwise convey title to the open space area to the
city for open space purposes; or
      2.   Convey ownership of the open space area to the homeowners'
association established as part of the approval of the planned townsite project
or to a third party recipient acceptable to the city; or
      3.   A combination of subsections D1 and D2 of this section.
In the event the alternative in subsection D2 or D3 of this section is used,
the developer shall also execute an open space preservation easement or
agreement with the city, in accordance with the provisions of Utah Code
Annotated title 57, chapter 18, as amended, the effect of which shall be to
acknowledge that all rights for development of housing, commercial or similar
urban use have been transferred from the property, and any excavating, making
additional roadways, installing additional utilities, constructing any
dwellings or other structures, or conducting or allowing the conduct of any
activity that would alter the character of the open space area from that
initially approved, without the prior approval of the city, is prohibited.
The appropriate method for ensuring preservation shall be as determined by the
city at the time of development approval.
   E.   Assessments And Guarantees: Where the proposed open space includes
developed or useable space or facilities (tennis courts, pavilions, swimming
pools) intended for the use by project residents, the organizational documents
shall include provisions for the assessment of adequate fees and performance
guarantees required to secure the construction of required improvements,
including the costs of installation of all landscaping and common amenities.
   F.   Landscaping Plan: A detailed landscaping plan showing the proposed
landscape treatment of all portions of the project proposed to be developed as
useable, common open space shall be submitted as part of the submittal
documents. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
10-6D-10: IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS:
The following improvements shall be constructed in all developments. All such
improvements shall meet minimum city standards and shall be completed within
one year from the date of approval of the final plat by the city council.
Financial assurances (bonds) guaranteeing the construction of all required
public improvements shall be submitted and approved as a condition of final
approval and shall be administered in the same manner as for subdivisions.
   A.   Streets and travelways.
   B.   Water and sewerage mains and facilities.
   C.   Fire hydrants.
   D.   Any required drainage or flood control structures.
   E.   Any required restoration of cut and fill slopes.
   F.   The costs of installing landscaping and common facilities within any
common open space area. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
10-6D-11: WATER RIGHTS CONVEYANCE REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Water rights shall be conveyed to the city in accordance with the
provisions of section
10-6-16 of this chapter.
   B.   Where the proposed development anticipates the buildings to be located
on common property (i.e., condominium ownership), the lot area used to
determine the amount of water rights required to be conveyed shall include the
territory occupied by the dwelling and the area proposed to be occupied as
developed open space. (Ord. 3-4-2003C, 3-4-2003)
10-6D-12: DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS:
The following documents and statements shall be submitted as part of the
application for approval, as applicable:
   A.   Organizational documents (articles of incorporation, bylaws, etc.).
   B.   Open space preservation documents.
   C.   Water rights conveyance documents.
   D.   A pro forma statement identifying the tasks to be performed by the
association and establishing the initial cost for providing the proposed
services, maintenance of common improvements, and association dues, and
including adjustments for cost of living increases. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-
2000)
10-6D-13: PROJECT EVALUATION GUIDELINES:
   A.   Findings: The planning commission shall review the proposal and may
recommend approval upon finding that:
      1.   All plans, documents and other materials required for consideration
have been submitted in a form suitable for evaluation.
      2.   The plan conforms in all respects to the design standards and
criteria applicable to the planned townsite projects.
      3.   The site is suitable for development of a planned townsite project
and that such a project will be consistent with existing development in the
vicinity and compatible with the master plan for the area.
      4.   The arrangement of the buildings, roadways, open space and other
project elements will result in a safe and attractive living environment equal
or superior to that which would be provided under lot by lot development.
      5.   The project, if developed, will accomplish the objectives for
planned townsite projects as stated under section
10-6D-1 of this article.
   B.   Changes: The planning commission may require changes in the plan in
order to more fully accomplish the intent of the planned townsite project. Such
changes may include, but are not limited to, adjustments in the density or the
number of structures, relocation of project elements, redesign of the road
system, increase in the amount of open space and provisions for the disposal of
surface water drainage. (Ord. 8-17-2000A, 8-17-2000)
CHAPTER 7
ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
SECTION:
10-7-1: Application For Building Permit Required
10-7-2: Plans Required
10-7-3: Licenses And Permits To Comply
10-7-4: Recovery Of Damages; Nonliability Of City
10-7-5: Violation
10-7-6: Penalty
10-7-1: APPLICATION FOR BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED:
Any person, partnership, firm or corporation desiring to construct, remodel or
move a building or structure within the territory shown on the official zone
maps to the extent of one hundred dollars ($100.00) or more in replaceable
value shall make application therefor to the chief building official before
commencing construction thereon. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978; amd. 2004 Code)
10-7-2: PLANS REQUIRED:
   A.   All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by plans
that have been drawn to scale showing the actual dimensions of the lot to be
built upon, the size and location of existing buildings, and buildings to be
erected.
   B.   Building permit submittal documents shall comply with the currently
adopted international building codes including being prepared by a registered
design professional.
Exception: Submittal documents for construction completed within the
International Residential Code prescriptive methods shall be prepared in a
professional manner but do not require preparation by a registered design
professional. (Ord. 11-21-2017B, 11-21-2017)
10-7-3: LICENSES AND PERMITS TO COMPLY:
   A.   From the time of the effective date hereof, permits shall not be
granted for the construction or alteration of any building or structure, or for
the moving of a building or structure onto a lot, or for the change in use of
any land, building or structure, if such construction, alteration, moving or
change in use would be a violation of any of the provisions of this title; nor
shall any sewer or water service line or electric utilities be installed to
serve the premises if such use would be a violation of this title.
   B.   No license or permit shall be issued by any official or employee vested
with the duty and authority to issue licenses or permits that would not be in
conformance with the provisions of this title. Any license or permit so issued
shall be null and void. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978)
10-7-4: RECOVERY OF DAMAGES; NONLIABILITY OF CITY:
Any person purchasing a lot or parcel of land who may be injured as the
consequence of a denial of a building permit, which purchase was made pursuant
to inaccurate, incorrect, untrue or fraudulent information on the part of the
seller or his agent, may recover damages from the seller or his agent by civil
action. However, the City shall not be civilly liable for any damages that may
occur as a consequence of the denial of a building permit based upon such
information. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978)
10-7-5: VIOLATION:
Whenever it becomes necessary to enter action in the court in order to obtain
compliance with one or more provisions of this title, the chief building
official shall first refer such matters to the City Attorney and shall
thereafter follow the instructions of the City Attorney with respect thereto.
(Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978; amd. 2004 Code)
10-7-6: PENALTY:
Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this title
shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, is
subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this Code. (Ord. 6-20-78A, 6-20-1978; amd. 2004 Code)
TITLE 11
SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
CHAPTER 1
GENERAL PROVISIONS
SECTION:
11-1-1: Title
11-1-2: Intent
11-1-3: Subdivision Plats Required; Exceptions
11-1-4: Penalty
11-1-1: TITLE:
This title shall be entitled the SUBDIVISION ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF CEDAR
HILLS, UTAH, and may be so cited and pleaded. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
11-1-2: INTENT:
The intent of this title is as follows:
   A.   To facilitate the orderly development of the city in accordance with
the city general plan.
   B.   To facilitate circulation and transportation.
   C.   To help avoid congestion within the city.
   D.   To facilitate the transfer of the ownership of building sites.
   E.   To facilitate the provision for water, sewer, drainage, utilities and
other services.
   F.   To establish the rights, duties and responsibilities of subdividers
with respect to the development of land. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
11-1-3: SUBDIVISION PLATS REQUIRED; EXCEPTIONS:
From the effective date hereof, no person shall subdivide any tract of land
that is located wholly or in part within the limits of the city, nor shall any
person sell, exchange or offer for sale or purchase, or offer to purchase any
parcel of land that is any part of a subdivision of a larger tract of land
within the city, nor shall any person offer for recording any deed conveying
such a parcel of land or any interest therein unless he shall first make or
cause to have made a final plat thereof, which plat shall be in accordance with
all of the requirements of this title and state statute, and shall have been
approved by the planning commission and city council, and recorded in the
office of the county recorder; provided, however, that land may be sold by
metes and bounds without the necessity of recording a final plat if all the
following conditions are met:
   A.   A buildable lot or parcel cannot be created by exclusively using metes
and bounds. City services shall not be extended to parcels created exclusively
by metes and bounds. If city services are already in place, the metes and
bounds parcel will be billed at the nonresident rate;
   B.   The subdivision layout, complying with the requirements for a
preliminary plan as set forth in this title, shall have been first approved in
writing by the planning commission;
   C.   The subdivision is not traversed by the mapped lines of a proposed
street as shown on the official map or maps of the city;
   D.   The subdivision does not require the dedication of any land for street
or other public purposes;
   E.   Each lot in the subdivision meets the frontage, width and area
requirements set forth under the zoning provisions of this code, or has been
granted a variance from requirements by the hearing officer; and
   F.   All improvements required under
chapter 7 of this title shall have been installed or assurances given to the
city that said required improvements will be installed without cost to the city
as provided for in
chapter 3 of this title.
(Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979; amd. 2004 Code; Ord. 3-16-2010A, 3-16-2010; Ord. 07-
07-2020A, 7-7-2020)
11-1-4: PENALTY:
   A.   Any person, firm or corporation who shall transfer or sell any lot or
land in a "subdivision", as defined in section
11-2-1 of this title, which subdivision has not been approved by the planning
commission and except as provided for in section
11-1-3 of this chapter, also approved by the city council and recorded in the
office of the county recorder, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and,
upon conviction, subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code, for each lot or parcel of land so transferred or sold, and
the description of such lot or parcel of land by metes and bounds in the
instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or
transferring, shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties, or from the
remedies herein provided. The city may enjoin such transfer or sale or
agreement by action of injunction brought in any court or equity jurisdiction
or may recover the said penalty by civil action in any court of competent
jurisdiction.
   B.   Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this
title shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof,
shall be subject to penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979; amd. 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 2
DEFINITIONS
SECTION:
11-2-1: Definitions
11-2-1: DEFINITIONS:
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following
meaning unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
OFF SITE FACILITIES: Facilities designed or located so as to serve other
property outside of the boundaries of the subdivision; usually lying between
the development and existing facilities.
ON SITE FACILITIES: Facilities installed within or on the perimeter of the
subdivision.
OVERSIZE FACILITIES: Facilities with added capacity designed to serve other
property, in addition to the land within the boundaries of the subdivision.
SUBDIVIDER; DEVELOPER: Any person laying out or making a subdivision.
SUBDIVISION: A. Any land that is divided, resubdivided or proposed to be
divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, or other
division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer, sale,
lease, or development either on the installment plan or upon any and all other
plans, terms, and conditions.
   B.   Subdivision" includes:
      1.   The division or development of land whether by deed, metes and
bounds description, devise and testacy, lease, map, plat, or other recorded
instrument; and
      2.   Except as provided in subsection C of this definition, divisions of
land for all residential and nonresidential uses, including land used or to be
used for commercial, agricultural and industrial purposes.
   C.   "Subdivision" does not include:
      1.   A bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for the
purpose of joining one of the resulting separate parcels to a contiguous parcel
of unsubdivided agricultural land, if neither the resulting combined parcel nor
the parcel remaining from the division or partition violates an applicable
zoning ordinance;
      2.   A recorded agreement between owners of adjoining properties
adjusting their mutual boundary if:
    a. No new lot is created; and
    b. The adjustment does not result in a violation of applicable zoning
ordinances; or
      3.   A recorded document, executed by the owner of record, revising the
legal description of more than one contiguous parcel of property into one legal
description encompassing all such parcels of property.
   D.   The joining of a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of
property that has not been subdivided does not constitute a "subdivision" under
this definition as to the unsubdivided parcel of property or subject the
unsubdivided parcel to the city's subdivision ordinance. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-
1979; amd. Ord. 1-13-93B, 1-13-1993; 2004 Code)
CHAPTER 3
COSTS AND CHARGES OF DEVELOPMENT
SECTION:
11-3-1: Costs And Charges Of Development
11-3-1: COSTS AND CHARGES OF DEVELOPMENT:
Costs and charges in connection with the planning and development of
subdivisions shall be shared between the subdivider and the city according to
the following schedule:
 
Plan Or Facility Subdivider City
1. Preparation of         100 percent                0 percent
vicinity plan
2. Preparation of
preliminary plan and      100 percent                0 percent
improvement drawings
3. Easements and rights
of way "on site" and "off 100 percent                0 percent
site"
4. Preparation of final
plat and final            100 percent                0 percent
engineering drawings and
documents
                                                     Special negotiations with
                                                     city council for all
5. Grading and draining   100 percent for all        grading and drainage work
streets "on site"         minor and collector        over estimated costs of
                                                     minor and collector
                                                     streets
6. Grading and draining   Special negotiations with  Special negotiations with
streets "off site"        city council               city council
                                                     Special negotiations with
                                                     city council for the costs
                          100 percent for all        of bridges and culverts in
7. Bridges and culverts   minor and collector        excess of the cost of such
                          streets                    facilities required for
                                                     minor and collector
                                                     streets
8. Street paving          100 percent                0 percent
9. Curb and gutter and    100 percent                0 percent
curb cuts
10. Sidewalk              100 percent                0 percent
11. Street signs          100 percent                0 percent
12. Water supply          Convey water rights to     City accepts entitlement
                          city
                                                     For lines in excess of
                                                     those required to be
                                                     installed by subdivider,
                                                     special negotiations with
                          100 percent for installing city council for
                          size of lines required to  difference between cost of
13. Water and sewer       serve subdivisions or      installing size of lines
                          standard size lines,       required for the
                          whichever is greater       subdivision and those
                                                     required by the city -
                                                     subject to repayment
                                                     provisions as set forth
                                                     under the water and sewer
                                                     resolution
                                                     For lines in excess of
                                                     those required to be
                          100 percent for            installed by subdivider -
                          installing size of lines   special negotiations with
                          required to serve          city council for
                          subdivision or standard    difference between cost of
14. Water and sewer       size lines, whichever is   installing size of lines
mains, off site           greater - subject to       required for the
                          repayment provisions as    subdivision and those
                          set forth under the water  required by the city -
                          and sewer resolution       subject to repayment
                                                     provisions as set forth
                                                     under the water and sewer
                                                     resolution
                          100 percent for            100 percent for
15. Street lighting       easements and rights of    maintenance of lights
                          way and installation of    after installation
                          facilities
16. Electric utilities    100 percent                0 percent
17. Parks                 0 percent                  100 percent
18. Monuments             100 percent                0 percent
19. Canal and flood       Special negotiations with  Special negotiations with
channel protection        city council               city council
20. Elimination of other  Special negotiations with  Special negotiations with
environmental hazards     city council               city council
21. As constructed        100 percent                0 percent
drawings
 
(Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
CHAPTER 4
PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL; PLANS AND PLATS
SECTION:
11-4-1: Discuss Proposal With City Planner
11-4-2: Concept Plan
11-4-3: Preliminary Plan And Improvement Drawings
11-4-4: Final Plat, Engineering Drawings And Documents
11-4-5: Performance Guarantee
11-4-1: DISCUSS PROPOSAL WITH CITY PLANNER:
Any person wishing to subdivide land within the city shall secure from the city
planner, or designee, information pertaining to the city plan of streets,
parks, drainage, zoning and other master plan requirements affecting the land
to be subdivided. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979; amd. 2004 Code)
11-4-2: CONCEPT PLAN:
   A.   Preparation: The subdivider shall then prepare a concept plan and shall
submit fifteen (15) copies of the same to the planning commission not less than
fourteen (14) days prior to the next regularly scheduled planning commission
meeting. Said plan shall be prepared in accordance with city standards as
adopted by resolution of the city council.
   B.   Obtain Planning Commission Approval: The planning commission shall
review the concept plan within thirty one (31) days from the date of submission
to the planning commission and shall act to: 1) approve the plan; 2) disapprove
the plan; 3) approve the plan subject to modification; or 4) where considered
necessary or desirable, act to table further consideration of the plan. Failure
of the planning commission to take one of the above actions within the
specified time shall constitute a finding of approval. Approval of the concept
plan shall not be construed to constitute approval of the subdivision, but
shall be deemed as an expression of approval of the basic concept and general
layout of the proposed subdivision, which the subdivider may use as a guide in
the preparation of the preliminary plan.
   C.   Content Format: In addition to what is required in this section, all
plans and documents shall be submitted to staff in an electronic form, the file
format and quality shall be determined by the city planner or designee. All
submissions shall be required at the time specified in subsection A of this
section. (Ord. 10-7-2008A, 10-7-2008)
11-4-3: PRELIMINARY PLAN AND IMPROVEMENT DRAWINGS:
   A.   Preparation; Content; Standards:
      1.   Upon approval of the concept plan by the planning commission, the
subdivider shall prepare a preliminary plan of the subdivision and shall submit
fifteen (15) copies of the same to the planning commission not less than
fourteen (14) days prior to the next regularly scheduled planning commission
meeting. Said plan shall contain:
         a.   A preliminary layout plan.
         b.   Preliminary drawings showing proposed public improvements.
         c.   Proposed schedule for construction of required public
improvements.
         d.   Evidence of payment of preliminary review fee.
         e.   Evidence of ability to satisfy water conveyance requirements.
         f.   Any other material or information required by the planning
commission and/or city engineer.
      2.   All plans, documents and other data shall be prepared in accordance
with city standards. Failure to submit all required material prepared in
accordance with the city standards shall be grounds for denial.
      3.   In addition to what is required in this section, all plans and
documents shall be submitted to staff in an electronic form, the file format
and quality shall be determined by the city planner or designee. All
submissions shall be required at the time specified in this subsection. (Ord.
10-7-2008A, 10-7-2008)
   B.   Obtain Planning Commission Approval:
      1.   The planning commission shall review the preliminary plan within
thirty one (31) days from the date of the submission of the preliminary plan
and shall act to: a) approve the plan; b) disapprove the plan; c) approve the
plan subject to modification; or d) where considered necessary, act to table
further consideration of the plan. Approval or denial of the plan shall be
based upon compliance with the general plan and with the standards and
conditions of approval. If disapproved, the planning commission shall express
its reasons therefor to the subdivider. Failure of the planning commission to
act upon the preliminary plan within the time specified shall be construed as
to constitute approval of the basic subdivision layout only. Such approval
through inaction of the planning commission shall not exempt the plan or the
subdivider from compliance with all other procedures, standards, specifications
and requirements for subdivisions adopted as part of or pursuant to this title.
      2.   Where a subdivider owns or controls more land than he wishes to
develop immediately, the planning commission may require that a preliminary
plan of the whole area be submitted, in which case the subdivider shall
indicate on the preliminary plan the portion to be developed immediately and
the portion to be held for future development. Whenever final approval has been
obtained on any part of an approved preliminary plan, approval of the remaining
part of said preliminary plan shall remain in effect for a period of one year.
      3.   For subdivisions not requiring the recording of a final plat in the
office of the county recorder (see section
11-1-3 of this title), action by the planning commission to approve the
subdivision shall be considered only as tentative approval of the preliminary
plan. Final approval of said preliminary plan shall not be given by the
planning commission until:
         a.   A performance guarantee, complying with provisions of subsection
11-4-5B of this chapter shall have been accepted by the city council.
         b.   A tracing of the proposed subdivision shall have been received by
the planning commission. Said tracing shall be prepared in accordance with city
standards for minor subdivision plans.
         c.   Notification shall have been received from the city engineer that
the requirements relating to the conveyance of water have been satisfactorily
complied with.
         d.   A motion to give final approval to said subdivision shall have
been duly executed by the planning commission and such action noted on the
tracing of said subdivision plan. The signature of the chairperson of the
planning commission on said tracing shall constitute final approval of the
preliminary plan. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979; amd. 2004 Code)
11-4-4: FINAL PLAT, ENGINEERING DRAWINGS AND DOCUMENTS:
   A.   Preparation; Content; Submittal:
      1.   Upon approval of the preliminary plan by the planning commission,
the subdivider shall prepare the final plat, final engineering drawings and
documents, and shall submit copies of the same to the planning commission not
less than fourteen (14) days prior to the next regularly scheduled planning
commission meeting. Said plats, drawings and documents shall include:
         a.   Two (2) large prints and fifteen (15) eleven inch by seventeen
inch (11" x 17") prints of the final plat.
         b.   Two (2) copies of the final engineering drawings.
         c.   Itemized estimate of the cost of constructing all required public
improvements.
         d.   Evidence of payment of final plat fees.
         e.   Documents conveying water to the city.
      2.   The required copies of the final plans, plats and documents shall be
prepared in accordance with city standards. Failure to submit the final
material in accordance with said standards shall be grounds for denial.
      3.   In addition to what is required in this section, all plans and
documents shall be submitted to staff in an electronic form, the file format
and quality shall be determined by the city planner or designee. All
submissions shall be required at the time specified in this subsection. If any
changes are required to be made, by the planning commission, city council, or
staff, to any of the submitted documents, a final electronic copy of those
documents shall be required to be submitted to staff. (Ord. 10-7-2008A, 10-7-
2008)
   B.   Planning Commission Action:
      1.   The planning commission shall review the final plat, final
engineering drawings and documents within thirty one (31) days of submission
and shall act to: 1) approve the plan; 2) disapprove the plan; 3) approve the
plan subject to modification; or 4) where considered necessary, act to table
further consideration of the plan. If disapproved, the planning commission
shall state its reasons therefor to the subdivider.
      2.   Upon approval by the planning commission, said commission shall sign
the plat and shall forward the plat to the city council with recommendation
that the plat be approved and the proposed dedications accepted.
   C.   City Council Action:
      1.   The city council shall review the final plat and shall act to
tentatively approve or disapprove the plat or tentatively approve it with
modification. If disapproved, the city council shall state its reasons therefor
to the subdivider. If modifications are required, such modification must first
be referred to and accepted by the planning commission.
      2.   Tentative approval by the city council shall be in the form of a
motion duly entered in the minutes of the city council. The effect of such a
motion shall be:
         a.   To indicate city council approval of the layout of the
subdivision.
         b.   To indicate that the requirements relating to the conveyance of
water to the city have been satisfactorily complied with.
         c.   To authorize the subdivider to post bond or other financial
assurances guaranteeing that all required improvements will be installed.
         d.   To authorize the mayor when so stated in the motion to sign the
final plat, and accept all dedications to the public upon the posting of the
required performance guarantees and to record the final plat in the office of
the county recorder.
   D.   Mayor Signs Final Plat; Recording: After financial assurances have been
posted, the mayor shall, when so authorized by the approval motion, sign the
final plat and the city recorder shall, within a reasonable time thereafter,
submit said plat for recording in the office of the county recorder. The
signature of the mayor on the final plat shall constitute final approval. (Ord.
4-11-79A, 4-24-1979; amd. 2004 Code)
11-4-5: PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE:
   A.   Subdivisions Requiring Final Plat: Upon tentative approval of the final
plat by the city council, the subdivider shall post a bond or other financial
assurance acceptable to the city council with the city recorder guaranteeing
construction of the required improvements (see title 9, chapter 2 of this
code).
   B.   Subdivision Not Requiring Final Plat: Upon passage of a motion by the
planning commission to tentatively approve the preliminary plan, the subdivider
shall post a bond or other financial assurance acceptable to the city council
with the city recorder guaranteeing construction of the required improvements
(see title 9, chapter 2 of this code). (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
CHAPTER 5
DOCUMENTATION AND DESIGN REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
11-5-1: Documentation Requirements
11-5-2: Design Requirements
11-5-1: DOCUMENTATION REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Scope: The content of all required submittal documents (i.e., concept
plan, preliminary plan and improvement drawings, final plat and engineering
drawings and bond documents) shall be in accordance with city standards as
directed by the planning commission or its authorized representative.
   B.   Technical Reports Required In H-1 Zone Area 1 :
      1.   Maps And Technical Reports Required: In addition to all other
materials required for submission, when the proposed subdivision is situated
partially or wholly within the H-1 zone, the following maps and technical
reports shall also be provided:
         a.   Geotechnical report.
         b.   Engineering geology report.
         c.   Grading and drainage plan.
         d.   Natural conditions analysis map. (Ord. 1-13-93B, 1-13-1993)
         e.   Traffic analysis report. (Ord. 5-18-2010A, 5-18-2010)
      2.   Standards: The scope and content of these required technical reports
and plans shall be in accordance with city standards.
      3.   Waiver: The planning commission, subject to the prior recommendation
of the city engineer, may waive the necessity for submitting one or more of the
technical reports or any element of a report where, in its opinion, conditions
associated with the proposed subdivision do not require consideration of the
subject matter covered.
      4.   Review By City Engineer: The plans and technical reports required
herein shall be reviewed by the city engineer for the purpose of making a
determination as to the adequacy of the reports and recommendations relating to
the proposed project. Prior to the time of action by the planning commission,
the city engineer shall provide to the planning commission a written or oral
report of the results and conclusions of the review, together with any
recommendations for amendment of the technical reports or subdivision project.
      5.   Further Review: If the city engineer concludes that the
determinations required by this chapter require further review by professionals
having qualifications not possessed by the city staff, he may designate a
qualified person to make the required determination.
      6.   Appeal: Any person dissatisfied with a determination made by the
city engineer may appeal the same within thirty (30) days to the city council.
(Ord. 1-13-93B, 1-13-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 10, chapter 4, article D of this code.
11-5-2: DESIGN REQUIREMENTS:
   A.   Scope: The layout and design of all subdivision projects shall be in
accordance with city standards as directed by the planning commission or its
authorized representative.
   B.   Special Design Requirements In H-1 Zone 1 : The following design
standards shall apply to subdivisions within the H-1 zone; provided, that where
the provisions of this subsection conflict with other provisions of this title,
these provisions shall prevail:
      1.   General Design Criteria:
         a.   Each lot in the subdivision shall comply with the minimum
requirements for a zoning lot as set forth under the zoning ordinance,
including, but not limited to, the minimum size, width, buildable area,
frontage, access, utility and special requirements.
         b.   The design shall recognize and accommodate all significant
environmental conditions known or identified in the technical reports.
      2.   Streets:
         a.   Wherever possible, street alignments should be parallel to
contours, in valleys or along ridges, and the street system should be designed
to produce minimal impact with environmental constraints (i.e., large cut
faces, extensive removal of natural vegetation, concentration of drainage
waters).
         b.   Streets shall not be located on land having a slope greater than
thirty percent (30%), except that the city may approve the placement of streets
in such locations provided:
            (1)   It has been demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city that
the placement of the roadway in the proposed location is necessary for the
proper development of the area and there is no feasible alternate alignment
that conforms with the slope requirement;
            (2)   No cut or fill slope created as part of the construction of
the street shall exceed the critical angle of repose; and
            (3)   It has been demonstrated that the plan provides adequate
measures to ensure that all disturbed surfaces will be stabilized, erosion
hazard eliminated, vegetation restored and other environmental hazards
accommodated. (Ord. 1-13-93B, 1-13-1993)
         c.   No public street, common drive or private street shall have a
grade greater than eight percent (8%), except that the city council may approve
a grade of up to twelve percent (12%) for "short stretches" where, in the
opinion of the city council, compliance with the eight percent (8%) standard
would result in excessive cut or fill slopes. For purposes of this section,
"short stretches" shall be construed to mean a distance of less than five
hundred feet (500') or fifty percent (50%) of any street segment (portion of a
street located between 2 intersecting streets), whichever is less. Cul-de-sacs
or dead end streets shall have a maximum grade of eight percent (8%) and the
bulb or turnaround portion at the end of the street segment shall have a
maximum grade of four percent (4%).
         d.   All public streets, common drives, private streets and private
driveways shall be designed and constructed in accordance with city standards.
(Ord. 3-4-2003B, 3-4-2003)
         e.   Sidewalks of not less than four feet (4') in width shall be
constructed adjacent to all streets; provided, that on minor streets that
provide access to lots on one side only, the city may waive the requirements
for the construction of a sidewalk on the nonaccess side.
         f.   Where the road is located in a cut or fill area, the graded
roadbed shall extend not less than three feet (3') beyond the curb face or edge
of sidewalk, as applicable, on the fill side and two feet (2') on the cut side.
         g.   Cul-de-sac shall have a maximum length of one thousand feet
(1,000') and shall be terminated with a suitable turnaround having a diameter
of not less that one hundred ten feet (110'). (Ord. 1-13-93B, 1-13-1993)
         h.   Cul-de-sacs or dead end streets shall have a maximum average
daily traffic (ADT) of two hundred fifty (250) trips or less. City owned
facilities or parcels having access via cul-de-sacs or dead end streets shall
be exempt, and trips generated by city use shall not be included in the maximum
ADT because the city may close public facilities in the event of a safety or
emergency situation. (Ord. 5-18-2010A, 5-18-2010)
      3.   Grading:
         a.   All land surface having a slope of thirty percent (30%) or
greater shall remain in its natural state and shall not be graded or otherwise
disturbed, except for the planting of additional vegetation, the addition of
sprinkler irrigation systems, the establishment of required fire breaks or
access easements, or when such disturbance is specifically provided for under
the approved plan. (Ord. 1-13-93B, 1-13-1993)
         b.   No grading, filling or excavation of any kind shall be commenced
without first having obtained a grading permit from the city engineer, who
shall not issue such permit until the final grading and drainage plan, endorsed
by a licensed civil engineer, submitted as a part of the preliminary plat, is
approved by the planning commission. (Ord. 1-13-93B, 1-13-1993; amd. 2004 Code)
         c.   Fill areas shall be prepared by removing organic material such as
vegetation, rubbish and other material that is determined by the city engineer
detrimental to proper compaction or otherwise not conductive to stability. No
rock or similar irreducible material with a maximum diameter greater than
twelve inches (12") shall be used as a fill material in fills that are intended
to provide structural strength.
         d.   All rough street and site grading shall be completed prior to the
installation of utilities.
         e.   Fills shall be compacted to at least ninety five percent (95%) of
AASHTO T180 density for those areas intended as structural foundations,
including roadways.
         f.   The surface of cut slopes shall be no steeper than two and one-
half (21/2) horizontal to one vertical. Subsurface drainage shall be provided
as necessary for stability.
         g.   The surface of fill slopes shall be not steeper than two (2)
horizontal to one vertical.
         h.   Slope easements will be provided of sufficient width on both
sides of a street so that tops and toes of cut and fill slopes shall be set
back from the slope easement boundary a distance of ten feet (10').
         i.   Borrowing for fill shall be prohibited unless the material is
obtained from a cut permitted under an approved grading plan obtained for some
purpose other than to produce fill material, or imported from outside the
hillside area of the zone.
         j.   Cut slopes shall be constructed to eliminate sharp angles of
intersection with the existing terrain and shall be rounded and contoured as
necessary to blend with existing topography to the maximum extent possible.
      4.   Drainage:
         a.   Required stormwater runoff collection facilities shall be
designed so as to retain on site the stormwater runoff resulting from a 100-
year frequency storm for a sufficient length of time so as to prevent flooding
and erosion.
         b.   Required stormwater runoff collection facilities shall be so
designed as to divert surface water from cut faces or sloping surfaces of a
fill. French drains are not acceptable.
         c.   Curb, gutter and pavement designs shall be such that water on
roadways is prevented from flowing off the roadways.
         d.   Natural drainage shall be riprapped or otherwise stabilized to
the satisfaction of the city engineer below drainage and culvert discharge
points for a distance sufficient to convey the discharge without channel
erosion.
         e.   Waste material from construction, including soil and other solid
waste materials, shall not be deposited within a natural or manmade drainage
course, nor within irrigation channels.
         f.   Sediment catchment ponds shall be constructed downstream from
each development, unless sediment retention facilities are otherwise provided.
      5.   Vegetation And Revegetation:
         a.   Every effort shall be made to conserve topsoil that is removed
during construction for later use on areas requiring vegetation or landscaping,
e.g., cut and fill slopes.
         b.   New planting shall be protected with organic cover.
         c.   All disturbed soil surfaces shall be stabilized and revegetated.
Plans for the revegetation of all disturbed slopes shall be submitted as part
of the grading and drainage plan.
      6.   Fire Protection:
         a.   The placement of buildings on lots shall be such that adequate
clearance of hazardous, flammable vegetative cover may be accomplished.
         b.   The city may require the dedication of easements for firebreaks
for safety of built up areas. Such easement shall provide access for
firefighting personnel and equipment and shall be dedicated for this specific
purpose by being recorded in the office of the county recorder.
         c.   The inability to provide fire line water pressure and fire flows
consistent with the standards set by the city fire code shall be justification
for denial of a subdivision request.
      7.   Access Easements: The city may require the dedication of easements
adjacent to the borders of lots adjoining public lands for the purpose of
providing public access to said public lands. Said easements may be those
required for fire safety set forth under subsection B6 of this section. (Ord.
1-13-93B, 1-13-1993)
 
Notes
1 1. See also title 10, chapter 4, article D of this code.
CHAPTER 6
SUBDIVISION REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
11-6-1: Standards And Specifications
11-6-2: Streets To Be Dedicated; Exceptions
11-6-3: Lots To Abut Approved Streets
11-6-4: Amended Plats
11-6-5: Maintenance Of Private Roads By City Prohibited
11-6-6: Work To Be Done By Engineer Or Surveyor
11-6-7: Developer Responsible For Quality Of Construction
11-6-8: Water Rights Conveyed To City; Exceptions
11-6-9: Review Fees
11-6-1: STANDARDS AND SPECIFICATIONS:
   A.   Adoption Of Manual:
      1.   The city hereby adopts the "design standards and public improvements
specifications" ("the manual") for the city, version February 1999, as amended
from time to time, and authorizes the enforcement of said manual;
      2.   Three (3) copies of the manual shall be retained in the city offices
at all times for public review.
   B.   Failure To Conform To Design Standards: For failure to conform to the
design standards and regulations set forth in the manual, the city engineer, or
his designee, may:
      1.   Suspend or revoke all construction activities;
      2.   Issue a stop order;
      3.   Order removal and replacement of faulty work;
      4.   Require an extended warranty period; and/or
      5.   Negotiate a cash settlement to be applied toward future maintenance
costs.
   C.   Appeal Of Suspension, Revocation Or Stop Order: Any suspension,
revocation or stop order by the city engineer may be appealed by the
constructing party to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal
within ten (10) days of the action of the city engineer. The city council shall
hear such appeal, if written request therefor be timely filed, as soon as
practicable, and render his/her decision within a reasonable time following
filing of notice of appeal.
   D.   Penalty: Unless otherwise specified, a violation of any provision of
this chapter, or failure to comply with an order of suspension, revocation or
stop work, shall be a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, subject to
penalty as provided in section
1-4-1 of this code. Each day the violation exists shall be a separate offense.
No criminal conviction shall excuse the person from otherwise complying with
the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2-16-99A, 2-16-1999; amd. 2004 Code)
11-6-2: STREETS TO BE DEDICATED; EXCEPTIONS:
All streets within the subdivision shall be dedicated for public use, except as
may be approved as a common drive or private street in a planned residential
development. All public and private streets shall conform to the minimum
standards for width, except that the city council may approve partial width
streets, subject to the following conditions:
   A.   The proposed partial width street is located at the border of the
subdivision;
   B.   The width of the proposed partial width street shall be sufficient to
accommodate the minimum travelway and all utility lines in the location
required under city standards; and
   C.   There are no existing conditions that would prevent the subsequent
development of the remaining portion of the street. (Ord. 3-4-2003B, 3-4-2003)
11-6-3: LOTS TO ABUT APPROVED STREETS:
Each lot in the subdivision shall abut upon a public street, private street or
common drive that has been approved by the city. Interior lots having frontage
on two (2) streets shall be prohibited, except where topographic conditions
make such design desirable. (Ord. 3-4-2003B, 3-4-2003)
11-6-4: AMENDED PLATS:
No change shall be made in a plat that has received final approval unless and
until approval for said change has been given by the planning commission and
city council, and any change in a plat that has been recorded shall first
require that the plat be vacated in accordance with the applicable provisions
of Utah Code Annotated and a new plat of the territory approved and filed in
accordance with the procedures and requirements of this code. (Ord. 4-11-79A,
4-24-1979)
11-6-5: MAINTENANCE OF PRIVATE ROADS BY CITY PROHIBITED:
No officer or employee of the city shall enter upon a common drive, private
road or driveway for the purpose of constructing or maintaining the same,
unless and until such common drive, private road or driveway shall have been
made to comply with the standards for public streets and accepted as a public
street by the city council; provided, however, that the city may construct or
maintain public water, sewer or similar city utilities located within a common
drive, private road or driveway if a public utility easement for such utility
has been granted. (Ord. 3-4-2003B, 3-4-2003)
11-6-6: WORK TO BE DONE BY ENGINEER OR SURVEYOR:
All engineering work must be done by or under direction of a registered
professional engineer registered in the state. All land survey work must be
done by or under the direction of a registered land surveyor registered in the
state. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
11-6-7: DEVELOPER RESPONSIBLE FOR QUALITY OF CONSTRUCTION:
The developer shall be responsible for the quality of all materials and
workmanship. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
11-6-8: WATER RIGHTS TO BE CONVEYED TO CITY; EXCEPTIONS:
   A.   Intent: It is the intent of this provision to provide a mechanism
whereby the city may acquire sufficient water rights to accommodate the needs
of the future inhabitants of the proposed subdivision.
   B.   Requirement: An entitlement, acceptable to the city council, to the
perpetual use of water in amount as set forth in accordance with city standards
shall be conveyed to the city as a condition of final plat approval. (Ord. 4-
11-79A, 4-24-1979)
   C.   In Lieu Of Water Right: In the event that the city shall have acquired
water rights in excess of the amount needed to meet the current demand, the
city may accept a cash payment in lieu of the actual conveyance of water
rights. The amount of the in lieu payment shall be as established by action of
the city council. (Ord. 3-4-2003B, 3-4-2003)
11-6-9: REVIEW FEES:
All costs for the processing subdivision proposals and the administration of
this title shall be borne by the subdivider. The city council may, by
resolution, establish fees for that purpose and provide for the assessment and
collection thereof. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
CHAPTER 7
IMPROVEMENT REQUIREMENTS
SECTION:
11-7-1: Scope
11-7-2: Time Of Completion; Extensions
11-7-3: Streets
11-7-4: Sewer Mains And Sewage Disposal
11-7-5: Water Mains
11-7-6: Curb, Gutter And Sidewalk
11-7-7: Fire Hydrants
11-7-8: Permanent Survey Monuments
11-7-9: Streetlights
11-7-10: Environmental Hazards
11-7-11: Electric, Gas And Telephone
11-7-12: Street Signs
11-7-13: Fences Adjacent To Parks And Trails
11-7-1: SCOPE:
The following improvements shall be installed in all subdivisions. Improvements
shall meet minimum city standards for quality and shall be installed in
accordance with city standards and specifications, as directed by the city
engineer. (Ord. 4-23-80B, 4-23-1980)
11-7-2: TIME OF COMPLETION; EXTENSIONS:
   A.   All required improvements shall be completed within one year from the
date of final approval of the subdivision; provided, however, an extension of
the time, not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days, may be granted by the
city council upon application by the subdivider, submitted at least sixty (60)
days prior to the expiration of the guarantee and provided the issuer of the
guarantee is willing to extend the time of the assurance.
   B.   The city council may, upon appeal of the subdivider, grant a limited
extension of the time limit, not to exceed sixty (60) days, without the
necessity of filing the sixty (60) day notice as required above, when it is
determined by the city council that failure to perform is due to conditions
beyond the control of the subdivider. (Ord. 4-23-80B, 4-23-1980)
11-7-3: STREETS:
All streets shall be graded and paved and all required culverts and
drainageways installed as required by the city. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
11-7-4: SEWER MAINS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL:
Both off site and on site sewer mains of not less than eight inches (8") in
diameter shall be installed in such a way that each lot may be served
therefrom. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
11-7-5: WATER MAINS:
Both off site and on site water mains of not less than six inches (6") in
diameter shall be installed in such a way that each lot can be served
therefrom. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
11-7-6: CURB, GUTTER AND SIDEWALK:
All streets shall be bordered by an approved curb, gutter and sidewalk. (Ord.
4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
11-7-7: FIRE HYDRANTS:
Fire hydrants shall be installed at all locations indicated on the preliminary
plan. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
11-7-8: PERMANENT SURVEY MONUMENTS:
Not less than two (2) permanent survey monuments shall be installed in each
subdivision. The location of the monuments shall be shown on the final plat.
Also, all corners on the subdivision and all lot corners in the subdivision
shall be marked. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
11-7-9: STREETLIGHTS:
Streetlights shall be installed at all locations indicated on the preliminary
plan. The location, design and size shall be is accordance with city standards.
(Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
11-7-10: ENVIRONMENTAL HAZARDS:
Environmental hazards must be eliminated as required by the planning commission
as follows:
   A.   No cut or fill slopes shall be constructed in a location or in such a
manner that produces a slope face exceeding the critical angle of repose
unless, in the opinion of the planning commission, adequate measures will be
taken to prevent the soil from moving under force of gravity until such slope
is stabilized. All cut and fill slopes shall be covered with topsoil and
reseeded to the same extent as the prior existing natural conditions unless, in
the opinion of the planning commission, alternative or additional treatment of
the slope is necessary to avoid the creation of a significant soil erosion,
flood or other environmental hazard.
   B.   Location of streets and buildings on unstable soil shall be avoided.
   C.   Surface water produced from the subdivision development shall be
properly disposed within the subdivision or shall be drained into natural
channels in a manner that will reduce the exposure to flood hazard and will
prevent the soil within and outside of the subdivision from eroding, and will
not produce an undue flood hazard to adjacent properties.
   D.   The subdivision layout shall make adequate provision for natural
drainage channels and floodways.
   E.   All water, sewer and other utility systems and facilities located in
flood hazard areas shall be designed to minimize infiltration of floodwater
into the system, or discharge of the system into the floodwaters.
   F.   Other environmental hazards must also be eliminated or adequately
handled as directed by the planning commission. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
11-7-11: ELECTRIC, GAS AND TELEPHONE:
Electric power, gas and telephone shall be provided to each lot. All lines and
appurtenant facilities shall be located underground, except when the subdivider
can show that the placement underground is not physically feasible. All
facilities shall conform to minimum city standards. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979;
amd. 2004 Code)
11-7-12: STREET SIGNS:
Street signs shall be installed at all locations indicated on the preliminary
plan. The location and design of said signs shall conform to minimum city
standards. (Ord. 4-11-79A, 4-24-1979)
11-7-13: FENCES ADJACENT TO PARKS AND TRAILS:
Where a subdivision borders upon an existing or proposed city park, trail, or
major street corridor, a fence conforming with the standards of subsection 10-
5-18F of this code shall be constructed along the common boundary between the
lots and park, trail, or major street corridor areas. (Ord. 8-15-2006D, 8-15-
2006)
