CHAPTER 1
ORDINANCES
SECTION 1-1 Repeal of Existing Ordinances.
SECTION 1-2 Effect of Repealing Ordinances.
SECTION 1-3 Omission to Specify General Law Not a Waiver
SECTION 1-4 Rules for Construction of Ordinances and Amendments
SECTION 1-5 Title of Sections and Sub-Sections
SECTION 1-6 Constitutionality. Effect of.
SECTION 1-7 Publication and Effective Date of Ordinance
SECTION 1-8 Recording, Numbering, and Certification of Passage
SECTION 1-9 Enacting Clause
SECTION 1-10 Liabilities of Employers and Agents to Penalty for Violation of Ordinance
SECTION 1-11 Foot Note Annotations
SECTION 1-12 General Penalty for Violation of Ordinance 
 
  Ch. Pg. 1
ORDINANCES OF CEDAR CITY
CHAPTER 1
ORDINANCES
SECTION 1-1. Repeal of Existing Ordinances.
The ordinances contained in this chapter and the chapters following shall be known as the
"ORDINANCES OF CEDAR CITY, UTAH", and insofar as their provisions are the same in effect as
those previously existing ordinances, they shall be construed as a continuation thereof; but subject to
the above limitations and provisions of the next section, all ordinances and resolutions of Cedar City
heretofore in force, (excepting such as are of private, local or temporary nature including franchises,
grants, dedication and special levies for local assessments) are hereby repealed.
SECTION 1-2. Effect of Repealing Ordinance.
These revised ordinances shall not affect any act done, any right accrued, and penalty
incurred, any suit, prosecution or proceedings pending, or the tenure of office of any person holding
office at the time when they take effect; nor shall the repeal of any ordinance hereby have the effect of
reviving any ordinance theretofore repealed or superseded.
SECTION 1-3. Omission to Specify General Law Not a Waiver.
The omission to specify or enumerate herein those provisions of the general law applicable to
all cities, shall not be construed as a waiver of the benefits of any or all such provisions.
SECTION 1-4. Rules For Construction of Ordinances and Amendments.
In the construction of these ordinances and all ordinances amendatory thereof the following
rules shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the
legislative body or repugnant to the context of the ordinances:
The singular number includes the plural;
Words used in the present tense include the future;
Words used in the masculine gender comprehend, as well, the feminine and neuter;
The word "person" includes bodies politic and corporate, partnerships, associations and
companies;
The word "writing" includes printing, writing and typewriting;
The word "signature" includes any name, mark or sign written with the intent to authenticate
any instrument or writing;
The word "month" means a calendar month unless otherwise expressed, and the word "year"
or the abbreviation "A.D." is equivalent to the express "year of the Lord";
 
  Ch. Pg. 2
The word "oath" includes "affirmation" and the word "swear" includes the word
"affirm". Every mode of oral statement under oath or affirmation is embraced in the term "testify" and
every written one in the term "depose";
The word "property" includes both real and personal property;
The terms "land", "real estate", and "real property" includes lands, tenements, hereditaments,
water rights, possessory right and claims;
The terms "personal property" includes every description of money, goods, chattels, effects,
evidence of right in actions, and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or
title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defected, discharged, or diminished,
and every right or interest therein.
The words, "highway" and "roads" include public bridges, and may be held equivalent to the
words "country highway", "country road", "common road", and "state road";
The word "street" includes alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares,
public places and sidewalks.
When any "time" is specified in these ordinances it shall mean standard time, or daylight
savings time as then in effect, as distinguished from solar time, and word "midnight" or "noon" shall
be taken to be midnight or noon standard or daylight savings time;
The word "owner" applied to building or land shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant
in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land;
The word "tenant" or "occupant", applied to a building or land shall include any person who
occupies the whole or any part of such building or land either alone or with others;
Words prohibiting anything being done except in accordance with a license or permit or
authority from a board or officer, shall be construed as giving such board or officer power to license
or permit or authorize such thing to be done;
The word "officer" shall include officers and boards in charge of departments and members of
such boards;
The term "willfully" when applied to the intent with which an act is done or omitted, implies
simply a purpose or willingness to commit the act or make the omission referred to. It does not
require any intent to violate the law, or to injure another, or to acquire any advantage;
The term "neglect", "negligence", "negligent", and "negligently" impart a want of such
intention to the nature or probable consequence of the act or omission as a prudent man ordinarily
bestows in acting in his own concerns;
The term "knowingly" imparts only a knowledge that the facts exist which bring the act or
omission within the provisions of these ordinances. It does not require any knowledge of the
unlawfulness of such an act or omission;
The term "bribe" signifies any goods, money, right in action, property, thing of value, or
advantage, present or prospective, or any promise or undertaking to give any, asked, given, or
accepted, with corrupt intent to influence unlawfully the person to whom it is given in his action,
vote, or opinion in the public or official capacity;
The term "corruptly" imparts a wrongful desire to acquire or cause some pecuniary or other
advantage to the person guilty of the act or omission referred to or to some other person;
The terms "malice" and "maliciously" import a wish to vex, annoy, or injure another person,
or an intent to do a wrongful act established either by proof or by presumption of law.
 
  Ch. Pg. 3
SECTION 1-5. Titles of Sections and Sub-Sections.
The title of any section or sub-section of these ordinances shall be deemed to in no wise
restrict or qualify or to limit the effect of the provisions set forth and contained in such sections or
sub-section.
SECTION 1-6. Constitutionality. Effect of.
Should any section, sub-section or portion of these Ordinances, or of any ordinance which
may be hereafter passed, approved and published as required by law, be declared by any court of
competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or void, such adjudication shall in no way affect the
remaining portion of these ordinances.
SECTION 1-7. Publication and Effective Date of Ordinances.
All ordinances, except those enacted pursuant to Sections 10-3-706 to 10-3-710 Utah Code
Annotated, before taking effect, shall be deposited in the office of the Cedar City Recorder and a
short summary thereof published at least once in a newspaper published within the municipality, or if
there is no newspaper published therein, then by posting complete copies in three public places within
Cedar City. Any ordinance, code, or book relating to building or safety standards, municipal
functions, administration, control or regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further
publication or posting if reference is made to the code or book and at least three copies thereof have
been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the recorder prior to the adoption of
the ordinance by the governing body. Ordinances shall be effective twenty days after publication or
posting or thirty days after final passage by the governing body, whichever is more remote from the
date of final passage, but ordinances may become effect at an earlier date or later date, after
publication or posting if so provided in the ordinance.
SECTION 1-8. Recording, Numbering, and Certification of Passage.
The Cedar City Recorder shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose, all
ordinances passed by the governing body. The Recorder shall give each ordinance a number, if the
governing body has not already so done. Immediately following each ordinance, or codification of
ordinances, the Recorder shall make or cause to be made a certificate stating the date of passage and
of the date of publication or posting, as required. the record and memorandum, or a certified copy
thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage, and publication or posting of the
ordinance or codification.
SECTION 1-9. Enacting Clause.
The enacting clause of all ordinances of Cedar City, hereafter passed, shall be in the following
form: "Be it ordained by the City Council of Cedar City, Utah:".
 
  Ch. Pg. 4
SECTION 1-10. Liabilities of Employers and Agents to Penalty For Violation of Ordinances.
When the provisions of an ordinance prohibit the commission or omission of an act, not only
the person actually doing the prohibited thing or omitting the direct act, but also the employer and all
other persons concerned or aiding or abetting therein, shall be guilty of the offense described, and
liable to the penalty prescribed for the offense.
SECTION 1-11. Foot Note Annotations.
Annotations set forth in parenthesis at the end of sections are not a part of these ordinances
but refer for reference to identical or substantially identical provisions of "Utah Code Annotated,
1953 as amended."
SECTION 1-12. General Penalty For Violation of Ordinances.
Whenever no other penalty is prescribed, any person convicted of violating any provision of
any ordinances included in these Ordinances, or ordinances hereafter enacted, shall be punished by a
fine in any sum less than ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the City
Jail for a period of not longer than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
Amended 10/8/86.
Chapter 1a
Of the Ordinances of Cedar
City, Utah
Repealed by Ord. #0918-13
CHAPTER 2
CITY COUNCIL, ADMINISTRATION, SEAL
SECTION 2-1 Corporate Seal
SECTION 2-2 Officers
SECTION 2-3 Legislative and Governing Body
SECTION 2-4 Eligibility of Officers
SECTION 2-5 Regular Meetings
SECTION 2-6 Special Meetings
SECTION 2-7 Quorum
SECTION 2-8 Rules-Expulsion of Members
SECTION 2-9 City Departments
SECTION 2-10 Council Member Not to Hold Created Office
SECTION 2-11 Create Offices
SECTION 2-12 Official Bonds and Reports
SECTION 2-13 Audit of Accounts, Time, Filing
SECTION 2-14 Adoption of Budget, Notice, Hearing, etc.
SECTION 2-15 Appointments
SECTION 2-16 Oath of Office
SECTION 2-17 Amount of Bonds. Approval
SECTION 2-18 Removal from Municipal Limits Vacates Office
SECTION 2-19 Vacancies. How filled.
SECTION 2-20 Appointee to Vacancy Shall Qualify
SECTION 2-21 Officers--Conflict of Interest
SECTION 2-22 Elected Officials or Employees Not to Exceed Budget
SECTION 2-23 Fiscal Year of the Council
SECTION 2-24 Annual Tax Levy
SECTION 2-25 Salaries of City Officers
SECTION 2-26 Accounts Monthly
SECTION 2-27 Records, etc. to be Open for Inspection
SECTION 2-28 Term of Board Members
SECTION 2-29 Property and Books to be Delivered to Successor. Penalty
Ch. 2 Pg. 1
CHAPTER 2
CITY COUNCIL, ADMINISTRATION, SEAL
SECTION 2-1. Corporate Seal.
The official and corporate seal of Cedar City shall consist of a circle one and one fourth (1
1/4") inches in diameter depicting a mountain range with the rising sun in the background and three
(3) flags in the foreground. Centered in the bottom one third of the circle are two (2) lines of text.
The first line of text contains “Festival City USA”. The second line of text contains “CEDAR
CITY, UTAH.
SECTION 2-2. Officers.
The municipal government of the City is vested in a Mayor and City Council, to be composed
of five councilmen, to be elected at large.
SECTION 2-3. Legislative and Governing Body.
The Mayor and City Council are and shall be the legislative and governing body of this city
and as such shall have, exercise, and discharge, all of the rights, powers, privileges, and authority
conferred by law upon this City and shall perform all duties required of them by law or ordinances,
and shall perform such other acts and take such other measures, not inconsistent with law, as may
be necessary for the efficient government of this City.
SECTION 2-4. Eligibility of Officers.
All elective officers shall be chosen by qualified voters of the City. No person shall be
eligible to any office, elective or appointive, who is not a qualified elector of the City nor shall any
person be eligible to any office who is a defaulter to the corporation.
SECTION 2-5. Regular Meetings.
The City Council shall hold regular meetings on the second and fourth Wednesday of each
month, or as otherwise adopted and posted consistent with the State of Utah Open and Public
Meetings Act. The time for holding said meetings shall be designated by resolution of the Council. It
shall sit with open doors, excepting when met in executive session. The yeas and nays shall be taken
upon the passage of all ordinances and all propositions to create any liability against the City and in
all other cases at the request of any member, which shall be entered upon the journal of its
proceedings. The concurrence of a majority of the voting members present shall be necessary to the
passage of any such ordinance or proposition.
Ch. 2 Pg. 2
SECTION 2-6. Special Meetings.
The Mayor and any two members of the Council may call a special meeting of the City
Council. The Order shall be entered in the minutes of the governing body. The Order shall provide
at least three (3) hours notice of the special meeting and notice thereof shall be served by the
Recorder on each member who did not sign the Order by delivering the Notice personally or by
leaving it at the member's usual place of abode.
SECTION 2-7. Quorum.
The majority of the Council shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number
may adjourn from time to time, and are hereby empowered to compel the attendance of an absent
member, and may when necessary, direct the Police Chief to bring in such member or members
under arrest.
SECTION 2-8. Rules-Expulsion of Members.
The City Council shall determine its own rules of proceeding, may punish its members for
disorderly conduct, and with the concurrence of two thirds of the members may expel a member for
cause.
SECTION 2-9. City Departments.
There shall be ten (10) departments of the City as follows: 1. Administration; 2. Economic
Development; 3. Engineering; 4. Finance; 5. Fire; 6. Legal; 7. Leisure Services; 8. Library; 9. Police;
and 10. Public Works. Each department shall have such divisions as shall from time to time be
approved by the adoption of the City’s yearly budget.
The City Manager shall be the administrative officer of the City Council to administer the
departments of the City.
The Mayor and City Council shall exercise all powers conferred by law and shall, although
not limited to the following: enact all legislation necessary for the government of the City; approve
all bills against the City at least monthly and shall determine all matters of general policy pertaining
to the City and its different departments. Nothing herein stated shall prevent or prohibit the City
council from delegating such administrative powers as it sees fit.
During the absence of the City Manager, any City Councilman may be assigned by the Mayor
to any City Department and each councilman so assigned shall have the responsibility for the
operation of said department. The Mayor may at any time make such assignment of Councilmen to
City Departments as is deemed advisable for the best interests and welfare of the City. At least one
City Councilman shall be assigned by the Mayor to meet with and be an ex-officio member of all
boards and commissions provided for in these ordinances.
Ch. 2 Pg. 3
SECTION 2-10. Council Member Not to Hold Created Office.
No member of the City Council shall hold or be appointed to any office which shall have
been created during the term for which he/she was elected.
SECTION 2-11. Create Offices.
The City Council may create any office they may deem necessary for the good government
of the City, and provide for filling vacancies in elective and appointive offices, and prescribe the
powers, duties and compensation of all officers of the City, except as otherwise provided by law.
SECTION 2-12. Official Bonds and Reports.
The City Council may require all municipal officers and agents of the City elected or
appointed, to give bonds and security for the faithful performance of their duties, in such amount as
may be required by resolution or ordinance or by law, and require from every officer of the City at
any time a report in detail of all transactions in his office or any matters therewith. The premium
charged by a corporate surety for an official bond shall be paid by the City.
SECTION 2-13. Audit of Accounts, Time, Filing.
It shall be the duty of the City Council to have made, at least annually, by or under the
immediate direction and supervision of a competent accountant, an audit of the accounts of all
officers of the City having the care, management, collection or disbursement of money belonging
to the City or appropriated by law or otherwise for its use and benefit.
Such audit, for any fiscal year, shall be completed not later than six calendar months after the
close of such year.
Copies of all audit reports made in conformity with the provisions of this section shall be
filed with the City and a copy filed with the State Auditor's Office.
SECTION 2-14. Adoption of Budget, Notice, Hearing, etc.
The City council shall adopt a budget for the ensuing fiscal year in accordance with and in
the manner provided in the Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act for Utah Cities (§§ 10-6-101 through 10-
6-159).
SECTION 2-15. Appointments.
The Mayor, by and with the advice and consent of the City Council, shall appoint committee
members as provided for by ordinance; such staff members as required by State Law, ordinance, or
the City’s Personnel Policy.
Ch. 2 Pg. 4
SECTION 2-16. Oath of Office.
Before any officer of this municipality shall be entitled to assume the duties of his office, he
shall take and subscribe to the following Oath:
"I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support, obey, and defend the Constitution of
the United States, and the Constitution of this State; that I will discharge the duties of my office with
fidelity."
SECTION 2-17. Amount of Bonds. Approval.
Before any officer of this municipality, except the mayor, shall be entitled to assume the
duties of his office, he shall give bond as follows: Mayor and Recorder $l,000.00 each. The
Treasurer $l0,000.00. City Manager $5,000.00. All other elective officers, $l,000.00 each. Said
bonds shall run to Cedar City and be secured by at least two good and sufficient sureties, or by a
surety company qualified to do business with the State of Utah. The bond of all other officers,
except the bond of the Mayor shall be approved by the City Council. The premium of any such bond
shall be an expense to the City.
SECTION 2-18. Removal from Municipal Limits Vacates Office.
If any elective officer of this City shall at any time during his term of office move from the
limits of the City, his office shall thereby become vacant.
SECTION 2-19. Vacancies. How Filled.
Whenever any vacancy occurs in the office of Mayor or Councilman, the governing body
shall, by a majority vote, appoint any registered voter in the municipality to fill the unexpired term
of the office vacated until the next municipal election, when a successor can be elected and
qualified. If for any reason the governing body does not fill the vacancy within thirty (30) days after
the vacancy occurs, the two (2) persons having the highest numbers of votes of the governing body
shall come before the governing body, and if there is not a majority vote by the governing body, the
vacancy shall be filled by lot in the presence of the governing body.
SECTION 2-20. Appointee to Vacancy Shall Qualify.
Any person so appointed to either of the aforesaid offices shall qualify in the same manner
as though he had been elected to said office, and shall have the exercise of all powers conferred by
law upon such office.
SECTION 2-21. Officers-Conflict of Interest.
See 10-3-1301 Utah Code Annotated, l953 as amended, "Municipal Officers and Employees
Disclosure Act". Amended 4/19/84
Ch. 2 Pg. 5
SECTION 2-22. Elected Officials and Employees Not to Exceed Budget.
No elected official or employee of this City shall make or cause expenditures or incur
indebtedness in excess of appropriations for his office or department made in the budget adopted
pursuant to the provisions of law; and any indebtedness or obligation that is contracted by any such
elected official or employee in excess of appropriation to and for his office or department made as
aforesaid shall be and become the debt and obligation of the elected official or employee himself,
and shall not be or become valid or enforceable against the City.
SECTION 2-23. Fiscal Year of the Council.
The business and fiscal year of the City Council of this City for the purpose of definitely
fixing the period of incumbency of all appointive officers and termination of the current business of
the Council shall begin on the first business day of July and end on the 30th day of June next
ensuing; and all councilmen shall enter upon the duties of their office, and that of their predecessors
shall end with the first meeting in January, following their election.
SECTION 2-24. Annual Tax Levy.
l. Not later than June l5th of each year, the governing body of Cedar City shall by Ordinance
or Resolution set the real and personal property tax levy for various municipal purposes, provided
the mill levy may be set at an appropriate later date, with the approval of the Utah State Tax
Commission.
2. In its computation of the total levy, the governing body shall determine the requirements
of each fund for which property taxes are to be levied and shall specify in its ordinance or resolution
adopting the levy, the number of mills apportioned to each fund.
3. The proceeds of the levy apportioned for general fund purposes shall be credited as
revenue in the General Fund.
4. The proceeds of the levy apportioned for special fund or enterprise fund purposes shall
be credited to the appropriate account.
5. A combined mill levy for Cedar City for all purposes in any year, excluding the retirement
of general obligation bonds and the payment of interest thereon, and taxes expressly authorized by
law to be levied in addition thereto, shall not exceed 35 mills.
SECTION 2-25. Salaries of City Officers.
The Mayor and City Council and all other city officers, elected or appointed, shall receive
salaries in accordance with the City’s personnel policy, duly adopted salary rates pursuant to the
provisions of UCA § 10-3-818, and as funded by the annual City budget.
Ch. 2 Pg. 6
SECTION 2-26. Accounts Monthly.
It shall be the duty of all officers and agents of the City to keep a true and correct account of
all funds collected or received by them for the City and pay the same into the City Treasury within
three (3) business days of receipt.
SECTION 2-27. Records, etc. to be Open for Inspection.
All records, books, papers, and documents belonging to any office of the City Government
of said City shall be open to inspection of the public at all reasonable office hours.
SECTION 2-28. Term of Board Members.
On all appointed boards of Cedar City, Utah, those members appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the City Council shall have a term of office as set forth in the individual ordinances
establishing and defining the terms and duties of the respective boards involved. Board members
shall be removed by the Mayor, with the approval of the City Council after missing three (3)
consecutive meetings, unless such a board members shows reasonable circumstances to justify the
absences sufficient to convince the Mayor that removal is not appropriate.
SECTION 2-29. Property and Books to be Delivered to Successor. Penalty.
Every officer of this City shall within five (5) days after notification and request, deliver to
their successor in office all properties, books and effects of every description in his possession
belonging to the City or appertaining to his office, and upon his refusal to do so shall be liable for
all damages caused thereby and to a fine in any sum less than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00))
or to imprisonment in the City Jail not exceeding six (6) months or to both such fine and imprisonment.
Amended 10/8/86.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0928-11.
CHAPTER 3
MAYOR
SECTION 3-1 Chief Executive Officer
SECTION 3-2 Presiding Officer
SECTION 3-3 Shall Sign All Ordinances, Licenses, Deeds SECTION 3-4 May Offer
Reward
SECTION 3-5 Pardoning Power
SECTION 3-6 General Supervision
SECTION 3-7 General Duties
SECTION 3-8 Mayor Pro Tem
SECTION 3-9 Revision of Ordinances
SECTION 3-10 Prepare Tentative Budget
SECTION 3-11 Restricted Conduct In Time Of Riot, Unlawful Assembly, Civil
Disobedience
SECTION 3-11-1 Authority in Time of Riot
SECTION 3-11-2 Proclamation
SECTION 3-11-3 Termination
SECTION 3-11-4 Penalty
Ch. 3 Pg. 1
CHAPTER 3
MAYOR
Section 3-1. Chief Executive Officer.
The Mayor is the Chief Executive and Administrative Officer of this City. He shall supervise
the conduct of all City officers and may suspend any appointive officer from office for sufficient
cause; such suspension, however, to terminate at the next regular meeting of the City Council, unless
such officer, is, after a hearing and opportunity to present his defense, thereupon removed from
office.
Section 3-2. Presiding Officer.
It shall be the duty of the Mayor to preside at all meetings of the City Council, but he shall
not vote except in case of a tie, when he shall give the deciding vote. He may call special meetings
of the City Council as occasion may require.
Section 3-3. Shall Sign All Ordinances, Licenses, Deeds, etc.
The Mayor shall sign all City Ordinances, Licenses, and he is hereby authorized and
empowered to sign his name officially for and in behalf of the City, to all deeds, bonds, bills, notes,
contracts, leases and other writings to which the City is a party, when so directed by the City
Council.
Section 3-4. May Offer Reward.
The Mayor may, when necessary, offer a reward for the apprehension of offenders against
the ordinances of this City in any sum not exceeding One Hundred Dollars ($100.00).
Section 3-5. Pardoning Power.
The Mayor is authorized to grant full pardon in all cases presented under or by authority of
the City for any violation of the ordinances thereof, or to remit all or any part of any fine or penalty
imposed thereunder, together with the costs of prosecution. He shall report at the next regular
meeting of the City Council the number of fines and the amounts thereof so remitted, and the number
of pardons granted, giving his reasons therefor.
Section 3-6. General Supervision.
The Mayor, as chief executive officer of the City, shall exercise a general supervision over
each and all the departments of the City Government. He shall see that every officer, at the expiration
of his term of office, or resignation or removal from the same, delivers to his successors all the
property, books, papers, maps, plats, furniture, fixtures, or other property appertaining to such office.
Ch. 3 Pg. 2
Section 3-7. General Duties.
The Mayor shall perform all duties which are or may be prescribed by law, or ordinance, and
shall see that the laws and ordinances are faithfully executed.
Section 3-8. Mayor Pro Tem.
In case of the temporary absence of the Mayor from the City, or in case of his temporary
inability to perform the duties of his offices, it shall be his duty to communicate such fact to the
members of the City Council; whereupon, it shall become the duty of the Council to appoint some
member thereof to act as Mayor Pro Tem, and during such time such Councilman is so acting in the
capacity of Mayor Pro Tem, he shall have power to exercise all the functions and duties of the
Mayor.
Section 3-9. Revision of Ordinances.
The Mayor may appoint by and with the advice and consent of the City Council, one or more
competent persons to prepare and submit to the City Council for their adoption or rejection, an
ordinance in revision of the ordinances of the City, and for the government of the City, and the
compensation of such revisors shall be determined and fixed by the City Council and paid out the
City Treasury.
Section 3-10. Prepare Tentative Budget.
On or before the lst day of May each year, the Mayor with the assistance of the City Recorder
and City Manager, shall prepare and file with the City Council a tentative budget which shall set
forth in detail the revenues and expenditures of the preceding fiscal year, the estimated revenues and
expenditures for the current fiscal year, and estimate of the revenues for the next succeeding fiscal
year based upon the lowest rate of tax levy which in his opinion will raise the required amount of
revenue, using the current year's assessed valuation, and a detailed estimate of the essential
expenditures of the City for the next succeeding fiscal year. There shall accompany this tentative
budget a statement showing the financial condition of the City by funds as of March 3lst of the
current year and also the estimated financial condition by funds at the close of the current fiscal
year. This tentative budget shall be made immediately available for public inspection and shall
remain so available for a period of at least ten (10) years prior to the adoption of the budget.
Section 3-11. Restricted Conduct In Time of Riot, Unlawful Assembly, Civil Disobedience.
Section 3-11-1. Authority In Time Of Riot.
Whenever in the judgment of the Mayor he determines or, in the event of his disability to act,
two members of the City Council determine that an emergency exists as a result of riot, mob action,
or other civil disturbance causing danger or injury or damages to persons or property, he, or said City
Ch. 3 Pg. 3
Councilmen, shall have the power to impose by proclamation any and all of the following regulations
necessary to preserve the peace and order of the City:
(a) To impose a curfew upon all or any portion of the City thereby requiring all persons in
such designated curfew areas to forthwith remove themselves from the public streets, alleys, parks
or other public places; provided, however, that physicians, nurses, and ambulance operators
performing medical services, utility personnel performing essential public services, firemen and City
authorized or requested law enforcement officers and personnel may be exempted from such curfew.
(b) To order the closing of any business establishment anywhere within the City for the
period of the emergency, such businesses to include, but not limited to, those selling or dispensing
intoxicating liquors, beer, gasoline, or other flammable liquids or combustible products.
(c) To order the closing of all private clubs or portion thereof wherein the consumption of
intoxicating liquor and/or beer is permitted.
(d) To order the discontinuance of the sale of beer.
(e) To designate any public street, thoroughfare, alley, park, or vehicle parking areas closed
to motor vehicles and pedestrians for the period of the emergency.
(f) To call upon regular and auxiliary law enforcement agencies and organizations within
or without the City to assist in preserving and keeping the peace within the City.
(g) Issue such other orders as are immediately necessary for the protection of life and
property.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0309-16-1.
Section 3-11-2. Proclamation.
The proclamation of emergency provided for herein shall become effective upon its issuance
and dissemination to the public by appropriate news media.
Section 3-11-3. Termination.
Any emergency proclaimed in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance shall
terminate upon the issuance of a proclamation determining an emergency no longer exists.
Section 3-11-4. Penalty.
Any person who shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with the order of duly authorized law
enforcement officers or personnel charged with enforcing the Proclamation of Emergency authorized
herein, or who violates any provisions of this ordinance or executive orders issued pursuant thereto
shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction shall be punishable by a fine not to exceed
Ch. 3 Pg. 4
One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment in the City Jail for a period not to exceed six
months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Amended 10/8/86.
CHAPTER 4
CITY RECORDER
SECTION 4-1 Appointment
SECTION 4-2 General Duties
SECTION 4-3 Draw Warrants. Keep Accounts
SECTION 4-4 Countersign Warrants and Contracts
SECTION 4-5 Annual financial Statement to be Published
SECTION 4-6 Pay Money and File Receipts
SECTION 4-7 Record Ordinances, etc.
SECTION 4-8 Auditor
SECTION 4-9 Oath and Bond
 
  Ch. Pg. 1
CHAPTER 4
CITY RECORDER
SECTION 4-1. Appointment.
On or before the first Monday in February following a city election for Mayor, the Mayor so
elected shall appoint by and with the consent of the Council, a qualified elector to be City Recorder
for a term of four (4) years, whose salary shall be fixed by resolution.
SECTION 4-2. General Duties.
The City Recorder shall keep correct records and minutes of all proceedings of the City
Council, accurately record all ordinances and resolutions passed by the City Council, certify to the
posting or publication of all ordinances, and attest all papers signed by the Mayor officially. The office
and records thereof shall be kept at the City Hall or any other place approved by the City Council.
SECTION 4-3. Draw Warrants. Keep Accounts.
The City Recorder shall draw and countersign all orders upon the Treasurer in pursuance of
any order or resolution of the City Council, but not otherwise and keep a correct account thereof in
books provided for that purpose and shall as directed by the City Council furnish reports of the
financial condition of the City. He shall keep regular books of accounts, including a list of
outstanding bonds, for what purpose, when and where payable and the rate of interest they
respectively bear, together with the amount of each outstanding, in which he shall enter all
indebtedness of the City, and which shall at all times show its financial condition and shall keep
accounts with all receiving and disbursing offices of the City, showing the amount they have received
from the different sources of revenue and the amount which they have disbursed under the direction
of the City Council. He shall examine all reports, bonds, papers, vouchers, and accounts of the City
Treasurer; shall audit all claims and demands against the city before they are allowed by the City
Council, and he shall prepare checks in payment thereof to be drawn on the appropriate bank
accounts of the City. He shall certify on the voucher copy of said check or other supporting recorder:
(l) That he has audited said claim and found it to be true and correct, and;
(2) That said claim has been approved by the governing body and shall state the date of such
approval. He shall keep a record of all claims presented and the action of the council thereon. He shall
keep a book properly indexed in which he shall enter all contracts, deeds, franchises and lists of
City-owned property, which book shall be open to the inspection of all persons interested, and shall
perform such other duties as the City Council may provide by ordinance or resolution.
SECTION 4-4. Countersign Warrants and Contracts.
 
  Ch. Pg. 2
The Recorder shall countersign all contracts and warrants made in behalf of the City, and
every contract or warrant made in behalf of the City, or to which the City is a party, shall be void
unless signed by the Recorder. The Recorder shall maintain a record of all contracts, properly
indexed, which record shall be open to the inspection of all interested persons
SECTION 4-5. Annual Financial Statement to be Published.
The City Recorder shall prepare and publish on or before the first Monday in October of each
year, in some newspaper having general circulation in the City, a detailed statement of the financial
condition of the City, and of all receipts and expenditures for the previous year ending June 30;
provided, that upon the expiration of his term of office, and before his successor enters upon his
duties, the Recorder shall make and prepare such statement, properly attested, for the use and benefit
of his successor, showing:
(l) The total receipts of the City, stating particularly the source of each portion of the
revenue.
(2) The amount of cash on hand at the date of the last report.
(3) The amount of sinking funds, and how invested.
(4) The number, date and amount of every bond issued or redeemed, and the amount received
or part therefore.
(5) The indebtedness of the City, funded and floating, stating the amount of each class and
the rate of interest borne by such indebtedness or any part thereof.
(6) The amount of cash in the City Treasury, and in the several funds.
(7) The total expenditures of the City, as shown by warrants issued, giving in total the
amount expended in each department.
SECTION 4-6. Pay Money and File Receipts.
The Recorder shall pay into the City Treasury, all money belonging to the City coming into his
hand by virtue of his office, and shall take a receipt for the same, which receipts shall be filed with
other papers in the Recorder's Office. He shall keep a list of all property coming into his possession
from his predecessor in office, and by purchase during his term, and deliver said list, together with the
property, to his successor in office.
SECTION 4-7. Record Ordinances, etc.
The Recorder shall record all ordinances passed by the City Council in a book kept for that
purpose, together with affidavits of publication by the publisher or his agent if such ordinance was
published, or if posted with the certificate of due posting thereof, he shall also keep in a book
provided for that purpose, the names of persons elected or appointed to any office within the City,
together with the dates on which they entered upon the duties of their respective offices and the date
of their resignation, or removal therefrom.
SECTION 4-8. Auditor.
 
  Ch. Pg. 3
The Recorder shall be ex-officio City auditor, and shall perform such other duties as are or
may be prescribed by law or ordinances.
SECTION 4-9. Oath and Bond.
Before entering into office, the City Recorder shall take, subscribe and file the constitutional
oath of office and file with the City a corporate surety bond, payable to the City, in the penal sum of
$l,000.00. The bond shall be approved by the City and the premium charged by a corporate surety
for said bond shall be paid by the City.
CHAPTER 5
CITY TREASURER
SECTION 5-1 Receive Money. Keep Accounts, etc.
SECTION 5-2 Payments
SECTION 5-3 Warrants--Order of Payment
SECTION 5-4 Give Receipt
SECTION 5-5 Accounts, Financial Reports.
SECTION 5-6 Special Funds
SECTION 5-7 Duties. General
SECTION 5-8 Oath and Bond
 
  Ch. Pg. 1
CHAPTER 5
CITY TREASURER
SECTION 5-1. Receive Money. Keep Accounts. Etc.
The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint the City Treasurer for a term
of four (4) years, who shall receive all money belonging to the City, including all taxes, license and
fines, and keep an accurate and detailed account thereof. He shall collect special taxes and
assessments as provided by law and ordinance. He shall make a settlement with the Recorder as the
City Council may direct at the end of every month, and turn over all warrants, interest coupons, bonds
or other evidence of indebtedness of the City which may have been redeemed by him during the
month, taking the receipts of the Recorder therefor, and all such warrants, orders or other evidence of
indebtedness shall be cancelled by him, and have written or stamped thereon the date of their payment
or redemption.
SECTION 5-2. Payments.
He shall pay no money out save upon lawful warrant, except bonds and interest coupons,
which when due, may be paid upon presentation, or in case the same are payable at some other place,
then the money for their redemption shall be sent to the place where they are payable, in time to meet
such payment when due.
SECTION 5-3. Warrants - Order of Payment.
All warrants shall be paid in the order in which they are presented, and the Treasurer shall
note upon the back of each warrant presented him the date of presentation and, when payment is
made, the date of payment; provided that no warrant shall be paid by the Treasurer in case a sufficient
amount of money shall not remain in the Treasury to pay all warrants issued previous to such warrant.
SECTION 5-4. Give Receipt.
The City Treasurer shall give every person paying money into the City Treasury a receipt
therefor, specifying the date of payment, and upon which account paid, and shall also file the
duplicate of such receipt with the Recorder.
SECTION 5-5. Accounts, Financial Reports.
The City Treasurer shall keep in suitable books a full account of all receipts and expenditures
and shall report as often as required by the City Council, a statement giving a full and detailed account
of all receipts and expenditures since his last report, with the amount on hand, and, on or before the
first Thursday in July of each year, present to the City Council a full report of his receipts and
expenditures for the preceding year with vouchers for all sums disbursed by him. He shall also keep a
 
  Ch. Pg. 2
registry of all warrants redeemed and paid during the year, describing such warrants, their date,
amount, number, the fund from which paid, and the person to whom paid, specifying also the time of
payment.
SECTION 5-6. Special Funds.
All money received by the Treasurer on any special assessment shall be applied to the payment
of the improvement for which the assessment was made. Such money shall be used for the payment of
interest and principal on bonds or other indebtedness issued in settlement thereof, and shall be used
for no other purpose whatsoever, except whenever the necessity for maintaining any special fund of
the City has ceased to exist and a balance remains in said fund, the City Council shall authorize the
transfer of such balance to the unappropriated surplus account in the general fund of the City, except
any balance remaining in a capital improvement or bond fund shall be transferred to the appropriate
bond redemption and interest fund or such other fund as the bond ordinance may require and
otherwise to the unappropriated surplus account in the general fund.
SECTION 5-7. Duties. General.
The Treasurer shall perform such other duties as are or may be prescribed by law or
ordinance.
SECTION 5-8. Oath and Bond.
Before entering into office the City Treasurer shall take subscribe and file the constitutional
oath of office and file with the City a corporate surety bond, payable to the City, in the penal sum of
Ten Thousand Dollars ($l0,000.00) or the amount required by the State Money Management Council,
whichever is greater. The bond shall be approved by the City and the premium charged by a corporate
surety for said bond shall be paid by the City.
CHAPTER 6
CITY MANAGER
SECTION 6-1 City Manager Appointment
SECTION 6-2 Bond of the City Manager
SECTION 6-3 Powers and Duties
Ch. 6 Pg. 1
CHAPTER 6
CITY MANAGER
SECTION 6-1. City Manager Appointment.
The Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council shall appoint a City Manager. He
shall be chosen for an indefinite period solely upon the basis of administrative qualifications. He
shall hold office at the pleasure of the City Council and receive such salary as shall be fixed by
ordinance or by resolution.
SECTION 6-2. Bond of the City Manager.
Before taking office, the City Manager shall file with the City Recorder a surety bond,
conditioned upon honest and faithful performance of his duties in the sum of Five Thousand Dollars
($5,000.00). The premiums of the bond shall be paid by the City.
SECTION 6-3. Powers and Duties.
The powers and duties of the City Manager subject to the control of the Mayor and Council,
shall be:
(a) Except for the appointments to be made by the Mayor and City Council as provided in
these ordinances, to have appointment and removal power of all officers, agents and employees
necessary for the proper conduct of duties incident to his position, such appointment to be made
upon the basis of fitness alone.
(b) To have direct supervision of the construction, improvements, repairs and maintenance
of streets, sidewalks, alleys, lanes, bridges, and other public highways; of sewers, drains, ditches,
culverts, streams and water courses of gutters and curbs; of all public buildings, boulevards, parks,
playgrounds, airports, squares and other grounds belonging to the City, and to collect and dispose
of waste material.
(c) To care for and preserve all machinery, tools, appliances and property belonging to the
City.
(d) To oversee the issuing of building permits; the inspection of buildings, plumbing and
wiring, jointly with the engineer, plumbing inspector and building inspector; to be fully informed
on all functions as may be undertaken by the various duly appointed Boards; to supervise and
oversee all functions of the Public Safety Department.
(e) To approve all claims before presentation to the City Council for Payment, to see that all
goods purchased by and for the City are received as per contract.
(f) Except in compliance with duly adopted resolutions and policies of the City Council,
to create no liability against the City without the sanction of the City Council in excess the
following:
(1) $2,500.00 with the City Manager's sole signature; and
(2) $5,000.00 with the City Manager's and Mayor's signatures jointly endorsed.
Ch. 6 Pg. 2
(g) To attend all meetings of the City Council with the right to participate in the discussion
but not to vote; to recommend to the Council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary
and expedient.
(h) To be responsible for the preparation of the Mayor's tentative and final budget, and keep
the council advised as to the financial condition and needs of the City.
(i) To notify the Mayor and City Council of any emergency existing in any department under
his supervision.
(j) To perform such other duties as may be required of him by ordinance or resolution of the
City Council. Provided, however, the power and duties of the City Manager may be enlarged or taken
away by resolution of the City Council. (Amended September, 1989)
CHAPTER 7
CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION 7-1 Act as Legal Adviser. Appointment
SECTION 7-2 Prosecute Actions, Etc.
SECTION 7-3 Appeals--City Attorney to Represent City
SECTION 7-4 Duties. General
 
  Ch. Pg. 1
CHAPTER 7
CITY ATTORNEY
SECTION 7-1. Act as Legal Adviser. Appointment.
The Mayor, with the approval of the City Council, shall appoint the City Attorney for a term
of four (4) years, who shall act as legal adviser of the City in all matters pertaining to contracts with
or by the City and on any question of law arising out of any law, ordinance or otherwise. It shall be
his duty to advise all City officials in relation to their official duties. He shall advise the City council,
or its committees, on such legal questions as may arise in relation to the business of the City, and shall
report at any time the City Council or the Mayor of the City may direct, upon any matters in his
hands, which may be necessary for their information.
SECTION 7-2. Prosecute Actions. Etc.
The City Attorney shall begin and conduct all prosecutions for violations of any ordinances of
the City. He shall prosecute or defend all actions in behalf of the City or any officers thereof, wherein
any of the rights, privileges, ordinances, acts or orders of the City Council may be brought in question
before any court. He may take appears in civil actions, by and with the approval of the Mayor when
the interest of the City requires it, and prosecute or defend the same in the appellate court.
SECTION 7-3. Appeals--City Attorney to Represent City.
Wherever a criminal action for the violation of a City Ordinance is appealed to the district
Court of Iron county, Utah, it shall be the duty of the City Attorney to appear and prosecute such
action in the District Court.
SECTION 7-4. Duties. General.
He shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by law or ordinances.
CHAPTER 8
CITY ENGINEER
SECTION 8-1 Creation of Office
SECTION 8-2 Duties of the City Engineer
SECTION 8-3 Field Notes. Maps and Profiles
SECTION 8-4 Other Duties
SECTION 8-5 Fees
 
  Ch.  Pg. 1 
CHAPTER 8
CITY ENGINEER
SECTION 8-1. Creation of Office.
There is hereby created the office of City Engineer to be filled by appointment as provided by
law. The City Engineer shall received such salary as shall be set by Resolution.
SECTION 8-2. Duties of the City Engineer.
It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to locate the lines and grades of all streets and
sidewalks, alleys, avenues, or other public ways, and to determine the position, size and construction
of all sewers, waterworks, irrigation or drainage canals, reservoirs, culverts, aqueducts, bridges,
viaducts, or other public works or appurtenances, and to prepare plans, maps or profiles of the same,
and to make estimates and furnish specifications for any of said work, whenever required to do so by
the City Council. He shall, under the direction of the City Council have general charge, supervision
and inspection of all public improvements and public work undertaken by or on behalf of Cedar City
by contract or otherwise, and shall see that the same are performed in a workmanlike manner, and in
accordance with the authorized plans and with the terms and specifications of the contracts.
SECTION 8-3. Field Notes. Maps and Profiles.
The City Engineer shall keep in his office three copies of all field notes, maps, or profiles
which relate to City surveys, waterworks, sewers, irrigation systems, streets, sidewalks, and all other
engineering works, and he shall arrange and index them in such manner as will enable a ready
reference thereto, and all shall be the property of the City.
SECTION 8-4. Other Duties.
The City Engineer shall make such surveys, reports, and give such technical advice and
assistance as is required by the Cedar City Planning and Zoning Commission and all other
commissions, or boards appointed by the City Council.
He shall also be the custodian of all City plans and maps and shall make such new surveys and
plats and maps of Cedar City as directed by the City Council. He shall be the custodian of all deeds,
abstracts of title and other evidences of ownership of real property by the City and he shall have the
duty of recording all deeds of conveyances of real property to the City. He shall also supply legal
descriptions of all property to be conveyed to or conveyed by the City.
SECTION 8-5. Fees.
 
  Ch.  Pg. 2 
For all work done by the City Engineer for private individuals during working hours for the
City, he shall charge said individual the regular fee therefore and said fee shall be paid into the City
Treasury. The provision shall not prevent the Engineer from performing engineering work for private
individuals during days or hours when not working for the City and retaining any fees earned for his
services.
CHAPTER 9
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION 9-1 Appointment
SECTION 9-2 Arrests
SECTION 9-3 Receipts for Property Taken from Person
SECTION 9-4 Keep Register. Remit Fines, etc.
SECTION 9-5 Rules and Regulations 
 
  Ch. Pg. 1
CHAPTER 9
POLICE DEPARTMENT
SECTION 9-1. Appointment.
The Mayor, with the consent and approval of the City Council shall appoint a Chief of Police.
The Chief of Police shall in the discharge of his duties, have like powers and be subject to like
responsibility as sheriffs and constables in similar cases, and he shall suppress riots, disturbances, and
breaches of the peace, and apprehend all persons committing any offense against the laws of the state
or the ordinances of the City. And at all times he shall diligently and faithfully discharge his duties and
enforce all ordinances and regulations of the City for the preservation of peace and good order, and
the protection of the rights and property of all persons.
SECTION 9-2. Arrests.
The Chief of Police and those acting under his direction, shall have the power and authority
without process to arrest and take into custody any person who shall commit or threaten or attempt
to commit in the presence of such officer, or within his view, any breach of the peace of any offense
directly punished by the laws of this state or the ordinances of this City.
SECTION 9-3. Receipts for Property Taken From Person.
When money or other property is taken from a person arrested upon a charge of public
offense, the officer taking it must at the time give to such person a receipt therefore, specifying
particularly the amount of money and the kind of property taken.
SECTION 9-4. Keep Register. Remit Fines, etc.
The Chief of Police shall provide and cause to be kept a register or arrests. Upon such register
there shall be entered a statement showing the date of arrests, the name of the person arrested, the
name of the officer making the arrest and the offense charged. He shall keep an account of all moneys
which shall come into his hands for the use and benefit of the City by way of fines or otherwise and
shall forthwith pay the same into the City Treasury.
SECTION 9-5. Rules and Regulations.
The Chief of Police, with the approval of the City Council, shall make and adopt such rules
and regulations for the improvement of the department and the uniforms of the officers, employees,
men and agents connected therewith as, in his judgment, shall be necessary and most appropriate for
the good of the service. The Chief of Police may assign any subordinate officer in the department to
any duty which in his judgment the good of the service may require and may change such assignment
from time to time whenever in his judgment the good of the service requires.
CHAPTER 10
AIRPORT
SECTION 10-1 Airport Board
SECTION 10-2 Organization
SECTION 10-3 Duties
SECTION 10-4 Public Expenditures
SECTION 10-5 Recommendations
SECTION 10-6 Airport Fees
SECTION 10-6-1 Board of Equalization. Rates. Rebates
SECTION 10-6-2 Regulations
SECTION 10-6-3 Compliance Required
SECTION 10-7 Penalty
Ch. 10 Pg. 1
CHAPTER 10
AIRPORT
SECTION 10-1. Airport Board.
(A) An airport board, to be known as the Cedar City Airport Board, consisting of eight
(8) members, is hereby created. The board members shall be appointed by the Mayor
with the advice and consent of the City Council.
(B) The appointed members of the board shall select one of the members to serve as the
Chairman. The Chairman shall conduct the meetings and shall be a voting member
of the board.
(C) Once appointed and confirmed each member shall serve a term of four (4) years.
There are no limits on how many times an individual may be appointed. Members
appointed to the Airport Board that are also serving as a member of an elected
governmental body shall have their terms of service on the Airport Board expire in
conjunction with the expiration of their elected term of office.
(D) Except for those board members that also serve as an elected official, all terms of
service shall be adjusted so that they expire on the 30th day of June immediately
preceding the current projected expiration date. With the exception of those
members who also serve as elected officials, the Mayor may adjust the overall term
of the existing members so that only approximately one third of the members terms
will expire in a given year. This adjustment in the length of terms is done in an effort
to make sure there is a balance between new members and a continuity of
membership. Once the adjustment is complete, all subsequent members that are not
also serving as elected officials shall serve four (4) year terms.
(E) The Mayor may remove members of the Airport Board for the following reasons, to
whit:
(1) Misconduct including, but not limited to, commission of a criminal act other
than minor traffic violations, and;
(2) Excessive absenteeism including, but not limited to, missing three (3)
consecutive meetings.
(F) Should an appointed member resign or be removed from office before their term of
office expires, the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may
appoint a person to serve out the remainder of the term.
SECTION 10-2. Organization.
The Board shall conduct meetings in accordance with the provisions of the State of Utah
Ch. 10 Pg. 2
Open and Public Meetings Act. All members of the board shall follow the State of Utah Public
Employees Ethics Act.
A simple majority of the voting members shall constitute a quorum to conduct business. The
Chairman shall conduct the meetings pursuant to Robert’s Rules of Order. In applying Robert’s
Rules of Order the Chairman is encouraged to reject overly formal applications, and adopt the
application that favors the following goals: (1) allow the Chairman the ability to facilitate or direct
the discussion and keep order; (2) protect the ability of all board members to bring up their ideas,
discuss them, receive input from the public and staff, and come to their individual opinions and
conclusions on each issue; (3) allow all members the opportunity to express their individual opinions
and conclusions on each issue through their vote; and (4) assure the majority vote of the board is the
opinion of the board while at the same time protecting the minority of board members’ ability to
speak, express ideas, and vote.
Cedar City shall assign such staff to the Airport Board that is necessary and proper. City staff
shall provide training for new members upon their appointment. The members of the board shall
not be entitled to any compensation but shall receive actual travel or other expenses incurred upon
prior approval by the City Council.
SECTION 10-3. Duties.
The Airport Board shall have the authority and responsibility to make recommendations to
the City Council of all matters of airport development and establishing of policy for the use and
operation of the airport, and such other duties and responsibilities as the City Council by may from
time to time assign either by resolution or ordinance.
If in the opinion of the Airport Board it is necessary to appoint a sub-committee, the Airport
Board may recommend the appointment of such a sub-committee. All sub-committees shall
complete their scope of work and report back to the Airport Board. The Airport Board will then
make recommendations to the City Council. All members of sub-committees shall be appointed in
a manner consistent with this ordinance, serve until the scope of work assigned to the committee is
completed, serve at the pleasure of the Mayor, and serve without compensation.
SECTION 10-4. Public Expenditures.
The Airport Board shall have no authority to appropriate and expend public moneys on the
airport or to incur any obligation therefor by the City.
SECTION 10-5. Recommendations.
The Board shall submit its recommendations to the City Council either by a member or in
writing or both and the Council shall as expeditiously as possible thereafter, take such action as is
deemed advisable.
Ch. 10 Pg. 3
SECTION 10-6. Airport Fees.
The City Council shall establish a rates and charges schedule for leases and services
available at the airport per SECTION 10-3 above. The charges, fees or rates shall be fixed from time
to time by resolution or at the option of the City Council, by Ordinance.
SECTION 10-6-1. Board of Equalization. Rates. Rebates.
The City Council is hereby constituted a Board of Equalization of land fee rebates, to hear
complaints and make corrections on any assessment or charges deemed to be illegal, improper or
unjust.
SECTION 10-6-2. Regulations.
The City Council shall have power and retains the right to adopt regulations controlling the
manner and circumstances under which the airport facilities may be used in addition to the regulatory
provisions set forth expressly in this Ordinance by resolution. The City Council shall adopt Rules,
Regulations and Minimum Standards that shall be enforced under this ordinance.
SECTION 10-6-3. Compliance Required.
It shall be unlawful for any person to land any aircraft at the Cedar City Municipal Airport
without complying with this ordinance and without complying with the regulations and payment of
fees imposed by resolution of Cedar City Council.
SECTION 10-7. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a
misdemeanor and may be punished by a fine in an amount not to exceed One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for not more than six months, or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
Amended 2/04.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 1028-09
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0612-13-1
Chapter 11
ANIMAL CONTROL
ARTICLE I. GENERAL PROVISIONS
Section 11-I-1 Purpose
Section 11-I-2 Definitions
Section 11-I-3 Adoption of State Animal Cruelty Statutes
Section 11-I-4 Policies and Procedures
ARTICLE II. LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS
Section 11-II-1 License
ARTICLE III. RABIES CONTROL
Section 11-III-1 Duty to Report Bites
Section 11-III-2 Quarantine
Section 11-III-3 Vaccinations
ARTICLE IV. REGULATORY PERMITS & LICENSES
Section 11-IV-1 Required Permits and Licenses
Section 11-IV-2 Kennel Permits
Section 11-IV-3 Breeder’s Permit
Section 11-IV-4 Cat Foster Care Permit
Section 11-IV-5 Posting of Licenses and Permits; Transferability;
Changes
Section 11-IV-6 Suspension or Revocation of Kennel Permit
ARTICLE V. PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES
Section 11-V-1 Harboring Stray Animals
Section 11-V-2 Animals Running at large
Section 11-V-3 Abandonment of Animals
Section 11-V-4 Unsafe Tethering
Section 11-V-5 Female Animals in Heat
Section 11-V-6 Animal Waste Disposal
Section 11-V-7 Carcass Disposal
Section 11-V-8 Cruelty to Animals
Section 11-V-9 Causing Injury or Death; Contacting Division
Section 11-V-10 Provoking Prohibited
Section 11-V-11 Animals Disturbing Neighborhood
ARTICLE VI. ANIMALS WHICH POSE A THREAT
Section 11-VI-1 Animals Attacking, Biting, or Chasing
Section 11-VI-2 Aggressive Animal at Large
Section 11-VI-3 Dangerous Animal at Large
Section 11-VI-4 Vicious Animal at Large
Section 11-VI-5 Provisions for Maintaining a Dangerous Animal
ARTICLE VII. IMPOUNDING AND ADOPTION
Section 11-VII-1 Authority; Applicable Animals
Section 11-VII-2 Information Required
Section 11-VII-3 Period of Impound
Section 11-VII-4 Impound Fees
Section 11-VII-5 Redemption
Section 11-VII-6 Adoption
Section 11-VII-7 Euthanasia
ARTICLE VIII. STERILIZATION REQUIREMENTS
Section 11-VIII-1 Definitions
Section 11-VIII-2 Sterilization Required; Written Agreement
Section 11-VIII-3 Sterilization Deposit
Section 11-VIII-4 Failure to Comply with Agreement
Section 11-VIII-5 Deposit; When Required for Redemption
Section 11-VIII-6 Penalty
ARTICLE IX. PROHIBITED ANIMALS
Section 11-IX-1 Prohibited Domestic Livestock
Section 11-IX-2 Prohibited Domestic Fowl
Section 11-IX-3 Domestic Livestock or Fowl at Large
Section 11-IX-4 Exotic Animals
Section 11-IX-5 Selling Diseased Animals
ARTICLE X. ENFORCEMENT
Section 11-IX-1 Enforcement Authority
Section 11-IX-2 Powers and Duties
Section 11-IX-3 Right of Entry for Enforcement
Section 11-IX-4 Interfering with Officers
ARTICLE XI. PENALTIES
Section 11-XI-1 General
Section 11-XI-2 Specific Penalties
Section 11-XI-3 Loss of Privilege
ARTICLE XII. APPEAL
Section 11-XII-1 Appealable Matters
Section 11-XII-2 Standing
Section 11-XII-3 Filing of Appeal
Section 11-XII-4 Hearing
ARTICLE I
GENERAL
Section 11-I-1 Purpose
Section 11-I-2 Definitions
Section 11-I-3 Adoption of State Animal Cruelty Statutes
Section 11-I-4 Policies and Procedures
SECTION 11-I-1 Purpose.
A) The purpose of this ordinance is to create in Cedar City a division known as the Division
of Animal Control within the Cedar City Police Department with power to cite,
apprehend, and/or impound animals found in violation of this Chapter, and to otherwise
carry out and enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
B) While the Division of Animal Control’s primary purpose is to provide animal services for
the citizens of Cedar City, the Division may provide assistance in other cases including:
1) Assisting neighboring jurisdictions during times of disaster in placing animals
in safe environments, including the Animal Shelter if space is available, and in
attempting to find foster homes for such animals; and
2) Taking animals from relinquishing owners living in neighboring jurisdictions
in Iron County if all of the following are met:
a) The owner pays twice the fee charged to Cedar City residents;
b) The animal is spayed or neutered;
c) The animal has complete current vaccinations, including bordatella;
and
d) The animal is in good health and adoptable.
3) Engaging in cooperative efforts with other shelters and qualified rescue
groups in placing animals for adoption or foster care.
SECTION 11-I-2 Definitions.
A) Abandoned or Strayed: means an animal whose owner cannot be immediately
identified through reasonable diligence.
B) Adequate Home: means an existing facility that meets the needs of the animal,
including food, water, shelter, and protection from extreme weather conditions.
C) Adoptable: means those domesticated animals eight weeks of age or older that, at or
subsequent to the time the animal is impounded or otherwise taken into possession, have
manifested no sign of a behavioral or temperamental defect that could pose a health or
safety risk or otherwise make the animal unsuitable for placement as a pet, and have
manifested no sign of disease, injury, or congenital, or hereditary condition that
adversely affects the health of the animal or that is likely to adversely affect in the future
the health of the animal, the person adopting the animal, or the public.
D) Animal Control Officer: means the supervisor, special function officers, and other
employees and volunteers of the Public Safety Department who have been designated by
the Chief of Police to perform the duties of Animal Control Officers and who have been
authorized to enforce the provisions of this Chapter.
E) Animal Shelter: means the Cedar City Animal Shelter used for the care and custody of
seized, stray, homeless, quarantined, abandoned, or unwanted dogs, cats, or other small
domesticated animals. Nothing in this Chapter shall be interpreted to prohibit or restrict
the establishment of an animal shelter by Iron County, by the State of Utah, or by
interlocal agreement.
F) Bite: means an actual puncture, tear, or abrasion of the skin inflicted by the teeth of an
animal.
G) Cattery: means an establishment for boarding, breeding, buying, grooming, or selling
cats for profit.
H) Commercial Kennel: means any premises or establishment where four (4) or more
dogs, older than four (4) months, are kept for the purpose of boarding, breeding, raising,
or training dogs for a fee or on a nonprofit basis.
I) Director: means the Cedar City Chief of Police.
J) Disposition: means the adoption, placement, or destruction of an animal.
K) Domesticated Animals: means animals accustomed to living in or about the habitation
of man that are not included in the definition of livestock, exotic animal, or wild animal,
as defined by this Chapter and as supplemented by Federal Wildlife Code, Chapter 13,
as amended. Examples include, but are not limited to dogs, cats, and rabbits.
L) Exotic Animal: means any animal that is not livestock or a domesticated animal and
includes, but is not limited to, no matter how well-trained: all alligators and crocodiles;
all bears; all cats other than the commonly accepted domesticated cats, including but not
limited to cheetah, leopard, lion, lynx, panther, cougar, mountain lion, bobcat, and tiger;
all dogs other than domesticated dogs, including but not limited to wolf, part wolf, fox,
part fox, coyote, and part coyote; all porcupines; all nonhuman primates; all raccoons;
all skunks; all venomous fish and piranha; all venomous snakes and lizards; and all
weasels other than ferrets.
M) Feral Animal: means an animal without owner identification of any kind whose usual
and consistent temperament is extreme fear of and resistance to contact with people.
N) Groomery: means any establishment maintained for the purpose of offering cosmetic
services for animals for profit.
O) Litter: means two or more puppies or kittens under the age of four (4) months old.
P) Livestock: means cattle, domesticated elk, bison, sheep, swine, goats, poultry, llamas,
horses, mules, or other equines.
Q) Non-Rehabilitable: means animals that are neither adoptable nor treatable, vicious
animals, or animals for whom euthanasia would be the most humane alternative due to
disease, injury or suffering that cannot reasonably be alleviated.
R) Pet Shop: means any establishment containing cages or exhibition pens, not part of a
kennel or cattery, wherein dogs, cats, birds, or other pets for sale are kept or displayed.
S) Quarantine: means the isolation of an animal in a substantial enclosure so that the
animal is not subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized persons.
T) Qualified Rescue Group: means a nonprofit, as defined in Section 501(c)(3) of the
Internal Revenue Code, animal rescue or adoption organization.
U) Responsible Adult: means a person eighteen (18) years of age or older, who is
employed or otherwise capable of providing the physical, medical and emotional needs
of the adopted animal. A person found guilty or who pled no contest to violating the
provisions of this Chapter or any other federal, state, or local law concerning the abuse
of or cruelty to animals within five (5) years of the animal adoption application, is not a
"responsible adult" for the purposes of this Chapter.
V) Riding School or Stable: means an establishment which offers boarding and/or riding
instruction for any horse, pony, donkey, mule or burro, or which offers such animals for
hire.
W) Secondary Offense: means an alleged violation of an ordinance that by itself shall not
result in an officer responding or issuing a citation. An officer may only take notice of a
secondary offense when the officer is lawfully present to respond to a separate violation
of state law or local ordinance. An officer may not issue a citation for a secondary
offense unless the officer issues a citation for one or more violations of state law or local
ordinance for which the officer is lawfully present.
X) Supervisor: means the position within the police department assigned by the Chief of
Police to oversee and supervise the daily operations of the Division of Animal Control
and the Animal Control Officers and staff.
Y) Treatable: means any animal that is not adoptable but that could become adoptable with
reasonable efforts.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0212-14-1
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0525-16
SECTION 11-I-3 Adoption of State Animal Cruelty Statutes.
The Cruelty to Animals Code of the State of Utah set forth at Title 76, Chapter 9, Part 3,
Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended, is hereby approved and adopted as part of this Chapter.
Whenever any amendment, revision, or supplement is made to the Cruelty to Animals Code of
the State of Utah, the same shall become an amendment, revision, or supplement to this Chapter.
SECTION 11-I-4 Policies and Procedures.
The Director, or his designee, shall establish and update, from time to time, written
policies and procedures which implement the provisions of this Chapter and which govern the
administration of the animal shelter. The Director, or his designee, shall also establish and
update, from time to time, written guidelines concerning volunteer opportunities available at or
through the animal shelter.
ARTICLE II
LICENSING OF DOGS AND CATS
SECTION 11-II-1 Licensing
Benefits of licensing dogs and cats include the ability of animal control to be able to
identify owners of animals that are in the animal shelter, and so animal control has the
opportunity to know if animals have been vaccinated for rabies. Cedar City will not require
licensing; however animal control will offer licensing to interested animal owners. Fees shall be
established through the City’s fee schedule.
Amended by cedar City Ordinance No. 0525-16
ARTICLE III
RABIES CONTROL
Section 11-III-1 Duty to Report Bites
Section 11-III-2 Quarantine
Section 11-III-3 Vaccinations
SECTION 11-III-1 Duty to Report Bites.
Any owner of an animal of a species subject to rabies having knowledge that the owner’s
animal has bitten any individual or another animal or that the owner’s animal was bitten by an
animal of a species subject to rabies shall report the incident immediately to the Division, giving
the name and address of the person bitten, or whose animal was bitten, and of the owner or
custodian of the biting animal, if available. Failure to provide such information or otherwise
assist the Division in discovering possible exposure to rabies or in ascertaining the immunization
status of an animal shall be in violation of this Chapter.
SECTION 11-III-2 Quarantine.
A) Any domestic animal that is known to have bitten a person resulting in the exchange of
bodily fluids must be placed in strict confinement for observation for a period of not less
than 10 days, which shall be determined from the date the bite occurred.
B) Any animal that is involved in a human biting incident shall be sterilized upon
completion of the quarantine period, unless the owner can demonstrate that sterilization
will significantly decrease the animal’s value for show, work or breeding purposes. The
owner shall bear the full cost of sterilization
C) An animal that has rabies or shows signs of having rabies, and every animal bitten by
another animal afflicted with rabies or that is known to have been exposed to rabies, shall
be reported by the owner, as set forth above, and shall immediately be confined in a
secure place by the owner. The owner shall turn over the animal to the Division upon
demand, whereupon the Division shall quarantine the animal for observation for a period
of not less than six (6) months. The owner of the animal shall bear all costs of
quarantining the animal. Although the Animal Shelter or a veterinary kennel shall be the
normal place for quarantine, other arrangements, including confinement by the owner,
may be made by the Director or his designee if the animal had a current rabies
vaccination at the time the bite was inflicted or if there are other special circumstances
justifying an exception. A person who has custody of an animal under quarantine shall
immediately notify the Division if the animal shows any signs of sickness or abnormal
behavior, or if the animal escapes confinement. It shall be unlawful for any person who
has custody of a quarantined animal to fail or refuse to allow a health or Animal Control
Officer to make an inspection or examination during the period of quarantine. If the
animal dies within six (6) months from the date of the bite, the person having custody
shall immediately notify the Division who shall immediately remove and deliver the head
of such animal to the state health laboratory to be examined for rabies. If, at the end of
the six-month period, the owner provides written verification by a licensed veterinarian
that the animal has had no sign of rabies, the animal may be released to the owner, or in
the case of a stray, it shall be placed for adoption or otherwise disposed of as provided in
this Chapter.
D) In the case of an unvaccinated animal species subject to rabies which is known to have
been bitten by a known rabid animal, said bitten or exposed animal should be
immediately destroyed. If the owner is unwilling to destroy the bitten or exposed animal,
the animal shall be immediately isolated and quarantined for six (6) months under
veterinary supervision, the cost of such confinement to be paid in advance by the owner.
The animal shall be destroyed if the owner does not comply herewith.
E) It shall be unlawful for any person to remove any animal from the place of quarantine
without the written permission of the Director or his/her designee.
SECTION 11-III-3 Vaccinations.
A) Rabies vaccination is required for dogs, cats and ferrets. The owner or custodian of a
dog, cat, or ferret shall have said animal vaccinated within thirty (30) days after it reaches
the age of four (4) months. Unvaccinated dogs, cats, or ferrets over four (4) months of
age acquired by the owner or brought into Cedar City must be vaccinated within thirty
(30) days. Every dog, cat or ferret shall be revaccinated thereafter to remain current.
This provision shall not apply to veterinarian or kennel operators temporarily maintaining
on their premises animals owned by others. Each veterinarian, when vaccinating any
animal for rabies, shall complete a certificate of rabies vaccination (in duplicate) which
includes the following information:
1) owner's name and address;
2) a description of animal (breed, sex, markings, age, name);
3) the date of vaccination;
4) the rabies vaccination tag number;
5) the type of rabies vaccine administered; and
6) the manufacturer's serial number of vaccine.
B) A copy of the certificate shall be distributed to the owner and original retained by the
issuing veterinarian. Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, any unvaccinated animal
that is impounded may be reclaimed prior to disposition by payment of impound fees and
by obtaining a rabies vaccination within fourteen (14) days of release. Any adoptable
animal not reclaimed within the minimum impound period shall be adopted, placed with
a qualified rescue group or into foster care, or may be destroyed if reasonable attempts to
adopt or place the animal have failed.
C) Dogs and cats shall not be licensed unless they have met the requirements of this Section.
Violation of this Section shall be treated as a failure to vaccinate, a class B misdemeanor.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0525-16
ARTICLE IV
REGULATORY PERMITS & LICENSES
Section 11-IV-1 Required Permits and Licenses
Section 11-IV-2 Kennel Permits
Section 11-IV-3 Breeder’s Permit
Section 11-IV-4 Posting of Licenses; Transferability; Changes
Section 11-IV-5 Suspension or Revocation of License
SECTION 11-IV-1 Required Permits and Licenses.
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or maintain a cattery, pet shop, groomery,
riding school or stable, veterinary clinic or hospital, or any similar establishment, unless such
establishment is located in a zoning district allowing such use as either a permitted or conditional
use and such person first obtains all necessary permits and licenses therefore as required by City
ordinance.
SECTION 11-IV-2 Kennel Permits.
A) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or maintain more animals than allowed
under Chapter 26, Cedar City Ordinances and never more than two (2) dogs, two (2) cats,
and two (2) rabbits at any one residence, place of business, or undeveloped lot, unless
that person is in possession of a Kennel Permit, or the animals are offspring less than four
(4) months of age not to exceed two litters under the age of four (4) months old at any
one time.
B) In addition to any requirements of this Chapter, holders of Kennel Permits must comply
with any limitations set by Chapter 26, Cedar City Ordinances.
C) Any person conducting, operating, or maintaining a kennel shall pay to the Division of
Animal Control an annual fee as established by Council Resolution for each calendar
year that the kennel is in operation. All kennels are subject to inspection without notice.
D) Violation of this section of the Ordinance of Cedar City is a secondary offense. The
penalty for the first violation of this section is set forth in Chapter 11, Article XI, Section
2.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0112-14-1.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0525-16.
SECTION 11-IV-3 Breeder’s Permit.
A) Any person who owns an unsterilized dog and/or cat for the purpose of breeding with or
without the intent to cause the whelping, sale, or transfer of ownership must pay an
annual breeder’s fee as established by Council Resolution to the Division prior to any
attempted breeding. Each person subject to this provision shall:
1) Not allow the whelping of more than one (1) litter each per dog or cat in any twelve
(12) month period, unless the owner is forced to destroy a litter due to poor health or
illness;
2) Not sell, transfer ownership of or release any animal until such a time that it is able to
eat solid food, unless transferred with the dam or to a licensed vet; and
3) Provide the Division with a breed and color description of the dam/sire at the time the
permit is purchased.
B) Except as directed by Subsection (C), no person shall have in their possession a litter of
dogs or cats unless that person had previously obtained a still-valid Breeder’s Permit.
Violations of this Chapter shall be determined according to ownership status at the time
of whelping, notwithstanding any transfer of ownership, including the surrendering of
ownership to the Division after whelping.
C) Within thirty (30) days of receiving a citation or Criminal Information for a violation of
Subsection (B), the charged person may provide proof that the dam involved in the
violation has been spayed. If such proof is provided within the thirty (30) days, the City
will request that the Court dismiss the criminal charge.
SECTION 11-IV-4 Cat Foster Care Permit.
A resident may apply to Cedar City Police Department’s Division of Animal Control for
a permit to operate a Cat Foster Care Program to promote the adoption of cats from the Cedar
City Animal Shelter. The requesting resident must make application to the Cedar City Police
Department’s Division of Animal Control and comply with the following regulations.
(A) The Cat Foster Care program must be a non-profit cat adoption program and
charge no fees to the party adopting the cat except for such fees as are required by
Cedar City.
(B) All cats involved in the Cat Foster Care program must come from the Cedar City
Animal Shelter.
(C) Cedar City Animal Control adoption fees shall be paid upon adoption of cats from
the Cat Foster Care Program.
(D) Cedar City Animal Control paperwork shall be required upon the adoption of cats
from the Cat Foster Care Program.
(E) The Cedar City Animal Control shall conduct monthly checks of the person(s)
residence involved in the Cat Foster Care Program to insure all policies are
followed and that all cats are cared for.
(F) All parties residing in the home where a Cat Foster Care program is operating
pursuant to this permit must execute in writing a waiver allowing Cedar City
Animal Control access to their property to conduct monthly inspections upon
reasonable notice and without the necessity of having to obtain a warrant.
(G) No more than five (5) foster cats will be allowed at one time in each residence.
All foster cats must be more than six (6) months old to be allowed in the Cat
Foster Care program.
(H) No more than two (2) litters with a nursing mother or not more than one (1) litter
without a nursing mother will be allowed at one time in a residence.
(I) Persons residing in the home where the Cat Foster Care program is located shall
be allowed two (2) cats of their own as personal pets.
(J) Persons wishing to host a Cat Foster Care program within their home and those
that will be involved in the Cat Foster Care program must pass a background
check.
(K) The Cedar City Animal Shelter will be notified of any health related issues
associated with cats involved in the Cat Foster Care Program.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0226-14
SECTION 11-IV-5 Posting of Licenses and Permits; Transferability; Changes.
All valid licenses and permits shall be posted in a conspicuous place in each
establishment, and licenses and permits shall not be transferable to other locations. The
licensee/permittee shall notify the Division of any change in location or ownership prior to such
change or within 5 business days of such change if such change is unexpected.
SECTION 11-IV-6 Suspension or Revocation of Kennel Permit.
A) A kennel permit may be suspended or revoked, or a permit application rejected for
falsification of facts in the permit application or for violation of any of the provisions of
this Chapter or any other law or regulation governing the establishment such as but not
limited to:
1) Kennels are not properly maintained upon inspection;
2) Neglect of animals is reported or discovered upon inspection;
3) Two (2) or more violations of this Chapter;
4) Animals are found running at large; or
5) Refusal of kennel owner to allow Division personnel to inspect kennel upon demand.
B) If the inspection of a permittee discloses a violation, the Director or designee shall notify
the permittee of the following:
1) The specific violations found;
2) A specific and reasonable period of time for the correction of the violations found,
said time period not being less than five (5) days nor more than two (2) months,
unless exigent circumstances require a different time period;
3) Notice that failure to correct may result in immediate suspension of the license; and
4) An opportunity for appeal pursuant to the requirements of this Chapter.
C) Notice shall be deemed to have been properly served when the original of the inspection
report form or other notice has been delivered personally to the permittee or person in
charge, or such notice has been sent by certified mail to the last known address of the
permittee. A copy of such notice shall be filed with the records of the Division.
D) Any person found in violation of this Article shall be subject to:
1) Loss of kennel license and privileges for a period of two (2) years; and/or
2) Forcible seizure of all animals with all applicable fees to be paid by the owner of the
animal and the kennel.
ARTICLE V
PROHIBITED ACTS AND ACTIVITIES
Section 11-V-1 Harboring Stray Animals
Section 11-V-2 Animals Running at Large
Section 11-V-3 Abandonment of Animals
Section 11-V-4 Unsafe Tethering
Section 11-V-5 Female Animals in Heat
Section 11-V-6 Animal Waste Disposal
Section 11-V-7 Carcass Disposal
Section 11-V-8 Cruelty to Animals
Section 11-V-9 Causing Injury or Death; Contacting Division
Section 11-V-10 Provoking Prohibited
Section 11-V-11 Animals Disturbing Neighborhood
SECTION 11-V-1 Harboring Stray Animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person, except an animal shelter, to harbor or keep any
lost, abandoned or strayed domestic animal. Whenever any domesticated animal shall be
found which appears to be lost, abandoned, or strayed, it shall be the duty of the finder,
within seventy-two (72) hours, to either return the domesticated animal to its owner, if
known, or to notify the Division, so the domesticated animal can be impounded as provided
in this Chapter.
SECTION 11-V-2 Animals Running At Large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to allow such animal to
run at large. The owner or person charged with responsibility for an animal found running at
large shall be strictly liable for a violation of this section regardless of the precautions taken
to prevent the escape of the animal and regardless of whether or not he/she knows that the
animal is running at large. Animals are considered running at large if they:
A) Leave their residential property unrestrained, except at any park, if any, that
allows unleashed animals as indicated by City signs, ordinance, or resolution;
B) By way of damage or destruction of a mutual fence line, all or part of the animal
is allowed to trespass upon the property of another;
C) Are left unattended in a vehicle in a manner that allows all or part of the animal to
hinder public access;
D) Are herded on or across City property except upon a City-approved easement; or
E) Are chained, staked out, or otherwise tethered on or attached to any public
property, sign, or structure or in such a manner that allows the animal to go
beyond the owner’s property line.
SECTION 11-V-3 Abandonment of Animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to abandon or place at large any animal for any
reason, including inability to care for or refusal to maintain such animal. Persons having
possession of such animals are responsible for placing such animals under the care, either
through transfer of ownership or surrender of ownership, of the Division of Animal Control.
SECTION 11-V-4 Unsafe Tethering.
It shall be unlawful for any person to chain, stake out or tether any animal in such a
manner that may be dangerous to the animal.
SECTION 11-V-5 Female Animals in Heat.
It shall be unlawful for the custodian of any female animal in heat to fail to confine
such animal in a secure enclosure so as to prevent it from coming into contact with another
animal of the same species, unless the other animal is of the same sex or has been sterilized,
except for planned breeding.
SECTION 11-V-6 Animal Waste Disposal.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of an animal to permit the animal to
defecate upon a public street, sidewalk, park, or other area, or upon the property of another
unless the owner or custodian immediately removes and properly disposes of all animal
waste that may result.
SECTION 11-V-7 Carcass Disposal.
A) General: It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian to allow the carcass of a
dead animal to remain anywhere in the City, whether interred or otherwise, and
whether on private or public property. Disposal shall be at the county sanitary
landfill by arrangement directly with the operator thereof who shall effect an
appropriate interment at the landfill site.
B) Domesticated Animals: The foregoing notwithstanding, upon the death of a
domesticated animal, the owner thereof may bury the animal on his/her private
property within one (1) day of the animal’s death.
C) Killing for Consumption: This Section shall have no application to animals killed
for consumption purposes, although unused portions of the carcass must be disposed
of in accordance herewith.
SECTION 11-V-8 Cruelty to Animals.
Cruelty to animals is prohibited. In addition to those acts prohibited by the Utah Code
sections adopted in this Chapter, cruelty shall include injurious hobbling and malicious
impounding.
SECTION 11-V-9 Causing Injury or Death; Contacting Division.
A) The operator of a motor vehicle that strikes and injures any domestic animal shall
immediately stop the vehicle at the scene of the accident or as close as possible without
obstructing traffic more than necessary until he has provided the notice required by
Subsection (C) of this Section.
B) Any person who injures or causes the death of an animal shall immediately provide the
notice required by Subsection (C) of this Section.
C) Notice. When notice is required, the person shall either
1) Notify the owner of the animal, if the owner can be ascertained, or
2) In the absence of the owner, notify the Division, furnishing requested facts relative to
the incident.
D) Emergency vehicles are exempted from the requirements of this provision.
SECTION 11-V-10 Provoking Prohibited.
Unless otherwise allowed by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to tease, torment,
abuse, or provoke an animal with the intent to harass or cause injury. This also includes, but is
not limited to causing the animal to run at large, bark excessively, or bite a person.
SECTION 11-V-11 Animals Disturbing Neighborhood.
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or harbor any animal which by loud, continued
or frequent barking, howling, yelping, meowing, screeching, or by noxious or offensive odors
shall annoy, disturb, or endanger the health and welfare of any person or neighborhood. This
section shall not apply to the Animal Shelter or veterinary hospitals.
ARTICLE VI
ANIMALS WHICH POSE A THREAT
Section 11-VI-1 Animals Attacking, Biting, or Chasing
Section 11-VI-2 Aggressive Animal at Large
Section 11-VI-3 Dangerous Animal at Large
Section 11-VI-4 Vicious Animal at Large
Section 11-VI-5 Provisions for Maintaining a Dangerous Animal
SECTION 11-VI-1 Animals Attacking, Biting, or Chasing.
A) It shall be unlawful for the owner or custodian of any animal to allow the animal to
attack, bite, or chase any person, any domesticated animal, or livestock.
B) The injuring, capturing, or killing of an animal by any person while the animal is engaged
in any act prohibited by this Section, if reasonably necessary to stop the animal’s actions,
shall not be a violation of any other provision of this Chapter, provided such injuring,
capturing, or killing in no way endangers another's safety or property.
SECTION 11-VI-2 Aggressive Animal at Large.
An animal will be considered aggressive if, while at large, the animal chases, worries, or
threatens a person in any way that would cause a reasonable person to be fearful or attacks a
domesticated animal or livestock resulting in injury or death. Complaining parties must be
forthcoming with their testimony including the signing of a witness statement or citation or
providing sworn testimony. Nevertheless, an officer may make the determination based on the
officer’s own observations or on the previous history of the animal.
SECTION 11-VI-3 Dangerous Animal at Large.
A) An animal will be considered dangerous if, while at large, the animal
1) Bites a person; or
2) Has violated Section 11-VI-2 Aggressive Animal at Large two (2) or more times
before.
B) Such animal is to be impounded at the shelter or licensed veterinary facility at the
expense of the owner until a determination is made by the court that the animal is or is
not a threat and/or danger to the public.
SECTION 11-VI-4 Vicious Animal at Large.
A) Vicious Animal at Large: An animal will be considered vicious if, while at large, the
animal:
1) Bites a person on two (2) or more occasions or on the first bite causes serious bodily
injury. Serious bodily injury is defined as an injury that involves a substantial risk of
death, unconsciousness, extreme physical pain, protracted and obvious disfigurement,
or protracted loss or impairment of the function of a bodily member, organ, or mental
faculty;
2) Has attacked a domesticated animal or livestock and a human;
3) Was previously determined to be “dangerous” and is at large; or
4) Has bitten a human on the neck or stomach.
B) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, possess, or maintain a vicious animal
within the City limits. Any person violating this provision must have the animal
destroyed by the Division or a licensed veterinarian.
C) Such animal is to be impounded at the shelter or licensed veterinary facility at the
expense of the owner until a determination is made by the court that the animal is or is
not a threat and/or danger to the public.
D) Petition to Classify as Vicious: If an Animal Control Officer does not or refuses to
deem an animal to be a vicious animal, any person may petition to have an animal
classified as vicious by filing with the Division a written “Petition to Classify an Animal
as Vicious” on a form provided by the Division.
1) Notice: Upon receipt of a properly executed petition, the Director shall ensure a copy
thereof is mailed or hand-delivered to the animal’s owner.
2) Response: The owner shall then have ten (10) calendar days from the date of receipt
to submit a written response to the allegations of the petition. If mailed, the petition
shall be deemed received five (5) calendar days after the date of mailing.
3) Decision: Upon receipt of the owner’s written response, if any, the Director shall
decide whether the animal is to be classified as vicious. The Director shall ensure
written notice of his decision is mailed or hand-delivered to the owner.
4) Appeal: Appeal of the Director’s decision shall be according to the requirements of
this Chapter.
5) Destruction of vicious animal: If an animal is classified as vicious and time for appeal
has expired or the Director’s decision is upheld on appeal pursuant to Article XII of
this Chapter, the Director shall have the animal destroyed as soon as reasonable
possible.
SECTION 11-VI-5 Provisions for Maintaining a Dangerous Animal.
A) This provision is for owners that have been told by the court that their animal is
dangerous but did not order destruction of the animal.
B) Any person who owns, keeps, or maintains a dangerous animal within the city limits
must:
1) Maintain the animal in a secure enclosure, which is enclosed on all six (6) sides, as to
prevent accidental escape.
2) Position such enclosure in a manner that is not accessible to the public. If the
enclosure is a fence that separates two adjoining properties, it cannot be constructed
of chain link or wire, even if slats are inserted between the links or wire, but must be
of a sight-obscuring material such as wood, vinyl or brick of at least 6 feet in height.
3) Post “Beware of Dog” or “Beware of Animal” signs visible to the public.
4) When off the owner’s property, animals must be on a secure restraint not to exceed
four (4) feet in length and be muzzled, and/or confined so as to prevent it from
injuring any person, property or other animal.
5) Immediately report to Animal Control in writing any material change in dangerous
animal situations, including, but not limited to a change, transfer or termination of
ownership, change of address, escape, or death.
ARTICLE VII
IMPOUNDING AND ADOPTION
Section 11-VII-1 Authority; Applicable Animals
Section 11-VII-2 Information Required
Section 11-VII-3 Period of Impound
Section 11-VII-4 Impound Fees
Section 11-VII-5 Redemption
Section 11-VII-6 Adoption
Section 11-VII-7 Euthanasia
SECTION 11-VII-1 Authority; Applicable Animals.
Except as otherwise directed by this Chapter or other applicable law, Animal Control
Officers shall place animals taken into custody in the Animal Shelter. The following animals
may be taken into custody and impounded:
1) Any animal being kept or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Chapter;
2) Any animal running at large contrary to the provisions of this Chapter;
3) Any animal which is by this Chapter required to be licensed and is not licensed or is
not wearing a tag, which shall be presumed to be unlicensed for purposes of this
section;
4) Any abandoned or stray animal;
5) Animals which are not vaccinated for rabies in accordance with the requirements of
this Chapter; and
6) Any dangerous or vicious animal.
SECTION 11-VII-2 Information Required.
The impounding of any animal shall require the following information to be kept by the
Division:
1) A complete description of the animal, including tag numbers if any;
2) The manner and date of impound;
3) The location of the pick-up and name of the officer picking up the animal;
4) The name and address of any person relinquishing an animal to the impound facility;
5) The name and address of the redeemer or person adopting, and the date thereof;
6) All applicable violations of this Chapter;
7) All applicable fees and penalties; and
8) All expenses accrued during impoundment.
SECTION 11-VII-3 Period of Impound.
Domesticated animals shall be impounded for a minimum period of five (5) days before
further disposition, unless voluntarily relinquished by the owner or custodian in which case there
shall be no minimum period of impound. All adoptable dogs and cats, except for those
quarantined or confined by court order, that have not been reclaimed by their owners within the
minimum impound period are then eligible for adoption, placement with a qualified rescue group
or into foster care, or, when reasonable attempts to adopt or otherwise place the animal have
been unsuccessful, destruction as the Director or his designee shall direct in accordance with this
Chapter.
SECTION 11-VII-4 Impound Fees.
Impound fees shall be in such amounts as established by resolution of the City Council.
SECTION 11-VII-5 Redemption.
Unless otherwise prohibited by this Chapter or other law, the owner of any impounded
animal, who is a responsible adult, may redeem his/her impounded animal before disposition,
upon payment of the following:
1) The impound fees;
2) The daily board charges;
3) Veterinary costs incurred during the impound period; and
4) License fees, if required.
SECTION 11-VII-6 Adoption.
A) The Division shall not receive any adoptable animal from its owner unless such person
signs a release agreement waiving rights to said animal, and provides full disclosure of
the animal, including age, vaccination history, and temperament. Acceptance of such
animal is determined by available space. The owner shall pay a surrender fee established
by resolution of the City Council.
B) All animals that are known to be infirm, diseased, aggressive, dangerous, vicious, or
otherwise non-rehabilitable shall not be considered adoptable, and it is therefore the
responsibility of the owner to have the animal humanely euthanized. If the owner of such
animal must relinquish ownership to the Division, the owner shall pay at the time of
surrender a euthanasia fee established by resolution of the City Council. The Division
has the right to refuse acceptance of such animals for reasons that include, but are not
limited to:
1) Limited kennel space availability;
2) Extended waiting time for euthanasia causing the animal undue stress or pain; or
3) Kenneling of animal may spread disease to other impounded animals.
C) Upon the expiration of the minimum period of impound, adoptable animals may be given
up for adoption to responsible adults, upon a showing that they can provide an adequate
home for the animal.
D) The Division has the right to refuse adoption of any animal to such persons that are
unable to properly care for such animal, including, but not limited to persons that have
relinquished ownership of another animal, or persons with repeated violations of any
animal ordinance or statute, or persons with a known intent to injure, abuse, or kill the
animal, unless otherwise required by law.
E) No warranty of any type may be given as to the health, temperament, or suitability of the
animal so adopted.
F) Records shall be kept of any person to whom an animal is given. No animal shall be
given to a former owner, directly or indirectly, without payment by the recipient of all
impound and other fees applicable to redemption.
G) Adoption fees shall be in such amounts as established by resolution of the City Council.
SECTION 11-VII-7 Euthanasia.
The Animal Shelter is not a no kill shelter. Healthy strayed animals are to be held for
five (5) days, and may be given an extended amount of time, based on available space and
adoptability of the animal. Animals are to be euthanized through humane methods by trained
personnel. Feral animals, animals with temperament problems, or animals with major health
issues are to be euthanized first while healthy, adoptable animals are to be given additional time
if possible.
ARTICLE VIII
STERILIZATION REQUIREMENTS
Section 11-VIII-1 Definitions
Section 11-VIII-2 Sterilization Required; Written Agreement
Section 11-VIII-3 Sterilization Deposit
Section 11-VIII-4 Failure to Comply with Agreement
Section 11-VIII-5 Deposit; When Required for Redemption
Section 11-VIII-6 Penalty; Appeal
SECTION 11-VIII-1 Definitions. As used in this Article:
A) Agreement: means the animal shelter's written animal sterilization agreement.
B) Claimant: means an owner claiming an animal upon the animal's second impound within
a twelve (12) month period and upon any subsequent impound of that animal.
C) Person: means an individual, an entity or a representative of an entity.
D) Proof of Sterilization: means a written document signed by a veterinarian licensed under
Utah Code Annotated Title 58, Chapter 28, The Utah Veterinary Practice Act, stating: 1)
a specified animal has been sterilized; 2) the date on which the sterilization was
performed; and 3) the location where the sterilization was performed.
E) Recipient: means the person to whom the animal shelter transfers an animal for adoption.
F) Sterilization Deposit: means the portion of a fee charged by the animal shelter to a
recipient or claimant of an unsterilized animal to ensure the animal is timely sterilized in
accordance with an agreement between the recipient or the claimant and the animal
shelter.
G) Sterilized: means an animal has been surgically altered, either by the spaying of a female
animal or by the neutering of a male animal, so it is unable to reproduce.
H) Transfer: means the animal shelter sells, gives away, places for adoption, or transfers an
animal to a recipient.
SECTION 11-VIII-2 Sterilization Required; Written Agreement.
A) The animal shelter may not transfer an animal that has not been sterilized, except as
provided below.
B) The animal shelter may transfer an animal for adoption that has not been sterilized
only if:
1) Recipient signs the animal shelter's written agreement which states that the animal
is not sterilized and the recipient agrees to be responsible for ensuring the animal
is sterilized:
a. Within thirty (30) days after the agreement is signed, if the animal is six
(6) months of age or older; or
b. If the animal is younger than six (6) months of age, within thirty (30) days
after the animal becomes six (6) months of age; and
2) The animal shelter receives from the recipient a sterilization deposit as provided
under the terms of the written agreement executed by the recipient under this
section.
SECTION 11-VIII-3 Sterilization Deposit.
A) Sterilization deposits shall reflect the average reduced cost of a sterilization of an animal,
based on the gender and weight of the animal, but the deposit may not be less than $25.
The amount of the sterilization deposit shall be established by resolution of the City
Council.
B) The sterilization deposit shall be refundable or paid directly to the vet if proof of
sterilization of the animal within the appropriate time limits is presented to the animal
shelter.
C) The deposit shall be forfeited to the animal shelter if proof of sterilization is not
presented to the animal shelter in compliance with this section.
D) If a female dog or cat and her litter are transferred to one person, a sterilization
deposit is required for the female dog or cat and for all members of the litter unless
they are transferred to a qualified rescue group.
E) All sterilization deposits forfeited or unclaimed under this section shall be retained by
the animal shelter and shall be used by the animal shelter only for:
1) A program to sterilize animals, which may include a sliding scale fee program;
2) A public education program to reduce and prevent overpopulation of animals and
the related costs to the City;
3) A follow up program to assure that animals transferred by the animal shelter are
sterilized in accordance with the agreement; and
4) Any additional costs incurred by the animal shelter in the administration of the
requirements of this section.
SECTION 11-VIII-4 Failure to Comply with Agreement.
If a recipient or claimant fails to comply with the agreement:
1) The failure is grounds for seizure and impoundment of the animal by the animal
shelter;
2) The recipient relinquishes all ownership rights regarding the animal and any claim to
expenses incurred in maintenance and care of the animal; and
3) The recipient forfeits the sterilization deposit.
SECTION 11-VIII-5 Deposit; When Required for Redemption.
A) Upon the second impound within a twelve (12) month period, and upon any subsequent
impound of an animal that is claimed by its owner, the animal shelter may release the
impounded animal to its owner only upon payment of all applicable fees required by the
shelter and:
1) Receipt of proof the animal has been sterilized; or
2) A sterilization deposit.
B) The sterilization deposit shall be refunded to the claimant only if the claimant
provides proof of sterilization to the animal shelter within the requirements of Section
(1) of this Article.
SECTION 11-VIII-6 Penalty.
A) Civil Penalty: A person who knowingly commits any of the violations set forth in this
Article shall be subject to a civil penalty as described in Article XI of this Chapter.
B) A person is subject to the civil penalties under this section who:
1) Falsifies any proof of sterilization submitted for the purpose of compliance with
this Chapter;
2) Provides to the animal shelter or a licensed veterinarian inaccurate information
regarding ownership of any animal required to be submitted for sterilization under
this Chapter; or
3) Submits to the animal shelter false information regarding sterilization fees or fee
schedules.
ARTICLE IX
PROHIBITED ANIMALS
Section 11-IX-1 Prohibited Domestic Livestock
Section 11-IX-2 Prohibited Domestic Fowl
Section 11-IX-3 Domestic Livestock or Fowl at Large
Section 11-IX-4 Exotic Animals Prohibited
Section 11-IX-5 Selling Diseased Animals
SECTION 11-IX-1 Prohibited Domestic Livestock.
A) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or maintain any domestic livestock
within the limits of Cedar City, except for:
1) Any person having a prior agreement with the City to maintain livestock on their
property, and/or are correctly zoned for livestock; or
2) Any offspring that must be bottle fed or hand fed until such time that they may eat
unsupervised.
B) Any domestic livestock that are in compliance with zoning/animal control ordinances
within the limits of Cedar City must still comply with all applicable nuisance
ordinances.
SECTION 11-IX-2 Prohibited Domestic Fowl.
A) It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep, or maintain any domestic fowl
within the limits of Cedar City, except for any person having a prior agreement with
the City to maintain fowl on their property, and/or are correctly zoned for domestic
fowl.
B) Domestic fowl includes but is not limited to: chicken, turkey, duck, goose, and
pigeons.
C) Any domestic fowl that are in compliance with zoning/animal control ordinances
within the limits of Cedar City must still comply with all applicable nuisance
ordinances.
SECTION 11-IX-3 Domestic Livestock or Fowl at Large.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in care of domestic livestock or fowl to
permit such animals to trespass upon the property of another or in a public place.
SECTION 11-IX-4 Exotic Animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to own, keep or maintain any animal defined as
exotic within the limits of Cedar City unless duly authorized or licensed as required under
State and Federal law.
SECTION 11-IX-5 Selling Diseased Animals.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring into Cedar City for sale or have in their
possession with intent to sale, any animal having a communicable disease, or which has been
exposed to, or which is liable to carry infection from a communicable disease.
ARTICLE X
ENFORCEMENT
Section 11-X-1 Enforcement Authority
Section 11-X-2 Powers and Duties
Section 11-X-3 Right of Entry for Enforcement
Section 11-X-4 Interfering with Officers
SECTION 11-X-1 Enforcement Authority.
The Director, his/her authorized designees, and Animal Control Officers are empowered
to apprehend, transport and impound any animal found in violation of this Chapter, including
animals required to be licensed for which no license has been procured in accordance with this
Chapter, or any licensed or unlicensed animals for any other violation of this Chapter, and are
empowered to issue criminal citations and/or notices of violation for any violations of this
Chapter.
SECTION 11-X-2 Powers and Duties.
The Director shall employ and designate those employees and volunteers within the
Police Department who shall perform the duties of Animal Control Officers. Animal Control
Officers shall be authorized to enforce the provisions of this Chapter in all respects, including but
not limited to, the apprehension and impoundment of animals found in violation of this Chapter
and to issue criminal citations and/or notices of violation for any violations of this Chapter.
SECTION 11-X-3 Right of Entry for Enforcement.
In the enforcement of this Chapter, any peace officer or Animal Control Officer is hereby
authorized to enter into the open yard of any person to secure or take possession of any animal
which is reasonably believed by such officer to then and there, in the presence and plain view of
such officer, to be in violation of this Chapter. Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted to
prohibit any peace officer or Animal Control Officer from entering property when otherwise
authorized by law.
SECTION 11-X-4 Interfering with Officers.
It is unlawful for any person to knowingly and intentionally interfere with the Director or
any officer in the lawful discharge of his/her duties as prescribed in this Chapter. For purposes
of this Chapter, the term “interfere” shall include, without limitation: failing to hand over to, or
release to, an officer an identifiable animal which has been pursued but not captured by such
officer; failing to comply with an abatement order lawfully issued by the Director; releasing an
impounded animal without authority from an Animal Control Officer; or failing to meet the
conditions imposed by a notice of violation and stipulation.
ARTICLE XI
PENALTIES
Section 11-XI-1 General
Section 11-XI-2 Specific Penalties
Section 11-XI-3 Loss of Privilege
SECTION 11-XI-1 GENERAL.
A) Any person violating the provisions of this Chapter, either by failing to do those acts
required herein or by doing any act prohibited herein, shall be subject to the following:
1) A Class C misdemeanor, unless expressly stated otherwise herein;
2) Restitution of the cost of all damages incurred by anyone whose person, property,
or animal has been injured or destroyed by a dog or other animal; and
3) Restitution of the reasonable costs or expenses of the Animal Shelter caused by
the person’s violation of this Chapter or other law.
B) In addition to any other remedies available at law or equity, penalties for violations of
this Chapter may be pursued under the City’s Administrative Code Enforcement
program.
C) Each day any violation of this Chapter is committed or permitted to continue shall
constitute a separate offense.
D) Surrender or transfer of an animal does not avoid the consequences of past actions,
including any violations of this Chapter or State law.
SECTION 11-XI-2 Specific Penalties.
Violations of the following Sections and Subsections of this Chapter shall be
punishable as follows:
1) Subsection 11-II-2(A) Improper Display of Tag: Minimum $50 fine per offense.
2) Subsection 11-II-2(B) Attempted Improper Transfer of License or Tag: Minimum
$100 fine per offense.
3) Section 11-III-1 Failure to Report Bite: Class C misdemeanor.
4) Section 11-III-2 Failure to Comply with Quarantine Provisions: Class B
misdemeanor.
5) Section 11-III-3 Failure to Vaccinate: Treated as a failure to license under
Subsection (1) above.
6) Subsection 11-IV-2(A) Failure to Obtain Kennel Permit or exceeding the number
of animals allowed under a Kennel Permit; Operating with Expired, Suspended, or
Revoked Permit:
a. First offense is a $50 fine.
b. Second offense within one (1) year of the first offense is a $100 fine.
c. Third offense within one (1) year of the first offense results in all animals
over the numerical limit adopted in ordinance being declared a nuisance.
The City is authorized to seek a court order requiring the responsible party
to abate the nuisance. The party harboring the nuisance animals shall
select which animals are to be adopted out, put down, or otherwise
removed from their property. Failure of the party harboring the nuisance
animals to designate which animals are to be adopted, put down, or
otherwise removed from the property shall result in City seeking within
the Court’s abatement order an order designating which animals shall be
deemed a nuisance and abated.
d. All fine amounts are total amounts and are not to be imposed per animal
above the designated animal limit.
7) Subsection 11-IV-3 Breeding without a Permit; Improper Breeding: Minimum
$150 fine per animal, per violation.
8) Section 11-IV-4 Improper Display of License or Permit; Failure to Notify of
Change: Minimum $100 fine per offense.
9) Section 11-V-1 Harboring Stray Animal: Minimum $50 fine per animal.
10) Section 11-V-2 Animals Running at Large:
a. For sterilized animals:
i. First offense: Minimum $50 fine per animal.
ii. Second offense: Minimum $100 fine per animal.
iii. Third or subsequent offense: Minimum $200 fine per animal.
b. For unsterilized animals:
i. First offense: Minimum $100 fine per animal.
ii. Second offense: Minimum $200 fine per animal.
iii. Third or subsequent offense: Minimum $300 fine per animal.
11) Section 11-V-3 Abandonment of Animals: Class B misdemeanor.
12) Section 11-V-4 Unsafe Tethering: Minimum $100 fine per offense.
13) Section 11-V-5 Failure to Confine Female in Heat:
a. First offense: Minimum $100 fine per animal.
b. Second offense: Minimum $200 fine per animal.
c. Third or subsequent offense: Minimum $300 fine per animal.
14) Section 11-V-6 Failure to Properly Dispose of Animal Waste:
a. First offense: Minimum $50 fine.
b. Second offense: Minimum $100 fine.
c. Third or subsequent offense: Minimum $200 fine.
15) Section 11-V-7 Improper Disposal of Carcass: Minimum $50 fine per offense.
16) Section 11-V-9 Failure to Stop and Provide Notice: Minimum $50 fine per
offense.
17) Section 11-V-10 Provoking:
a. If the provoked animal does not bite a person or bites only the person
provoking the animal:
i. First offense: Minimum $50 fine per animal.
ii. Second offense Minimum $100 fine per animal.
iii. Third or subsequent offense: Minimum $200 fine per animal.
b. If the provoked animal bites another person:
i. First offense: Minimum $100 fine per animal.
ii. Second offense: Minimum $200 fine per animal.
iii. Third or subsequent offense: Minimum $300 fine per animal.
c. Any offense under Subsection (a) shall be treated as a previous offense for
any later committed or convicted offense under Subsection (b), and any
offense under Subsection (b) shall be treated as a previous offense for any
later committed or convicted offense under Subsection (a).
18) Section 11-V-11 Animals Disturbing Neighborhood:
a. First offense: warning.
b. Second offense: Minimum $100 fine per offense.
19) Section 11-VI-2 Aggressive Animal at Large: Minimum $300 fine per animal.
20) Section 11-VI-3 Dangerous Animal at Large: Minimum $700 fine per animal.
21) Section 11-VI-4 Vicious Animal at Large; Keeping Vicious Animal in City: Class
B misdemeanor with a recommended minimum penalty of a $1,000 fine and
destruction of the animal.
22) Section 11-VI-5 Failure to Properly Maintain Dangerous Animal: Class C
misdemeanor.
23) Article 11-VIII Failure to Comply with Sterilization Requirements:
a. First offense: Minimum $250.00 fine.
b. Second or subsequent offense: Minimum $500.00 fine.
24) Section 11-IX-1 Possession of Prohibited Domestic Livestock:
a. First offense: Minimum $50 fine for first head plus minimum $10 per head
thereafter.
b. Second or subsequent offense: Minimum $100 fine for first head plus
minimum $10 per head thereafter.
25) Section 11-IX-2 Possession of Prohibited Domestic Fowl: Minimum $20 fine per
animal, not to exceed $200 per incident.
26) Section 11-IX-3 Domestic Livestock or Fowl at Large: Treated as Possession of
Prohibited Domestic Livestock of Fowl under Subsections (26) and (27) above.
27) Section 11-IX-4 Possession of Exotic Animal: Class C misdemeanor.
28) Section 11-IX-5 Selling Diseased Animal: Class C misdemeanor.
29) Section 11-X-4 Interfering with Officer: Class B misdemeanor.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0525-16.
SECTION 11-XI-3 Loss of Privilege.
A) Any person who is convicted of excessive violations of any section(s) of this ordinance
may be prohibited by the court from owning, keeping or maintaining any domestic
animals within the limits of Cedar City for a period of two (2) years. Any animal found
in possession of such person during the term of probation shall be confiscated and such
person will be charged with a class B Misdemeanor.
B) The City deems the following to constitute a nonexclusive list of excessive violations:
1) Four (4) or more violations of Animals, Domestic Animals, or Fowls at large within
any twelve (12) month period;
2) Three (3) or more violations of Animals Disturbing the Neighborhood within any
twelve (12) month period;
3) Two (2) or more violations of failing to obtain a Breeder’s Permit within any two (2)
year period; or
4) Two (2) or more violations for Cruelty to Animals at any time.
C) Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as an attempt by the City to limit a court’s
discretion in determining appropriate situations to prohibit a defendant from owning,
keeping, or maintaining any domestic animals.
D) For the purpose of counting multiple violations and subsequent offenses, previous
convictions shall be counted as previous violations and/or offenses if each of the previous
convictions occurred within the specified enhancement period from the date of the
current conviction or from the date of the commission of the offense upon which the
current conviction is based.
ARTICLE XII
APPEAL
Section 11-XII-1 Appealable Matters
Section 11-XII-2 Standing
Section 11-XII-3 Filing of Appeal
Section 11-XII-4 Hearing
SECTION 11-XII-1 Appealable Matters.
A) Except as provided under Subsection (B), the following matters may be appealed
according to the requirements of this Article:
1) The denial, suspension, or revocation of a license or permit;
2) The classification of a person, location, business, or other entity as a “Cattery,”
“Groomery,” “Pet Shop,” “Qualified Rescue Group,” “Riding School,” or Stable”;
and
3) The classification of an animal as vicious under Subsection 11-VI-4(D) of this
Chapter
B) Citations and Criminal Matters:
1) No decision on whether or not to issue or file a citation or Criminal Information may
be appealed under the provisions of this Article.
2) Once a citation or Criminal Information has been issued or filed on any matter under
this Chapter, no appeal under this Article may be filed for the same or any related
matter. A matter is the same or related if any of the following is true:
a. A decision by the City Manager either upholding or reversing the appealed
decision would result in a dismissal of the citation or criminal matter;
b. A finding of guilt or innocence by the Court handling the citation or Criminal
Information would make any decision by the City Manager moot; or
c. If the Court and the City Manager must interpret the application of the same
provision(s) of this Chapter to the same animal, location, incident, business, or
person.
3) The issuance or filing of a citation or Criminal Information shall not stay a currently
pending appeal on the same or a similar matter.
SECTION 11-XII-2 Standing.
1) The following persons have standing to appeal decisions regarding Appealable
Matters:
2) An applicant for a license or permit, a licensee, or permittee may appeal a decision
denying, suspending, or revoking the license or permit;
3) A person owning, in whole or in part, the location, business, or other entity the person
believes has been improperly classified as a “Cattery,” “Groomery,” “Pet Shop,”
“Qualified Rescue Group,” “Riding School,” or Stable”;
4) An owner of an animal that has been classified as a vicious animal under Subsection
11-VI-4(D) of this Chapter; and
5) A person that has petitioned the Director to classify an animal as a vicious animal
under Subsection 11-VI-4(D) of this Chapter.
SECTION 11-XII-3 Filing of Appeal.
Any person with standing on an Appealable Matter may appeal the decision to the City
Manager. Any appeal must be submitted in writing to the City Recorder’s Office within ten (10)
business days of the decision from which the appeal is taken. If mailed, the decision shall be
deemed received five (5) calendar days after the date of mailing. Such appeal shall describe in
detail the nature of the appeal, the action complained of, the grounds for appeal, and whether a
hearing is requested.
SECTION 11-XII-4 Hearing.
A) Scheduling of hearing: If a hearing is requested by either the appealing party or the
Director, a hearing shall be scheduled before the City Manager as soon as reasonably
possible, but not earlier than five (5) days nor more than thirty (30) days from the filing
of the appeal, unless the appealing party and the Director agree to another date.
B) Notice of hearing: Notice may be provided to the person appealing in person, by United
States Mail to the last-provided address, or personally on any agent or employee of the
appealing party’s business, if any. Notice shall be served personally on the appealing
party if the hearing is scheduled five (5) days or less from the date of service.
C) Presentation at Hearing: At the hearing, the City Manager shall allow the appealing
party, the Director, and the owner of the animal, if any, or their representatives to present
any relevant evidence, including reliable hearsay evidence.
D) Decision: Based on the evidence presented, whether at hearing or in writing by any
party, the City Manager shall affirm or overturn in writing the decision complained of
within fifteen (15) days of the hearing, if one is requested, or of the filing of the appeal, if
a hearing is not requested.
ANIMAL CONTROL FEE SCHEDULE Page 37 of 37
AMENDED BY ORDINANCE NUMBER 0311-09-1 and 12-14-16-1.
Chapter 12
Of the Ordinances of Cedar
City, Utah
Repealed by Ord. #0918-13
Chapter 13
Of the Ordinances of Cedar
City, Utah
Repealed by Ord. #0918-13
CHAPTER 14
CEMETERY
SECTION 14-1 Office of Sexton
SECTION 14-2 Duties
SECTION 14-3 Sexton to Attend All Interments, etc.
SECTION 14-4 Burial Information
SECTION 14-5 Sexton to Keep Record
SECTION 14-6 Sale of Lots. Burial Right
SECTION 14-7 Those Entitled to Burial Right
SECTION 14-8 Money to be Expended on Cemetery
SECTION 14-9 Burial of Deceased Person
SECTION 14-10 Burial Fees
SECTION 14-11 Collection of Fees
SECTION 14-12 Plats to be Recorded
SECTION 14-13 Transcripts of Burial Rights to be Filed with County Recorder
SECTION 14-14 Prohibited Activity
SECTION 14-15 Perpetual Care
SECTION 14-16 Yearly Maintenance and Care
SECTION 14-17 Recorder Shall Keep Record
SECTION 14-18 Markers in Cemetery
SECTION 14-19 Flowers, Decorations and Shrubbery
SECTION 14-20 Abandonment and/or Termination of Rights and Title to Cemetery
Lots
SECTION 14-21 Resale of Lots
Ch. 14 Pg. 2
CHAPTER 14
CEMETERY
SECTION 14-1. Office of Sexton.
There is hereby created the office of City Sexton which office shall fall under the
supervision of the Department of Leisure Services.
Amended by Ordinance Number 1108-17
SECTION 14-2. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the Sexton to take charge of the City Cemetery and to improve the
ground therein under the direction of the Department of Leisure Services. He shall dig or cause
to be dug all graves required for the burial of the dead therein, and keep a record of the same and
perform such other duties in relation to the cemetery as may be required.
Amended by Ordinance Number 1108-17
SECTION 14-3. Sexton to Attend All Interments, etc.
The Cedar City Sexton shall attend to every interment in the Cedar City Cemetery in
person or by a competent deputy. He shall fill up and neatly trim all graves immediately after
deposing the coffin and fill up and trim all graves that have or hereafter may sink. He shall
register the names, ages, and parentage of all persons interred therein, the place of their
interment, and their place of birth and death.
Amended by Ordinance Number 1108-17
SECTION 14-4. Burial Information.
Relatives of a deceased person, funeral directors, and any other person requesting burial
of a body in the Cedar City Cemetery shall provide the Sexton information identifying the
deceased, including but not limited to decedent's date of birth, death and residence. Written
authorization must be made by a plot owner or his heir prior to interment of a body in a plot. If
no designated heir is established, all parties that may have claim to said plot must give written
authorization to inter a body.
Amended by Ordinance Number 1108-17
Ch. 14 Pg. 3
SECTION 14-5. Sexton to Keep Record.
The Sexton shall keep a true and complete record of the death and place of burial of
every person so reported to him. He shall also keep a like record of all permits issued in
pursuance of this chapter. All records kept in pursuance of this chapter shall be the property of
the City, and at all reasonable times be open to the inspection of the public, and at the
termination of his employment the Sexton shall turn all such property over to his successor in
office; and he shall report fully to the Leisure Services Department Head as often as is required.
Amended by Ordinance Number 1108-17
SECTION 14-6. Sale of Lots. Burial Right.
The Sexton is hereby empowered to sell burial rights in any unsold lots in the City
Cemetery and any payment therefore shall be paid to the City Treasurer. As of March 1, 2020,
all sold burial plots shall be used for full size burials and interned as directed in Section 14-9.
Those who elect to be cremated will be inurned at the cemetery columbarium. As an exception, a
grantee of any burial right, as described in Section 14-7, may permit cremated remains of one
person to be interned on their plot if a full-size burial has previously occurred. The City Council
is hereby empowered to regulate by Resolution the selling price of burial rights in lots or fraction
of lots. The Sexton shall notify the City Recorder of any sale of burial rights in any lots and to
whom the sale was made and shall note said sale on the cemetery plat. Upon such notification,
the Mayor shall execute a Certificate of Burial Right for lot or portion of lot purchased which
shall be delivered upon full payment. All certificates so executed shall contain a restriction that
the lot shall be used only as a burial place and shall run to the purchaser and his heirs.
Amended by Ordinance 0226-20
SECTION 14-7. Those Entitled to Burial Right.
The grantee of any burial right and his or her spouse, father, mother, children and
grandchildren shall be entitled to be buried on said lot so long as burial space remains but no
other person without written consent, to be filed with the Recorder, of all persons herein named
who have reached majority.
SECTION 14-8. Money to be Expended on Cemetery.
All money arising from the sale of burial rights in a lot or lots shall be reserved as a fund
and appropriated exclusively to the maintenance, upkeep and expansion of the cemetery.
Amended by Ordinance Number 1108-17
SECTION 14-9. Burial of Deceased Person.
Ch. 14 Pg. 4
It shall be unlawful to bury or inter the remains of any deceased persons in any place
within Cedar City, Utah except in the Cedar City Cemetery or in any duly licensed private
cemetery or burial facility.
(a) All burials shall be in an approved burial vault that is capable of withstanding a
passage load of 5.0 metric tons after burial. All vaults will be set up and placed in the City
prepared burial opening by the responsible vault company. Cemetery personnel will ensure that
all vaults are properly installed. All backfill around the vault shall be done by Cedar City.
SECTION 14-10. Burial Fees.
All persons desiring to inter bodies in the Cemetery shall pay in advance to the City
Treasurer, burial fees as shall be fixed by resolution. The City Council may set said fees
commensurate to the work to be done and the size of the grave to be dug.
SECTION 14-11. Collection of Fees.
It shall be the duty of the Sexton to see that the fees provided for in the last preceding
section are paid in advance to the Treasurer and the Sexton shall not dig or cause to be dug any
grave in the cemetery or perform any other burial service until all fees connected with said burial
have been paid in advance.
SECTION 14-12. Plats to be Recorded.
The Sexton shall immediately file and cause to be recorded in the office of the County
Recorder of Iron County, State of Utah, an accurate plat of the Cedar City Cemetery, which said
plat shall clearly show the burial plots which have been disposed of and the names of the persons
owning or holding the same, and the burial lots held for disposal, and thereafter the Sexton shall
file additional plats of any additions to said Cemetery before offering for sale any burial lots
therein.
SECTION 14-13. Transcripts of Burial Rights to be Filed with County Recorder.
On the first day of January and of July of each year, the Sexton shall file with the County
Recorder of Iron County, Utah a transcript duly certified by him of any and all burial rights
issued by Cedar City to any cemetery lots during the preceding six months. The County Recorder
shall file said abstracts without charge and make any and all necessary notations upon the plats
of said cemetery theretofore filed in his office as provided by law.
SECTION 14-14. Prohibited Activity.
The Sexton shall not, either directly or indirectly, act or serve as agent, employee, or
salesman for any person or company furnishing materials used at the cemetery or for any person
or corporation selling grave markers or monuments.
SECTION 14-15. Perpetual Care.
Ch. 14 Pg. 5
Upon payment in full of the purchase price of any burial right in any lot together with
such additional fee as may be set forth by Resolution of the City Council in connection with the
erection of upright monuments or headstones, the owner shall be entitled to perpetual care by the
City, on said Lot. The City Council may determine, however, the extent of care to be given.
SECTION 14-16. Yearly Maintenance and Care.
The Sexton shall be tasked with the custody and care of the cemetery. These
duties shall include conducting regular maintenance and cleaning. In addition, it will be the duty
of the Sexton to organize and complete 3 yearly cleanups that comply with section 14-19 of this
ordinance. The cleanups will take place during the month of March, and 5 days after Memorial
Day and Veterans Day.
Amended by Ordinance Number 1108-17
SECTION 14-17. Recorder Shall Keep Record.
The Recorder shall keep a record in a book to be kept for the purpose, of all conveyances
executed, stating the number of lot and block conveyed, the date of such conveyance, the person
to whom conveyed, and the amount received for the same.
SECTION 14-18. Markers in Cemetery.
No person owning a lot in the City Cemetery or any person or firm selling markers to
persons owning lots in the Cedar City Cemetery shall plant, grade, or do any work inside the
Cemetery except by written authority obtained from the City Sexton; for purposes of this
ordinance, the Sexton shall be authorized to issue such written authority.
All markers shall be placed in the concrete slab where the size of the slab is no less than
16 inches larger in length and width of the marker to be placed on the slab. The slab cannot
exceed the boundaries of the lot or lots purchased.
The concrete base shall be used for the sole purpose of setting monuments on. No item
shall be affixed to or inserted into the concrete base for any reason.
Markers shall not exceed the height of three (3) feet.
Amended by Ordinance Number 1108-17
SECTION 14-19. Flowers, Decorations and Shrubbery.
No permanent planting of any kind or description shall be permitted in and about any
marker or headstone or upon any grave from and after the effective date of this Ordinance except
for landscaping done by the City.
Flowers or other decorations placed upon any grave within said Cemetery shall be
removed by the Sexton after five (5) days from the date the same was placed upon said grave.
Ch. 14 Pg. 6
No permanent decoration shall be affixed to markers or placed on gravesites. Prolonged
placement of flowers and decorations shall not be permitted at ground level but only on raised
portions of monuments that exceed 5 inches.
All decorations and flowers are to be contained within the boundaries of the maker placed
upon the gravesite except for 3 days before and 5 days after the following holidays: Memorial
Day, Independence Day and Veterans Day. Upon which all decorations remaining at ground
level will be removed and disposed of.
No decorations made of glass, ceramic, porcelain and fragile materials or dangerous
items shall be permitted. Upon the advice and consent of the Friends of the Cemetery Board, the
Sexton may reject other decorations that cause a safety concern.
Refer to exhibit A of this ordinance for further clarification of these rules.
Amended by Ordinance Number 1108-17
SECTION 14-20. Abandonment and/or Termination of Rights and Title to Cemetery Lots
1. Abandonment – Standards – Prima Facia Evidence.
The fact that the grantee or holder of a lot or parcel in a cemetery has not used portions of
the lots or parcels for the purpose of burial for more than 60 years shall be prima facie evidence
that the grantee or holder has abandoned the lots or parcels if during that time the grantee or
holder:
a. has not provided care to the lots or parcels; or
b. has not given to the City a written notice of claim or interest in the lots or parcels.
2. A Cemetery Plot may be preliminarily deemed abandoned upon the Sexton and City
Attorney affirming that:
a. More than 60 years have passed since a grantee, holder, or person with written
designation rights, has used portions of the lots or parcels for purposes of burial, as
anticipated under UCA 8-5-3; and
b. There does not exist in the Sexton’s records a written designation right which
identifies persons yet living that may designate those entitled to be buried in the plot.
3. Upon this preliminary finding, the City Council may pass a resolution demanding that the
owner of a lot, site, or portion of the cemetery, which has been unused for burial purposes
for more than 60 years, file with the city recorder notice of any claim to the lot, site, or
portion of the cemetery.
4. The City will then have a copy of the resolution personally served on the owner. The
resolution shall notify the owner that the owner shall, within 60 days after service,
express interest in maintaining the cemetery lot, site, or portion of the cemetery and
Ch. 14 Pg. 7
submit satisfactory evidence of an intention to use the lot, site, or portion of the cemetery
for a burial.
5. If the owner cannot be personally served with the resolution of the City as required by
Section 14-20(4), the City will publish its resolution:
a. for three consecutive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within the
county, and
b. mail a copy of the resolution within 14 days after the publication to the owner’s
last known address, if available.
6. If, for 30 days after the date of service or last date of publication of the City’s resolution,
the owner or person with a legal interest in the cemetery lots fails to state a valid interest
in the use of the cemetery lot, site, or portion of the cemetery for burial purposes, the
owner’s rights are terminated and that portion of the cemetery shall be vested in the City.
Added by Ordinance Number 1108-17.
SECTION 14-21. Resale of lots
1. A lot which has been designated abandoned and/or terminated after following the
procedures outlined under section 14-20, shall be held for thirty (30) days to allow
descendants of the original lot owner the ability to purchase said lot. These lots will be
resold to descendants on a first come first serve basis. Following the expiration of this
thirty (30) day period, the resale of the lot will be made available to the general public.
2. Lots will be resold at a price outlined under section 14-6 of this ordinance, plus the cost
to publish the resolution.
3. All money arising from the resale of lots will be used as outlined under section 14-8 of
this ordinance.
Added by Ordinance Number 1108-17.
CHAPTER 15
CLAIMS AND WARRANTS
SECTION 15-1 Claims. Times for Presenting. Action on Presented Claims
SECTION 15-2 Officers Not to Advocate Claim of Others
SECTION 15-3 Warrants. Registration. Payment
SECTION 15-4 Certification of Bonds and Warrants
SECTION 15-5 Limit of Warrants
 
  Ch. Pg. 0
CHAPTER 15
CLAIMS AND WARRANTS
SECTION 15-1. Claims. Times for Presenting. Action on Presented Claims.
All claims against Cedar City shall be presented and action taken thereon in accordance with
applicable Utah State Law.
SECTION 15-2. Officers Not to Advocate Claim of Others.
No City officer of Cedar City shall present any claim, account of demand for allowances,
against the City, nor in any way advocate the relief asked in the claim or demand made by any other
person. Any person may appear before the City Council and oppose the allowance of any claim or
demand made against the City.
SECTION 15-3. Warrants. Registration. Payment.
Warrants drawn by order of the City Council on the City Treasury for current expenses during
each year, must specify the liability for which they are drawn, when they accrued, and the funds from
which they are to be paid and must be pain in the order of presentation to the City Treasurer. If the
fund is insufficient to pay any warrant, it must be registered, and hereafter paid in the order of
registration.
SECTION 15-4. Certification of Bonds and Warrants.
The City Recorder shall endorse a certificate upon every bond, warrant or other evidence of
debt, issued pursuant to law or ordinance by him, that the same is within the lawful debt limit of the
City, and is lawfully issued. He shall sign such certificate in his official capacity.
SECTION 15-5. Limit of Warrants.
The City Recorder shall not draw warrants on City funds except in accordance with and
within the limits of an appropriation ordinance duly passed by the City Council for the current year.
CHAPTER 15a
CEDAR CITY/IRON COUNTY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
SECTION 15a-1 Members.
SECTION 15a-2 Powers and Duties.
SECTION 15a-3 Limited Powers.
SECTION 15a-4 Historic Downtown Economic Committee
CHAPTER 15a
CEDAR CITY/IRON COUNTY ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT COMMITTEE
SECTION 15a-1. Members.
SECTION 15a-1. Members.
(a) The Cedar City/Iron County Economic Development Committee shall be comprised
of the following members: A Cedar City Council Member appointed by the Mayor with the
consent of the City Council; the Mayor of Cedar City; a member of the Iron County Commission
designated by the Iron County Commission; a member of the Iron County School Board selected
by the Iron County School Board; a member of the Central Iron County Water Conservancy
District selected by the Central Iron County Water Conservancy District; and the Executive
Director of the Business Resource Center. The Advisory Committee shall elect a Chairman who
shall call and conduct meetings of the Committee. All meetings shall be conducted pursuant to
Robert’s Rules of Order as administered by the Chairperson. In applying Robert’s Rules of
Order the chair is encouraged to reject overly formal applications, and adopt the application that
favors the following goals: (1) allow the chair the ability to facilitate or direct the discussion and
keep order; (2) protect the ability of all board members to bring up their ideas, discuss them,
receive input from the public and staff, and come to their individual opinions and conclusions on
each issue; (3) allow all members the opportunity to express their individual opinions and
conclusions on each issue through their vote; and (4) assure the majority vote of the board is the
opinion of the board while at the same time protecting the minority of board members’ ability to
speak, express ideas, and vote.
The Economic Development Committee is not a public body pursuant to the Utah Open
and Public Meetings Act so it does not have to have its meetings in public, allow public input,
record its meetings, or take minutes of its meetings as a matter of state law. These bylaws shall
require city staff to take minutes of the meetings and encourage the Economic Development
Committee to conduct its meetings in public.
SECTION 15a-2. Powers and Duties.
The Cedar City/Iron County Economic Development Committee is empowered to advise
and make recommendations to the Cedar City Mayor, the Cedar City Council, and the Board of
Iron County Commissioners related to new and existing strategies for economic development
within the City and County and to support projects that foster, promote, and enhance local
economic development efforts. The committee shall meet quarterly to establish goals,
objectives, and policies for the purposes of: encouraging industry to locate in Iron County and
Cedar City; and encourage existing industries to remain and grow in Iron County and Cedar City.
The committee shall make recommendations to the taxing entities regarding incentive packages
dealing with tax increment incentives. Special meetings may be called for unique circumstances
when a response from the Cedar City/Iron County Economic Development Committee is
required. The Chair may call special meetings. When calling a special meeting the Chair shall
notify all members of the Board at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the meeting. The notice
from the Chair must contain the time, location, and date of the meeting. The Chair shall inform
the members of the general subject matter of the meeting. The notice may be sent by mail,
email, text, personal contact, or by phone.
SECTION 15a-3. Limited Powers.
The Committee shall have no authority to appropriate and expend public money nor to
incur any obligations on behalf of any of the governmental entities with representation on the
Economic Development Committee.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0612-13-4.
15a-4. Historic Downtown Economic Committee
I. Purpose Statement
II. Appointment of Members
III. Term of Office
IV. Organization of Committee
V. Meetings
VI. Ethics
VII. Staff
I. Purpose Statement
The purpose of the Historic Downtown Economic Committee is to provide
input and advice to the Cedar City Council on the following:
1. Propose innovative and efficient ways to effectively invest in the Historic
Downtown district.
2. Propose economically viable policies that are conducive to the economic health
and preservation of Historic Downtown.
The Historic Downtown area currently includes: the entire block of Main Street from 200
South to the Iron County Tourism Building and 100 East to 300 West. (See Map)
II. Appointment of Members
All members of the Historic Downtown Economic Committee shall be appointed
by the Cedar City Mayor with the advice and consent of a majority of the City Council.
There shall be a total of up to fifteen (15) members. Members are to be selected from
owners/operators of businesses located within Cedar City. One member shall be a
representative from the Utah Shakespeare Festival, the Cedar City Chamber of Commerce,
and the Iron County Tourism Office, and the Iron County School District. In addition to
the fifteen (15) members from the community, the Mayor may appoint a City Council
member to serve as a Board Member. All members shall serve without compensation from
the City.
III. Term of Office:
Members shall be appointed to serve a two-year term. A member may serve for up
to three consecutive terms. Members from the Utah Shakespeare Festival, the Cedar City
Chamber of Commerce, the Iron County School District and the Iron County Tourism
Office shall serve three (3) year terms. Residency of Cedar City is not required for the
members representing Utah Shakespeare Festival, the Cedar City Chamber of Commerce,
the Iron County School District and the Iron County Tourism Office, however it is
requisite for the remaining members.
IV. Organization of Committee
The Historic Downtown Economic Committee shall, by a majority vote,
select one of their members to serve as the Committee Chairperson. The
member selected as the Chairperson shall serve for two (2) years from the date they
are elected. The Chairperson shall conduct the meetings and shall be a voting member
of the committee. If the elected Chairperson is absent the remaining members shall
select, by the majority vote, one of the members to serve as Chair Pro Tempore. All
members shall have an equal vote in all matters before the committee.
V. Meetings:
The Historic Downtown Economic Committee will meet monthly as needed,
but at least quarterly.
The Chair may call for a meeting more often than monthly. In order to call for a
meeting the Chair must notify all members of the committee at least seventy-two (72)
hours prior to the meeting. The notice from the Chair must contain the time, location,
and date of the meeting. The Chair shall inform the members the general subject matter
of the meeting. The notice may be sent my mail, email, text, personal contact, or by
phone.
All meetings of the Historic Downtown Economic Committee shall be
conducted pursuant to Robert's Rules of Order as administered by the Committee
Chair. The Committee Chair shall take steps to insure that all opinions are allowed a
fair opportunity to be expressed during the meeting.
The Historic Downtown Economic Committee is a public body pursuant to the
Utah Open and Public Meetings Act so it must have its meetings in public, allow
public input, record its meetings, and take minutes of its meetings as a matter of state
law. These bylaws shall require City staff to take minutes of the meetings.
VI. Ethics
The members of the Historic Downtown Economic Committee are appointed
officials of the City and shall comply with the terms of the Utah Municipal
Officers and Employees Ethics Act, UCA § § 10-3-1301 through 10 -3-1312,
as currently enacted or as it may be amended.
VII. Staff
The City's Economic Development Office shall provide such support staff as
is reasonably necessary for the Historic Downtown Economic Committee. If
the Committee requires services that are not available through the Economic
Development Office additional City staff may be assigned to the support of
the Committee.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0308-17
Chapter 16
Of the Ordinances of Cedar
City, Utah
Repealed by Ord. #0918-13
CHAPTER 17
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION 17-1 Fire Chief
SECTION 17-2 Fire Marshal
SECTION 17-3 Salary. When and How Paid
SECTION 17-4 Duties and Powers
SECTION 17-5 Authority to Remove Poles, Wires, and Buildings. Limitations
SECTION 17-6 Fire Department May Blockade Street
SECTION 17-7 Limits at Fire
SECTION 17-8 Unlawful Interference with Officers, Apparatus, Water, etc.
Penalty
SECTION 17-9 Fire Code
SECTION 17-10 Use of Water
SECTION 17-11 Investigation After Fire. Report
SECTION 17-12 Willfully or Negligently Causing Fire
SECTION 17-13 Driving Over Fire Hose
SECTION 17-14 Apparatus
SECTION 17-15 Interference with Apparatus. Penalty
SECTION 17-16 False Alarm. Penalty
SECTION 17-17 Open Burning
SECTION 17-17(A) Open Burning Definitions
SECTION 17-17(B) Open Burning of Trash Household Waste and Waste
SECTION 17-17(C) Open Burning Recreational Cooking
SECTION 17-17(D) Open Burning – Large Recreational Fires
SECTION 17-18 Fireworks
SECTION 17-18(A) Definitions
SECTION 17-18(B) Sale or Use of Fireworks Declared Against Safety and Welfare
SECTION 17-18(C) Sale or Use of Fireworks Unlawful
SECTION 17-18(D) Public Display. When Permitted – Permit
SECTION 17-18(E) Permit Application
SECTION 17-18(F) Fireworks Display – Liability Insurance
SECTION 17-18(G) Recommended Use Locations
SECTION 17-18(H) Enforcement
SECTION 17-19 Knox Box
SECTION 17-19(A) Uses Requiring a Knox Box
SECTION 17-19(B) Installation Requirements
SECTION 17-19(C) Contents of the Box
SECTION 17-19(D) Automatic Sprinkler Systems
SECTION 17-19(E) Access to the Knox System
SECTION 17-19(F) Access to Security Keys
SECTION 17-19(G) Installation by Existing Entities
SECTION 17-19(H) Exempt Buildings
SECTION 17-20 Traffic Control Preemption Equipment
SECTION 17-21 Hazardous Materials Response Recovery
SECTION 17-21(A) Definitions
SECTION 17-21(B) Recovery of Expenses
SECTION 17-21(C) Cost Recovery Procedure
SECTION 17-21(D) Action to Recover Costs
SECTION 17-21(E) Expenses of Other Responding Entities
SECTION 17-21(F) Severability
SECTION 17-22 Wildland Urban Interface Code (WUI)
CHAPTER 17
FIRE DEPARTMENT
SECTION 17-1. Fire Chief.
The Mayor, with the consent of and approval of the City Council, shall appoint the Chief
of the Fire Department. The City Manager shall initiate the recruitment process as determined
by the City personnel policies. Volunteer firefighters will be part of the selection committee.
The Fire Chief shall serve as the department head, be the appointing power within the
organization of the department, and be responsible for administrative direction of the department
by organizing the activities and staff to protect lives and property of the City.
SECTION 17-2. Fire Marshal.
There shall be the position of Fire Marshal, whose duties shall include: Inspections of
various types of structures and/or locations to insure compliance with the, Utah Fire Prevention
and Safety Law, International Fire Code, International Fuel Gas Code, and International
Mechanical Code requirements; enforce applicable fire safety codes and regulations; respond to
citizen's complaints, investigate fire cause, manage departments fire prevention program, and
other duties and responsibilities appertaining to the position. The Fire Marshal shall work under
the general supervision of the Fire Chief.
SECTION 17-3. Salary. When and How Paid.
The salary of the full time employees and the hourly firefighters shall be fixed by
resolution of the City Council from time to time, and shall be paid from the funds of the City
upon warrants drawn by the City.
SECTION 17-4. Duties and Powers.
The activities of fire prevention and fire suppression and of protecting life and property
within the City is entrusted to the Chief of the Fire Department. The Chief may divide the City
into fire districts and make such rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the City Council
for the government of all officers and members of the Department, as deemed expedient. The
Chief may make suitable regulations under which the officers and members of the Department
shall be required to wear and appropriate uniform or badge, by which, in case of fire and other
times, their authority and position in the Fire Department may be known. The Chief, or his
designee, shall have command over all officers and members of the Department at any
emergency scene. The Chief, or his designee, shall have full charge at all times of all apparatus
and appurtenances belonging to the Department, and shall adopt such measures as deemed
expedient for the suppression and prevention of fire, protection of property, or preservation of
order and observance of the laws of the State, and the ordinances of the City. It shall be the duty
of the Chief, or his designee, to examine the condition of all fire stations and to inspect all
apparatus and equipment of the City Fire Department.
It shall be the duty of the Chief, or his designee, of the Fire Department to see that at all
times the provisions of these ordinances relating to the protection and regulation of property are
strictly enforced, and also all provisions of those ordinances for the prevention of and the
protection against fires.
SECTION 17-5. Authority to Remove Poles, Wires, and Buildings. Limitations.
When a fire is in progress, the Fire Chief of the department, or his designee, may order
any building or buildings in close proximity thereto, to be torn down or otherwise disposed of for
the purpose of checking for fire extension, determining fire cause and to prevent fire spread, but
neither the Chief nor any other officer or member of the Fire Department shall unnecessarily or
recklessly destroy or injure any building or other property.
SECTION 17-6. Fire Department May Blockade Street.
When a fire shall occur, it shall be lawful for the Chief, or his designee, to blockade any
street, or other place if in their judgment, it is necessary to secure a safe and efficient working
zone for fire personnel and apparatus under their command. It shall be unlawful for any person
to break through said blockade.
SECTION 17-7. Limits at Fire.
The police department officer in charge, in conjunction with the fire officer in charge
may prescribe the limits in the vicinity of the fire within which no person, except members of the
department, and police, or those admitted by order of the officer in charge shall be permitted
SECTION 17-8. Unlawful Interference with Officers, Apparatus, Water, etc. Penalty.
Any person who shall willfully hinder any fire officer or firefighter in the discharge of
their duty at a fire, or in any manner injure, deface or destroy any engine, hose, or other fire
apparatus belonging to the City or in any way interfering with the water or its source of supply,
shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
SECTION 17-9 Fire Code
The Fire Code shall be adopted in accordance with Chapter 36 Section 8 of the City
Ordinance along with the appendixes A through J. This code shall be used to govern the fire
department and the actions of their members in code enforcement and fire prevention.
SECTION 17-10. Use of Water.
The Fire Chief or other officer in charge, shall have the right to use water from any
source for the purpose of extinguishing fires or for saving property in danger of being destroyed
thereby.
SECTION 17-11. Investigation After Fire. Report.
Once a fire is extinguished the Chief, or his designee, shall, make a prompt and thorough
investigation of the fire cause, the time of the fire, the amount of loss, a description of the
affected buildings and premises, and shall secure all other useful information and data available,
and record the same in the National Fire Incident Reporting System (NFIRS). The department
has the right to enter any building, or real property, for fire suppression activities and the
contemporary investigation. Once lawfully present, the department may keep custody of the
incident for a reasonable time without a need for a warrant in order to conduct their
investigation.
SECTION 17-12. Willfully or Negligently Causing Fire.
Any person who willfully or negligently sets on fire or causes to be set on fire, or
procures to be set on fire, any trees, shrubs, bush, grass, undergrowth, cultivated crops, or other
property on any land, public or private, is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any exception to the above
shall be regulated by the Utah Air Conservation Regulations permit process as governed by the
Bureau of Air Quality, State Department of Health. amended 6/91
SECTION 17-13. Driving Over Fire Hose.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or person in charge or control of any motor vehicle or
for anyone driving or operating any other type of vehicle to drive the same over any fire hose on
any street in this City.
SECTION 17-14. Apparatus.
All engines, hoses and other fire equipment shall be kept at such places as the City
Council shall provide and designate, and shall be kept in proper condition for immediate use.
SECTION 17-15. Interference with Apparatus. Penalty.
Any person who may use or in any way interfere with any of the fire apparatus, without
the consent of the Chief, shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
SECTION 17-16. False Alarms. Penalty.
False alarms will be covered by Chapter 23 Section 9(K).
SECTION 17-17. Open Burning
SECTION 17-17(A). Open Burning Definitions
a) Open Burning - The burning of material wherein products of combustion are emitted
directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or chimney from an enclosed
chamber. Open burning is any fire or smoldering (burning with or without visible
flames) where any material is burned in the outdoor air, or receptacle other than a furnace
or fire place connected to a stack or chimney.
b) Waste - All solid, liquid or gaseous material, including, but not limited to, garbage, trash,
household waste, construction or demolition debris, or other refuse, including that
resulting from the prosecution of any business, trade or industry.
c) Trash - solids not considered to be highly flammable or explosive; including, but not
limited to, clothing, rags, leather, plastic, rubber, floor coverings, excelsior, tree leaves,
yard trimmings and other similar materials.
d) Household Waste - any solid or liquid material normally generated by a family in a
residence in the course of ordinary day-to-day living; including, but not limited to,
garbage, paper products, rags, leaves and garden trash.
e) Fire Extinguishing Equipment - a minimum of one portable fire extinguisher with a
minimum 4-A rating or other approved on-site fire extinguishing equipment, such as dirt,
sand, water, garden hose or water truck, shall be available for immediate utilization.
f) Out-of-Control Fire - A fire which under this ordinance is not under the management or
control of the person who ignited the fire which causes the fire to burn in a uncontrolled
state or to burn wild without direction. The failure to keep the fire in check which causes
the fire to flourish and spread quickly in a uncontrolled way.
g) Nuisance - Open burning that will be offensive or objectionable because of smoke or
odor emissions when atmospheric conditions or local circumstances make such fire
hazardous shall be prohibited. The Fire Department is authorized to order the
extinguishment of a fire which creates or adds to a hazardous of objectionable situation.
Furthermore, any nuisance as defined under chapter 25 shall be applicable to this
definition.
SECTION 17-17(B). Open Burning of Trash Household Waste and Waste.
Open burning of trash, waste material, construction waste and yard waste material within
the limits of Cedar City is hereby prohibited. Any individual who violates this section shall be
deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
SECTION 17-17(C). Open Burning Recreational Cooking
a) Open burning for the purpose of cooking food is permitted if the following conditions are
met; the fire is not within 25 feet of a structure and has a clear space in all directions of
three (3) feet; the fire must be small and designed for cooking food; the fire shall be
contained to an area smaller than 30 inches in diameter and less than 706 square inches
total, with flame lengths no higher than three feet during ignition and thereafter kept as a
small smoldering fire. Fire extinguishing equipment shall be provided sufficient to
extinguish the fire, the fire must be attended until the fire is completely extinguished and
under the control of a person (18) eighteen years of age or older.
b) At any time the fire becomes a nuisance to your neighbors the responsible party may be
asked to extinguish the fire. The fire department also has authority to extinguish any fire
that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation. If the fire results in an outof-
control fire, the responsible party will be charged for all suppression costs and for the
losses associated from said fire.
c) Noncommercial barbeques designed for the purpose of cooking food are exempt from
this ordinance
SECTION 17-17(D). Open Burning - Large Recreational Fires
a) Open burning for special circumstances such as religious or group activities that require a
larger fire (roasting a pig, burning of Christmas trees and bonfires) shall obtain a permit
from the fire department; and shall follow rules as set forth in this section. The larger
fires will require 100 feet of clearance in all directions from a structure, and the fire must
be attended until the fire is completely extinguished. Fire extinguishing equipment shall
be provided sufficient to extinguish the fire, the fire must be attended until the fire is
completely extinguished and under the control of a person (18) eighteen years of age or
older.
b) At any time the fire becomes a nuisance to your neighbors, the responsible party may be
asked to extinguish the fire. The fire department also has authority to extinguish any fire
that creates or adds to a hazardous or objectionable situation. If the fire results in an outof-
control fire, the responsible party will be charged for all suppression costs and for the
losses associated from said fire.
c) Open burning in the established burn pit(s) at Thunderbird Gardens will not be
considered a violation of Cedar City ordinance as contemplated under Chapter 17.
SECTION 17-18 Fireworks
SECTION 17-18(A). Definitions
All terms relating to fireworks used in this ordinance shall have the same meaning as they are
defined in Utah Code Ann. 53-7-202 of the Utah Fire Prevention Act.
SECTION 17-18(B). Sale or Use of Fireworks Declared Against Safety and Welfare.
The sale, exposure for, use, distribution or possession of fireworks or pyrotechnics within
the City of Cedar City, except as hereinafter provided, is hereby declared by the City Council to
be against the public health, safety and welfare of the people of the City of Cedar City, Utah.
SECTION 17-18(C). Sale or Use of Fireworks Unlawful.
a) It is unlawful to sell or offer for retail sale, or to discharge, or to have in their possession
any fireworks in this municipality, other than class C common Utah State approved
explosives used in accordance with, and only on the dates allowed, by Utah Code Ann.
Sections 53-7-220 through 225; the rules adopted pursuant thereto; and this ordinance,
except as otherwise permitted by state law.
b) It is unlawful for any person to discharge any fireworks within 20 feet of any residence,
dwelling, or structure.
SECTION 17-18(D). Public Display. When Permitted--Permit.
The Fire Department upon application in writing, and upon proof of liability insurance
may grant a permit for the public display of fireworks by religious, fraternal or civic
organizations, fair associations, amusement parks, or other organizations or groups of individuals
when such display is to be handled by a competent State of Utah licensed operator to be
approved by the Fire Marshal under the direction of the chief of the fire department of the
City. Such display shall be of such a character, and so located, discharged, or fired, as in the
opinion of the chief of the fire department, after proper inspection, shall not be hazardous to
property or endanger any person or persons. After such permit shall have been granted, sales,
possession, use and distribution of fireworks for such display, shall be lawful for that purpose
only.
SECTION 17-18(E). Permit Application.
All such applications for permits shall set forth the date, the hour, and place of making
such display, and the place of storing fireworks prior to the display; and further, the name or
names of the person, persons, firm, partnership, corporation, association or group of individuals
making the display; and the name of the person or persons in charge of the igniting, firing,
setting off, exploding or causing to be exploded such fireworks, and the types and descriptions of
the fireworks to be used.. The location of the storage place shall be subject to the approval of the
chief of the fire department of the City. No permit granted hereunder shall be transferable.
SECTION 17-18(F). Firework Display – Liability Insurance
The City will require proof of liability insurance in the amount of one million dollars
($1,000,000.00) per occurrence, with a total aggregate of four million dollars ($4,000,000.00)
designed for the payment of all damages, which may be caused either to a person or persons or to
property, by reason of the display so as aforesaid licensed, and arising from any acts of the
licensee, his agents or employees. Such liability insurance shall be for the use and benefit of any
person injured or the owner of any property damages, who is authorized to maintain an action
thereon, or his heirs, executors, administrators, successors or assigns.
SECTION 17-18(G) Recommended Use Locations
All classifications of fireworks that are permitted by State law may be used at times
prescribed by State law. Also, it is recommended that fireworks only be used in large open
spaces where conditions are present to provide for fire control. Such recommended locations
include:
a) the South parking lot of Cedar High School;
b) the parking lot at the Bicentennial Softball Park;
c) the South parking lot of the Canyon View High School;
d) the West parking lot of the Cedar City Aquatic Center;
e) the parking lot at the Iron Springs Elementary School; and
f) any other location that the Fire Department may recommend.
The Cedar City Fire Department is authorized to use fireworks for the City’s yearly
display in an area they designate adjacent to the Airport fire station.
Added by Ordinance Number 0425-18.
SECTION 17-18(H). Enforcement
a) Every officer charged with enforcement of State and Municipal laws including the Fire
Marshal is hereby charged with the responsibility to enforce this ordinance.
b) Fireworks possessed, sold or offered for sale in violation of this ordinance may be seized
and destroyed and the license of the person selling or offering fireworks for sale may be
revoked.
c) Violation of this ordinance shall be a class B misdemeanor punishable by a maximum
sentence of up to 6 months in jail and a $1000.00 fine as set forth by Utah law.
d) In conformity with Utah Code Ann. 63A-3-4, a person who negligently, recklessly, or
intentionally causes or spreads a wildland fire shall be liable for the costs of suppressing
that wildland fire, regardless of where the fire begins.
Added by Ordinance Number 0425-18.
SECTION 17-19. Knox Box Ordinance.
SECTION 17-19(A). Uses Requiring a Knox Box
The businesses and residential operations listed in this section may be required to install
and maintain one or more of the following access control devices; a Knox Box, Knox
Fire Department Connection Caps (FDC), Knox Key Switches, and/or Knox padlock.
The determination as to which of the forgoing access control devices shall be installed
shall be made by the Fire Marshal by balancing the need for access to the facilities for the
protection of life and property with the cost to the property owner. The businesses and
residential operations that are required to install and maintain one or more of the above
referenced access control devices are as follows, to wit:
(i) All commercial occupancies with a sprinkler system;
(ii) All commercial occupancies with a fire alarm panel;
(iii) All occupancies handling any hazardous materials;
(iv) Any gated community whether they are commercial or residential;
(v) All commercial food preparation facilities with hood systems; and
(vi) All access gates other than the main entrance shall require a Knox Pad
Lock.
SECTION 17-19(B) Installation Requirements.
The Knox Box shall be located at or near the recognized public entrance to the property,
or the box shall be located above the Fire Department water connection (FDC) when the property
is served by an automatic sprinkler system. In no case shall the Knox Box be located at a height
of less than four (4) feet from the ground or more than six (6) feet from the ground; all other
locations for the Knox Box shall be approved by the Fire Marshal.
SECTION 17-19(C) Contents of the Box.
Each Knox Box shall contain keys clearly labeled for the following uses, to wit:
1. A master key that will open all doors including mechanical rooms and sprinkler control
rooms; and
2. Keys to alarm panels; and
3. Keys to elevators and all other rooms as specified during planned review by the Fire
Marshal.
SECTION 17-19(D) Automatic Sprinkler Systems.
When a building is protected by an automatic sprinkler system, the Fire Departments’
water connection (FDC) shall be protected with a Knox Fire Department connection security cap
to be installed at the owner’s expense.
SECTION 17-19(E) Access to the Knox System.
All properties required to install a Knox security key system shall provide access keys to
the Fire Marshal to be secured into the Knox box. A separate sub-mastered key shall be
provided to the Police Chief, and a separate key to the Director of the Emergency Medical
Services, for all gated communities.
SECTION 17-19(F) Access to Security Keys.
Access and use of the security keys shall be governed by the Fire Chief. The Fire Chief
and the Fire Marshal shall have a master key for the Knox Security System; the other master
keys shall be secured in a Key Secure device that requires a pin code to access the master key
and also tracks the use of the key. Each fire apparatus shall be equipped with a sub-mastered key
to open all access gates.
The sub-mastered keys will be given to all other emergency service providers (Law
Enforcement and EMS). Each entity shall draft policies to assure that the keys are not misused.
SECTION 17-19(G) Installation by Existing Entities.
All entities that are in existence as of the date of the passage of this Ordinance shall be
required to install a Knox Box within eighteen (18) months. The installation and maintenance of
the Knox Box shall be the sole responsibility of the business or residential entity.
SECTION 17-19(H) Exempt Buildings.
Buildings in a commercial or industrial area that are to be manned twenty-four hours a
day, seven days a week, need not install a Knox box. However, if the use of the building
changes so that it is not going to be occupied twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week, a
Knox box shall be installed. (Adopted 2/04)
THIS SECTION AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 0310-10.
SECTION 17-20. TRAFFIC CONTROL PREEMPTION EQUIPMENT.
1. All new or modified traffic signals within the City limits be equipped with 3M brand
Opticom (TN) controlled equipment with vehicle identification.
2. That the preemption equipment shall always be state of the art and be compatible with the
existing emergency vehicle preemption equipment. This equipment shall be installed per
the manufacturers recommendations, in sufficient quantity to provide emergency vehicle
preemption of the traffic signal from all directions and so that each direction of traffic
will move independently, allowing for protected left turn movements.
3. That the use of this preemption equipment shall be limited to emergency vehicles (Fire,
Police, and Ambulance service). Use by private citizens is prohibited. Any private
citizen found with a transmitter will lose the transmitter and be prosecuted in accordance
with Utah Code Annotated Title 41, Chapter 6, Section 28. (Adopted 4/05)
SECTION 17-21. HAZARDOUS MATERIALS RESPONSE – COST RECOVERY
SECTION 17-21 A. Definitions.
1. For the purpose of this section, the following terms, phrases, and words shall have
the following meaning:
a. “Hazardous material emergency” means a sudden and unexpected release
of any substance that, because of its quantity, concentration of physical,
chemical or infectious characteristics, presents a direct and immediate
threat to public safety or the environment, and requires immediate action
to mitigate the threat.
b. “Expenses” means all costs incurred for the response, containment and/or
removal and disposal of hazardous materials on initial remedial action. It
includes, but is not necessarily limited to, the actual labor costs of
government and other personnel including worker’s compensation
benefits, fringe benefits, administrative overhead, and any costs of
equipment, equipment operation, materials, disposal and any contract
labor or materials.
SECTION 17-21 B. Recovery of Expenses.
1. Those persons or entities whose negligent or intentional actions cause or create, in
whole or in part, a hazardous materials emergency within the boundaries of the
City is liable to the City for all costs and expenses incurred in or arising from
response to such hazardous materials emergency by the City and any other
political subdivision, agency or cooperative entity. The City shall recover all such
costs incurred in, related to or arising out of, all cost recovery efforts and
enforcement of the terms of this Ordinance.
2. All costs and expenses shall be billed at the current rate established and approved
by resolution of the Executive Committee of the Interlocal Agreement for
Cooperative Hazardous Materials Protection and Services.
3. The payment of expenses under this section does not constitute an admission of
liability or negligence in any legal action for damages.
SECTION 17-21 C. Cost Recovery Procedure.
1. The City shall investigate and determine the person or entity responsible for
causing or creating the hazardous materials emergency and shall notify the
responsible party in writing of said determination of responsibility and the amount
of costs and expenses incurred by the City in responding to the hazardous
materials emergency.
2. The notice required in this section shall specify that the party determined to be
responsible for causing or creating the hazardous materials emergency has the
right to appeal the decision determining responsibility to the governing body of
the City and shall specify a deadline for filing the notice of appeal and the person
or office in which it must be filed. The deadline for filing the notice of appeal
shall not be less than fifteen days from the date of the notice.
3. In the event a notice of appeal is filed, the hearing before the governing body shall
be an informal public hearing, and the parties shall not be required to adhere to
the Utah Rules of Civil Procedure or evidence. The appealing party and the City
shall be entitled to present evidence and argument in support of their respective
positions, in accordance with procedures established at the hearing by the
governing body.
4. The decision of the governing body shall be final.
SECTION 17-21 D. Action to Recover Costs.
1. In the event the responsible party fails or refuses to pay all of the costs and
expenses determined by the City related to or arising out of the City’s response to
the hazardous materials emergency within thirty days after assessment or after the
governing body’s decision on an appeal, the City may initiate a legal action to
recover such costs, including reasonable attorney’s fees and costs.
SECTION 17-21 E. Expenses of Other Responding Entities.
1. In the event that personnel and equipment from other political subdivisions,
agencies or cooperative entities shall respond to assist with the hazardous
materials emergency, then the City shall recover costs and expenses incurred by
such other political subdivisions, agencies or cooperative entities as part of the
City’s cost recovery efforts.
2. Upon recovery of costs and expenses from the responsible party, the City is
authorized to reimburse such other political subdivisions, agencies, or cooperative
entities for their actual costs incurred in responding to the hazardous materials
emergency.
SECTION 17-21 F. Severability.
1. If any provision of this ordinance is declared invalid by a court of competent
jurisdiction, the remainder shall not be affected thereby.
SECTION 17-22. Wildland Urban Interface Code (WUI)
1. Cedar City, by reference, adopts Utah’s Wildland Urban Interface Code (WUI). It is
also the City’s intent to automatically adopt any future amendments to the WUI that
the State of Utah may authorize. The WUI will be applicable to the City’s currently
adopted WUI zone which will change over time as fire risks change. Any exceptions
to the City’s application of terms contained in the WUI are listed in Section 17-22(2).
2. Exceptions:
a. Conflicts - If any conflicts arise between the application of the WUI and
Cedar City Ordinances, Codes and Rules, the application of the latter shall
take precedence.
b. Scope - Cedar City’s application of the WUI shall apply to all new
subdivisions and new construction located within the WUI zone.
c. Enforcement – the WUI will be administered, monitored and enforced by the
Cedar City Fire Department.
d. Information of Plans and Specifications – the City will accept plans and
specifications submitted by electronic means.
e. Failure to Comply – no fine will be issued to persons who fail to comply with
the WUI.
Adopted by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0115-20-3.
Entire Chapter 17 revised by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0309-11
CHAPTER 18 REPEALED BY CITY
ORDINANCE NO. 0309-11
(SEE CHAPTER 17 AND/OR INTERNATIONAL FIRE CODE)
CHAPTER 19
FRANCHISES AND SPECIAL PRIVILEGES
SECTION 19-1 Application Copies
SECTION 19-2 Non-Assignable. Exception
SECTION 19-3 Manner of Assignment
SECTION 19-4 Forfeiture
SECTION 19-5 Conditions
Ch. Pg. 1
CHAPTER 19
FRANCHISES AND SPECIAL PRIVILEGES
SECTION 19-1. Application Copies.
Whenever application shall be made to the City Council for a franchise or grant of special
privilege, or for an extension or renewal of any existing franchise, or grant of special privilege, the
applicant shall furnish to the City Recorder for the use of the City Council, ten copies of the proposed
resolution or ordinance and pay into the City Treasury a fee to be determined by the City Council.
SECTION 19-2. Non-Assignable. Exception.
All franchises and grants of special privilege shall be deemed to be non-assignable, without the
express permission of the City Council, whether such limitation is set forth in the body of the
franchise or grant or not.
SECTION 19-3. Manner of Assignment.
All assignments of franchises and special grants must be in writing and a copy thereof filed in
the office of the City Recorder before any such assignment or transfer will be recognized by the City.
SECTION 19-4. Forfeiture.
Any attempted assignment or transfer of a franchise or a special privilege, not made in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, shall operate as a forfeiture of all rights of the grantee
therein given.
SECTION 19-5. Conditions.
Prior to the granting or renewing of any franchise or special privilege, the City Council may
impose such conditions upon the applicant as it may deem advisable.
CHAPTER 20
HEALTH REGULATIONS
SECTION 20-1 Food Service Establishments. Permit
SECTION 20-2 Accumulation of Waste Materials
SECTION 20-3 Accumulation of Manure in Stables and Corrals Prohibited
SECTION 20-4 Depositing Waste Materials in Gutters and Ditches Prohibited
SECTION 20-5 Unsanitary Conditions Prohibited
SECTION 20-6 Garbage Receptacles
SECTION 20-7 Garbage Districts
SECTION 20-8 Permit
SECTION 20-9 Hauling Garbage, etc.
SECTION 20-10 City Council May Contract
SECTION 20-11 Board of Health to Issue Permit
SECTION 20-12 Board of Health Control
SECTION 20-13 Interference With Board of Health
SECTION 20-14 License
SECTION 20-15 Removal of Dead Animals
SECTION 20-16 Regulation of the Sale of Milk
SECTION 20-17 Unlawful to Sell Meat Which Has Not Been Inspected
SECTION 20-18 Sale of Diseased Cattle as Food Prohibited
SECTION 20-19 Storage Rooms to be Kept Clean
SECTION 20-20 Transportation of Infected Persons
SECTION 20-21 Unclean Drain or Receptacle Prohibited
SECTION 20-22 Unlawful to Work with Communicable Disease
SECTION 20-23 Penalty
Ch. Pg. 1
CHAPTER 20
HEALTH REGULATIONS
SECTION 20-1. Food Service Establishments. Permit.
No new business license shall be issued nor existing license renewed in Cedar City to operate
any food service establishments as defined in the Code of Food Service Sanitation Regulations, Utah
State Division of Health, July l6, l969, Part 1-3, until the applicant has been inspected and issued a
valid Food Service Establishment Permit by the Southwestern Utah District Health
Department. Note: Food Service Establishment shall man any fixed or mobile restaurant; coffee shop;
cafeteria; short-order cafe; luncheonette; grill; tea room; sandwich shop; soda fountain; tavern; bar;
cocktail lounge; nightclub; roadside stand; industrial feeding establishment; private, public, or
non-profit organization or institution routinely serving food; catering kitchen; commissary or similar
place in which food or drink is prepared for sale or for service on the premises or elsewhere; and any
other eating or drinking establishment or operation where food is served or provided for the public
with or without charge.
SECTION 20-2. Accumulation of Waste Materials.
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow garbage, ashes, waste, cinders, tin cans, rubbish,
manure, or other refuse to accumulate upon premises under his control or to fail to remove same
within twenty-four hours after notification from the Board of Heath so to do. All garbage, ashes,
waste, cinders, tin cans, rubbish, and other refuse may be ordered by the Board of Health to be hauled
away by any collector of garbage, etc. and the owner or occupant of said premises shall be required to
pay all expenses thereof.
SECTION 20-3. Accumulation of Manure in Stables and Corrals Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person having charge of any stable, stall, shed, apartment or yard
in which any animal shall be kept, or in any place within the limits of Cedar City in which manure or
liquid discharges of any animal shall accumulate or collect, to permit such stable, stall, shed,
apartment or yard to be kept in an unclean or unsanitary condition.
SECTION 20-4. Depositing Waste Materials in Gutters and Ditches Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to sweep into or deposit any paper or other rubbish in any
gutter or ditch within the City limits or to empty in any gutter or ditch any swill, house slops, contents
or spittoons, or other filthy refuse. It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or deposit any dead
animal or fowl, or any live animal or fowl in any reservoir, pool, canal, creek, or other stream of body
of water within the City.
Ch. Pg. 2
SECTION 20-5. Unsanitary Conditions Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer or permit, or have upon his premises, whether
owned or occupied by him, either one or more of the following unsanitary, fly producing,
disease-causing conditions, it wit:
l. Manure which is not securely protected from flies.
2. Any privy, vault, cesspool, sink, pit or like place which is not protected from flies.
3. Garbage which is not securely protected from flies.
4. Vegetable waste, trash, litter, rags or refuse of any kind, nature or description in which
flies may breed or multiply.
SECTION 20-6. Garbage Receptacles.
Every owner, lessee or occupant of any building, premises or place of business, shall provide,
at his expense, garbage containers of a type to be approved by the City Engineer which containers
shall become the property of the City.
SECTION 20-7. Garbage Districts.
The City Council shall from time to time create, and establish in the City, garbage districts as
may be necessary for the proper collection of said garbage. Garbage in residential areas in Cedar City
may be handled or collected in a different manner than in business areas and the City may make such
charge for collections as outlined below.
SECTION 20-8. Permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to collect, haul or dispose of manure,
garbage, market waste, ashes, tin cans, bottles, dead animals, rags, waste leather, waste paper, night
soil or other refuse or waste material, without first obtaining a permit so to do from the Board of
Health.
SECTION 20-9. Hauling Garbage, etc.
It shall be unlawful for any person engaged in hauling garbage, manure, rubbish, or other
matter of any kind to permit, allow, or cause any of said matter to fall and remain in the streets.
It shall be unlawful for any person to convey, transport or haul through or upon any of the
public streets, any garbage, swill, market waste, night soil, or pulp, or other similar refuse except in
sanitary receptacles especially constructed for the purpose, the same to be subject to the approval of
the Board of Health.
It shall be unlawful for any person to suffer, permit, or allow any vehicle loaded with garbage,
manure, slops, swill, market waste, pulp or other refuse to be or remain standing upon any public
street within Cedar City, any longer than may be necessary for the purpose of loading and
transporting the same.
Ch. Pg. 3
It shall be unlawful to haul any garbage, rubbish, leaves, tree limbs, or other waste material in
any vehicle on a public street within the City without having the material properly and adequately
covered to prevent the same from falling or being blown from said vehicle.
SECTION 20-10. City Council May Contract.
The City Council shall have the power to contract with any person, firm, or corporation to
gather, collect, haul and dispose of garbage, paper in which garbage is encased, swill, market waste,
ashes, tin cans, bottles, dead animals, rags, leather and other waste materials.
SECTION 20-11. Board of Health to Issue Permit.
Upon the making of such contract with the City Council, the Board of Health shall issue to the
contractor specified therein, a permit to gather, collect, haul and dispose of such waste material; and
no permit shall be granted by the Board of Health to any other person, firm or corporation, covering
the same service or districts, unless otherwise ordered by the City Council.
Prior to granting any permit, the Board of Health may prescribe such rules and regulations as
it may deem necessary in the conduct of the business of the contractor, unless the City Council shall
have contracted for any such garbage removed and in which event, the terms of any such contract
shall prevail.
SECTION 20-12. Board of Health Control.
Any person, firm or corporation authorized by contract of the City, County, or permit of the
Board of Health to collect City refuse shall gather, collect and dispose of the same in the manner and
at the times provided by said contract or by ordinance, and the carrying out of such contract and the
collection of such refuse and disposition thereof, shall at all times be subject to and under the
direction of the Board of Health.
SECTION 20-13. Interference With Board of Health.
It shall be unlawful for any person to tear down or remove any quarantine card or flag
mentioned in this Chapter without the consent or permission of the Board of Health, or in any manner
to hinder, interfere with or delay the Board of Health in the performance of its duties.
SECTION 20-14. License.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to engage in the business of hauling,
handling or dealing in garbage, market waste, refuse or filth, or dead animals, without first obtaining a
scavenger's license so to do, such license to be provided in Chapter 23.
Ch. Pg. 4
SECTION 20-15. Removal of Dead Animals.
The owner or attendant of any domestic animal which has died within the City limits of Cedar
City is hereby required to remove said animal from the City limits at once. It is hereby declared to be
unlawful for such owner or attendant to leave such animal within the City limits for more than two
hours after said animal has died.
SECTION 20-16. Regulation of the Sale of Milk.
It shall be unlawful for any person to bring or send into this City for sale, or to sell in this City,
any milk without first having obtained a permit from the Board of Health of this City to do so. Such
permit shall be given by said Board of Health whenever inspection of the premises where cows are
kept, and inspection of the vessels used to hold milk and test of the milk, it shall appear that said
vessels and premises are kept in good sanitary condition, and that the milk meets the requirements of
the ordinances, laws and rules adopted by the City and State Board of Health.
SECTION 20-17. Unlawful to Sell Meat Which Has Not Been Inspected.
It shall be unlawful for any retailer, wholesaler, distributor or other person to sell, offer to sell
or deliver any meat which has not been inspected and passed by inspectors of the State of Utah, or by
Federal Inspectors.
SECTION 20-18. Sale of Diseased Cattle as Food Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any persons to kill or cause to be killed for human food, any cattle in
any feverish or diseased condition, and all such diseased cattle within the limits of Cedar City and the
place where found, and their disease, shall be at once reported to the Board of Health.
SECTION 20-19. Storage Rooms to be Kept Clean.
It shall be unlawful for any person having or holding for sale the meat of any cattle, sheep,
swine, fish, game, fowl, or poultry to fail to keep the place in which such meat is stored or offered for
sale in a clean and wholesome condition, free from noxious odors.
SECTION 20-20. Transportation of Infected Persons.
It shall be unlawful for any person knowingly to transport any person affected with any
contagious disease, in any conveyance owned or operated by him or under his control, unless he shall
immediately thereafter cause such conveyance to be thoroughly disinfected according to the rules and
regulations of the Board of Health.
SECTION 20-21. Unclean Drain or Receptacle Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or permit any unclean, stinking, foul, defective or
Ch. Pg. 5
filthy drain, ditch, tank, or gutter, or any leaking or broken slop, garbage or manure box, or
receptacle of similar character to remain on his premises.
SECTION 20-22. Unlawful to Work with Communicable Disease.
It shall be unlawful for any person afflicted with tuberculosis, syphilis, or any communicable
disease to be employed in any bakery, hotel or restaurant, store, butcher shop, or other place where
food is prepared, kept, sold, or stored, and any employee of such establishment who may be
suspected of being so affected shall be reported to the manager of the establishment and to the Board
of Health.
SECTION 20-23. Penalty.
Any person who violates, disobeys, omits, neglects or refuses to comply with or resists any of
the provisions of this chapter, or who refuses or neglects to obey any of the rules, orders,
proclamations or sanitary regulations of the Board of Health or Health Officers, or who omits,
neglects, or refuses to comply with or who resists any officers, or orders, or special regulations of
said Board of Health or Health Officer shall upon conviction thereof, be fined in any sum less than
One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment. Amended 10/8/86.
CHAPTER 21
IRRIGATION AND WATER MASTER
SECTION 21-1 Application for Water
SECTION 21-2 Annual Payment
SECTION 21-3 Treasurer to Keep Books
SECTION 21-4 Water Master. Duties
SECTION 21-5 Water Master to Supervise Work
SECTION 21-6 Not to turn Water from Ditch
SECTION 21-7 Gate to be Constructed
SECTION 21-8 Waste Water to be Returned to Ditch
SECTION 21-9 City Not Liable for Damages
Ch. Pg. 1
CHAPTER 21
IRRIGATION AND WATER MASTER
SECTION 21-1. Application for Water.
Any person, corporation or association served by a City irrigation ditch hereafter desiring to
use the water of Cedar City for the purpose of irrigation shall first make application in writing to the
City Recorder therefor. Such application shall be made upon a blank furnished by the City Recorder
and shall set forth the name of the applicant, a description of the land to be irrigated by lot and block
and the time during which the water is to be used; provided that prior appropriations shall have the
preference right of use.
SECTION 21-2. Annual Payment.
Before the application of any applicant shall be approved or the right to the use of water
granted, the applicant shall first pay to the City Treasurer, for each irrigation season, such sum as
shall be fixed by resolution of the City Council.
SECTION 21-3. Treasurer to Keep Books.
It shall be the duty of the City Treasurer to keep duplicate receipt books to be furnished by the
City and he shall issue all receipts therefrom. The receipts and duplicates shall each show the name of
the applicant, the amount and date when paid and the period when said water shall be used. The
duplicate receipts shall be delivered to the City Recorder by the City Treasurer on or before the first
day of each month during the year.
SECTION 21-4. Water Master. Duties.
It shall be the duty of the City Water Master to apportion and allot the waters flowing through
the ditches and channels of this City over which waters the City has control, to all persons,
corporations and associations complying with the provisions, and not barred by the restrictions of this
Chapter. Said apportionment and allotment shall be made with respect to time and the amount of
water available in proportion to the quantity of the land to be irrigated. He shall also supervise the
proper location, construction and repair of all gates, flumes, ditches and reservoirs necessary for the
control, conservation and distribution of said waters.
SECTION 21-5. Water Master to Supervise Work.
The Water Master shall have supervision of all work done in cleaning the City ditches and
canals, of all work done in repairing flumes and bridges and all other work necessary and desirable to
facilitate the distribution of water in the City.
SECTION 21-6. Not To Turn Water From Ditch.
Any person who shall turn the water from any public ditch or reservoir or from any private
irrigation ditch during the irrigation period, except when the use of said water shall be duly allocated
Ch. Pg. 2
to him or shall willfully or maliciously break any dam, gate, sluice or ditch used for diverting or
controlling water or in any manner change the current or flow of the water used for irrigation, or in
any manner violate any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and
upon conviction thereof shall be fined in any sum not exceeding One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00). Where said water is found turned and running on any person's property other than the
person entitled to the same, it shall be deemed prima facie evidence that such water was appropriated
unlawfully and with intent to violate the provisions of this chapter. Amended 10/8/86.
SECTION 21-7. Gate to Be Constructed.
No person shall convey water from a public ditch to his lot or premises by an irrigation ditch,
flume or pipe without first having constructed under the direction of the City Water Master a
substantial gate, both in the public ditch and at the head of the branch ditch; the latter shall be kept
closed and water right, except during period allotted to him for the use of such water. Anywhere such
branch ditch crosses any portion of a sidewalk the same shall be made of lumber or other substantial
material, the covering of which shall be on a level with such sidewalk.
SECTION 21-8. Waste Water To Be Returned to Ditch.
Any person using water for irrigation purposes shall conduct the surplus or waste water into a
public ditch and shall not allow such water to flood the streets, sidewalks, private property to the
damage thereof. And where such waste water is conducted across any sidewalk it shall be done in the
manner provided by this Chapter for taking water to premises across sidewalks. Any person violating
the provisions of this Section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 21-9. City Not Liable For Damages.
Cedar City Corporation shall not be liable for damages to any water user by reason of
stoppage or interruption of his water supply, caused by scarcity of water, accidents to canals, ditches,
etc., or during any alteration, repairs, additions or other unavoidable cause.
CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY
SECTION 22-1 Purpose Statement
SECTION 22-2 Composition of the library Board of Directors
SECTION 22-3 Terms of Office for Library Board of Directors
SECTION 22-4 Removal from Office
SECTION 22-5 Vacancies
SECTION 22-6 Organization of the Library Board of Directors
SECTION 22-7 Powers and Duties of the Library Board of Directors
SECTION 22-8 Accounting for and Expenditure of Library Funds
SECTION 22-9 Library Director (Director)
SECTION 22-10 Use of Library and Materials
Ch. 22 Pg. 1
CHAPTER 22
LIBRARY
SECTION 22-1 Purpose Statement.
The purposes of this ordinance are to establish a Library Board of Directors in accordance
with Utah State Law: recognize and clarify the powers and duties of the Library Board of Directors
and the Director: provide for control and accountability for the public and private funds that are used
by the Library, and: recognize Cedar City as the governmental entity primarily responsible for the
operation, staffing and control of the Cedar City Library.
SECTION 22-2 Composition of the Library Board of Directors.
(1) The Board of Directors shall consist of seven (7) Trustees. Trustees shall include the
following, to whit:
(A) An Iron County Commissioner who is a resident of Cedar City, or a Cedar
City resident as designee;
(B) Not more than one (1) member of the Cedar City Council, and;
( C) Qualified Cedar City Residents that are appointed by the Cedar City Mayor
and approved by the Cedar City Council.
(2) All appointments shall be made prior to July 1st of each year.
SECTION 22-3 Terms of Office for Library Board of Directors.
(1) The term of appointment for a Trustee is three (3) years.
(2) Any Trustee serving as of the date of the passage of this ordinance shall include the
time he or she has served prior to the passage of this ordinance in order to determine
their length of service.
(3) A Trustee may not be appointed to serve more than two (2) consecutive terms in
office.
(4) In order to stager the terms in office of the entire board, and consistent with the terms
in office as of the passage of this ordinance, the terms of one third of the Trustees
shall expire each year.
Ch. 22 Pg. 2
SECTION 22-4 Removal from Office.
(1) The Mayor may remove Trustees for the following reasons, to whit: (1) Misconduct
including, but not limited to, commission of a criminal act other than minor traffic
violations, and; (2) Excessive absenteeism including, but not limited to, missing
three (3) consecutive meetings.
SECTION 22-5 Vacancies.
(1) Any vacancy in the Library Board of Directors occasioned by removal, resignation,
or otherwise, shall be filled by appointment of a Trustee for the unexpired term by
the Cedar City Mayor with the approval of the Cedar City Council.
(2) Appointment of an individual to serve out the unexpired term of a Trustee shall apply
to the calculation of the individual’s two (2) terms in office.
SECTION 22-6 Organization of the Library Board of Directors.
(1) Prior to July 1st of each year the Trustees shall meet to elect such officers as they
deem necessary for operation during the next year.
(2) Subject to the requirements in this ordinance, the Trustees shall adopt such bylaws,
rules and regulations as they deem necessary for governing the Library Board of
Directors.
(3) The Trustees shall select one of their own members to serve as the chairperson for
the Board of Directors. The Chairperson shall conduct the meetings and be a voting
member.
(4) The Board of Directors shall meet quarterly during the months of January, April,
July, and October, or more frequently at the discretion of the Chairperson. In order
to call for a meeting the Chair must notify all Trustees at least twenty four (24) hours
prior to the meeting. The notice from the Chair must contain the time, location, and
date of the meeting. The Chair shall inform the members of the general subject
matter of the meeting. The notice may be sent by mail, email, text, personal contact,
or by phone.
(5) All meetings of the Library Board shall be conducted pursuant to Robert’s Rules of
Order as administered by the Chairperson. In applying Robert’s Rules of Order the
Chair is encouraged to reject overly formal applications, and adopt the application
that favors the following goals: (1) allow the Chair the ability to facilitate or direct
the discussion and keep order; (2) protect the ability of all board members to bring
up their ideas, discuss them, receive input from the public and staff, and come to their
individual opinions and conclusions on each issue; (3) allow all members the
opportunity to express their individual opinions and conclusions on each issue
Ch. 22 Pg. 3
through their vote; and (4) assure the majority vote of the board is the opinion of the
board while at the same time protecting the minority of board members’ ability to
speak, express ideas, and vote.
(6) The Library Board shall follow the Utah Open and Public Meetings Act.
(7) The members of the Library Board are appointed officials of the City and shall
comply with the terms of the Utah Municipal Officers and Employees Ethics Act,
UCA §§10-3-1301 through 10-3-1312, as currently enacted or as it may be amended.
(8) The City’s Library Department shall provide such support staff as is reasonably
necessary for the Library Board. If the Board requires services that are not available
through the Library Department additional City staff may be assigned to support the
Board. Upon appointment of new members City staff shall provide such training as
is reasonably necessary.
SECTION 22-7 Powers and Duties of the Library Board of Directors.
(1) The Library Board of Directors shall have the following Powers and Duties, to whit:
(A) Appoint a competent person to serve as Director with the consent of the
Cedar City Mayor and the Cedar City Council, and subject to Cedar City
Hiring policy and section 22-7 of this ordinance;
(B) To institute and revise all policies and procedures for the day to day operation
of the Cedar City Library;
(C) Supervise, care for, and control the Library rooms and building such as is set
aside for the purpose of a reading room;
(D) Make recommendations and give advice to the Cedar City Council on matters
effecting the Cedar City Library;
(E) On or before the third Thursday in August, the Library Board of Directors
shall report to the Cedar City Council the current status of the library,
including, but not limited to the most recent financial statement and any other
statistics, information and suggestions the Trustees may have.
(F) Trustees shall serve without pay. Expenses incurred in the performance of
their duties may be compensated in accordance with Cedar City Policy.
SECTION 22-8 Accounting for and Expenditure of Library Funds.
(1) All funds that are in any manner received for the library shall be deposited in an
Ch. 22 Pg. 4
account maintained by Cedar City, in accordance with Utah State Law, said funds
shall be used for the sole purpose of the Library.
(2) The expenditure of money for the benefit of the Library, regardless of the source of
the money, shall be made in accordance with Cedar City Purchasing Policy, and after
Cedar City Council approval, if applicable.
(3) Donated funds shall be accounted for by Cedar City and expenditure or encumbrance
of donated funds shall be made only in accordance with Cedar City Purchasing Policy
and after Cedar City Council approval, if applicable.
SECTION 22-9 Library Director (Director).
(1) The Director shall be appointed in accordance with section 22-5 of this ordinance to
run the day to day operations of the Cedar City Library.
(2) Upon Appointment and confirmation, the Director shall be an employee of Cedar
City with the followings powers and duties, to whit:
(A) The Director shall be an exempt employee of the city;
(B) The Director shall be assigned compensation and benefits in accordance with
Cedar City Personnel policy, and applicable wage studies, during the hiring
process;
(C) The Director shall accountable to the Cedar City Manager for the
performance of the Cedar City Library and its employees;
(D) The Director shall be subject to discipline up to and including termination
only in accordance with Cedar City Personnel Policy
(E) The Director shall follow, and ensure that all other Cedar City Library
employees follow all Cedar City Policies as well as any Policies instituted by
the Cedar City Library Board, the Cedar City Administration, and the Cedar
City Council.
(F) The Director shall be accountable, in accordance with Utah State Law and
Cedar City accounting policy or practice, for all funds received at the Cedar
City Library.
(G) If the Director permits or allows any person to take materials from the Library
by means other than are provided in this Chapter, or applicable Library Policy
and Procedure, he or she shall be subject to removal from office and
personally liable for all damages occurring on account of such misconduct.
Ch. 22 Pg. 5
SECTION 22-10 Use of Library and Materials.
(1) The term “material(s)” shall include books, audio or visual materials, periodicals,
leaflets, pamphlets, or any material that is cataloged and in the possession of the
Library.
(2) Any Person that resides outside of Iron County may be permitted to withdraw
materials form the Library as long as a Library card has been received and an out of
county fee has been paid.
(3) Any person obtaining material form the Library shall be responsible for all damage
or injury to said materials.
(4) Any person retaining materials for a longer period of time than provided by the
Library Board of Directors policy, shall pay a late fee as determined by Library Board
of Directors Policy. AMENDED 9/03
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0612-13-5
CHAPTER 23
BUSINESS REGULATIONS AND LICENSES
SECTION 23-1 General Provisions
SECTION 23-2 Purpose
SECTION 23-3 Definitions
SECTION 23-4 Regulation as Applied
SECTION 23-4(A) Compliance Required
SECTION 23-4(B) Special Sales
SECTION 23-4(C) Responsibility for Obtaining License
SECTION 23-4(D) Separate License for Branch Establishments
SECTION 23-4(E) Joint License
SECTION 23-4(F) No License Required when Solely for Resale
SECTION 23-4(G) Exemptions
SECTION 23-5 City License Officer; Powers and Duties
SECTION 23-6 Procedure for Issuance of License
SECTION 23-7 Determination of License Fee
SECTION 23-7(A) General Business License Fee
SECTION 23-7(B) Term of License; Payment of License Fees
SECTION 23-7(C) Adjustment of Fee; Pro Rated Fees
SECTION 23-7(D) Rebate of Fee
SECTION 23-7(E) Late Penalties
SECTION 23-7(F) License Fee Additional
SECTION 23-7(G) Board of Equalization
SECTION 23-7(H) Small Overpayments
SECTION 23-8 Contents of License
SECTION 23-9 Regulation of Specified Businesses; Required License and
Fees
SECTION 23-9(A) Pawn Brokers, Swap Meets, Second-Hand Dealers
SECTION 23-9(B) Amusement Devices
SECTION 23-9(C) Billboard Advertising
SECTION 23-9(D) Dance Hall
SECTION 23-9(E) Itinerant Merchandising of Goods or Services
SECTION 23-9(F) Junk Dealers and Junk Yards
SECTION 23-9(G) Fireworks
SECTION 23-9(H) Auctioneers
SECTION 23-9(I) Produce Peddlers
SECTION 23-9(J) Special Events, Exhibitions, Concerts and Performances
SECTION 23-9(K) Alarms
SECTION 23-9(L) Christmas Tree Sales Lots
SECTION 23-9(M) Horse Drawn Carriage Operations
SECTION 23-9(N) Restaurants
SECTION 23-9(O) Ice Cream Vehicle Operations
SECTION 23-9(P) Retail Tobacco Specialty Businesses
SECTION 23-9(Q) Residential Short-Term Rentals
SECTION 23-10 Rental Dwelling License
SECTION 23-11 Liquor Set-Up License
SECTION 23-12 Beer Licenses
SECTION 23-12(A) Definitions
SECTION 23-12(B) Unlawful to Sell Beer Without a License
SECTION 23-12(C) Retail License Privileges
SECTION 23-12(D) Fees
SECTION 23-12(E) Application
SECTION 23-12(F) Qualifications of Licensee
SECTION 23-12(G) Additional Licenses
SECTION 23-12(H) Transfer of License Prohibited
SECTION 23-12(I) Restrictions
SECTION 23-12(J) Beer Handler’s Permit
SECTION 23-12(K) Denial of License or Permit
SECTION 23-12(L) License Suspension and Revocation
SECTION 23-12(M) Wholesale License
SECTION 23-12(N) Late Penalty
SECTION 23-12-A Single Event Permits
SECTION 23-12-A(A) Council's Power to Grant Permits
SECTION 23-12-A(B) Application Requirements
SECTION 23-12-A(C) Qualifications
SECTION 23-12-A(D) Operational Restrictions
SECTION 23-13 Treatment Facilities
SECTION 23-14 Duties of Licensees, Permittees, and Applicants
SECTION 23-14(A) General Standards of Conduct
SECTION 23-14(B) Display of License or Permit
SECTION 23-14(C) Unlawful Possession
SECTION 23-14(D) New Location Desired
SECTION 23-14(E) Keep Records
SECTION 23-15 Transfer of License or Permit
SECTION 23-16 Non-Established Businesses; Non-Residents
SECTION 23-17 Undue Burden on Interstate Commerce
SECTION 23-18 Enforcement
SECTION 23-18(A) Inspections
SECTION 23-18(B) Provisional Order
SECTION 23-18(C) Final Order
SECTION 23-18(D) Summary Action
SECTION 23-18(E) Effect of Denial, Suspension or Revocation; Waiting Period
SECTION 23-18(F) Liability of Violator
SECTION 23-19 Penalty
SECTION 23-20 Constructive Notice of Time Periods
SECTION 23-21 Severability
SECTION 23-22 Business License Exemption
SECTION 23-23 Ordinances Repealed
Ch. 123 Pg.
CHAPTER 23
BUSINESS REGULATIONS AND LICENSES
SECTION 23-1. General Provisions
The provisions of this Chapter shall govern all businesses and rental dwellings within the
municipal limits of Cedar City, Utah, and shall regulate all business and rental dwelling licenses
and permits required and granted by Cedar City, including beer licenses and permits.
SECTION 23-2. Purpose.
This Chapter is designed for the regulation of business activities, raising revenue
therefrom, promoting the safety, health and prosperity, improving morals, peace, good order,
comfort and convenience of the citizens of Cedar City, Utah.
SECTION 23-3. Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the following
meaning:
(A) Business: Includes all kinds of vocations, occupations, professions, enterprises,
establishments and all other kinds of activities and matters, whether full-time or part-time,
together with all devices, machines, vehicles and appurtenances used therein, any of which are
conducted for private profit or benefit, either directly or indirectly, on any premise within this
City or anywhere within its jurisdiction.
(B) Business Operated Occasionally: will be determined by City Staff after looking at the
business’s size, frequency, duration, visibility and seasonality of the proposed business.
(C) City: Cedar City, Utah.
(D) City License Officer: City Recorder of Cedar City.
(E) Employee: Any operator, owner or manager of a business; any person or persons
employed by an operator, owner or manager in the operation of a place of business in any
capacity, whether part-time or full-time; any sales persons or agents; or, at the Senior Business’s
election, any qualified independent contractors engaged in the furtherance of a business activity
in any capacity, regardless of the method of compensation. As used herein, the term "employee"
is intended to include all owners whether there is only one or more than one.
(F) Home-based Business: involves a Business as defined under 23-3(A) which is
operated out of a person’s primary residence.
(G) License: Certificate or document issued by the City evidencing permission or
authority from the City to the holder named to carry on a particular business or to pursue a
particular occupation.
(H) Licensee: Person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to the provisions of
this Chapter, including individual persons, partnerships, joint ventures, associations, clubs, trusts,
corporations or any other entities qualified by law to carry on any business referred to
herein. The term "person" as used herein shall include all of the above, and shall be either an
applicant or licensee.
(I) Number of Employees: The average number of employees engaging in the
furtherance of the licensee's business from a base within the City during a regular working week
of the preceding calendar year, or in the case of a new business, said number shall be based upon
the applicant's sworn statement of the expected number of employees for the license period
pursuant to this Section. In computing such number, the following shall apply:
(1) Owners shall be counted like all other employees according to the hours each
owner works; however, the total calculation for all owners, calculated separately
from other employees, shall not be less than one employee;
(2) Each employee designated as a full-time employee by licensee’s business for
tax, insurance, or benefits purposes shall be calculated as one employee regardless
of the actual hours worked;
(3) Each employee working an average of thirty-two (32) hours or more per week
shall be counted as one employee if not already accounted for under Subsection
(2); and
(4) All employees not counted above, including part-time, seasonal, or temporary,
shall be counted by the following calculation: the total average weekly hours of
all part-time, seasonal, and temporary employees divided by forty (40), with the
quotient being rounded to the nearest half employee.
(J) Offsite Impact: includes but is not limited to the cumulative effect of light, noise,
traffic, dust, and street use that the home-based business has on the primary residential use and
surrounding neighborhood.
(K) Premises: All lands, structures, places, and also the equipment and appurtenances
connected or used therewith in any business, and also any personal property which is either
affixed to or otherwise used in connection with any such business conducted on such premises.
(L) Qualified Independent Contractor: Any independent contractor that conducts ninety
percent (90%) or more of his/her work and services through a Senior Business.
(M) Senior Business: A business that utilizes the work and services of at least one
qualified independent contractor.
THIS SECTION AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 0628-17-2.
SECTION 23-4. Regulation as Applied.
(A) Compliance Required. It shall be unlawful for any person, either directly or
indirectly, to conduct any business or non-profit enterprise, or to use in connection therewith any
vehicle, premises, machine or device in whole or in part for which a license is required by any
law or ordinance of this City without a license first being procured and kept in effect at all such
times as required by law.
(B) Special Sales. This Ordinance shall apply to all business in the nature of special
sales for which a license is required by any law or ordinance of this City, and it shall be unlawful
for any person either directly or indirectly to conduct any such sale except in conformity with the
provisions of this Chapter.
(1) One act constitutes doing business. For the purpose of this Chapter, any
person shall be deemed to be in business or engaging in non-profit business and
thus subject to the requirements of Subsections A and B of this Section when any
of the following are done.
(a) Providing any goods or services for consideration;
(b) Soliciting business or offering goods or services for sale or hire; or
(c) Acquiring or using any vehicle or any premises in the City for business
purposes.
(C) Responsibility for Obtaining License. It shall be the responsibility of the person
engaging in business within the City to voluntarily apply and maintain in full force and effect a
valid license. The agents or other representatives of non-residents who are doing business in the
City shall be personally responsible for compliance by their principals and the businesses they
represent with the terms of this Chapter.
(D) Separate License for Branch Establishments. A license shall be obtained in the
manner prescribed herein for each branch establishment or location of the business engaged in,
as if each branch establishment or location were a separate business, provided that warehouses
and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business license under the
provisions of this Chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch
establishments.
(E) Joint License. A person engaged in two or more businesses at the same location
shall obtain separate licenses for conducting each of such businesses, but when such businesses
are complementary a single license may be issued which shall specify on its face all such
businesses operated at that location.
(1) A person is engaged in two or more businesses at the same location if the
person has or should have registered under State law more than one DBA
(Doing Business As), corporation, limited liability company, or limited
partnership with the State of Utah for the activities conducted at that
location.
(2) Two or more businesses may be deemed complementary only if the
businesses have the same owner(s) and only if the applicant requests a
joint license at the time of application or renewal.
(3) A fee for each separate business specified on the face of such license shall
be required to the same extent as would be required if a separate license
was obtained for each business.
(4) No joint license shall include licenses for beer, liquor set-ups, dance, and
amusement devices.
(5) A Senior Business licensed with the City may choose to treat its qualified
independent contractors as employees of the Senior Business, listing each
of the independent contractors’ businesses that meet the ninety percent
(90%) requirement. If a Senior Business chooses not to treat its qualified
independent contractors as employees, it shall inform its qualified
independent contractors of that decision and instruct them to obtain a
separate business license. No Senior Business shall offer products or
services through a qualified independent contractor that the Senior
Business knows is not licensed through this Chapter.
(F) No License Required when Solely for Resale. No license shall be required for any
solicitor or salesman who solicits, obtains orders for or sells goods in the City solely for resale
and maintains no premise in the City in connection therewith.
(G) Exemptions. Exemptions to this Chapter are as follows:
(1) A business license fee shall not be imposed on any person engaged
in business solely for religious, charitable eleemosynary or any other types
of strictly non-profit purpose which is tax exempt in such activities under
the laws of the United States and the State of Utah, nor shall any business
license fee be imposed on any person engaged in a business specifically
exempted from municipal taxation and fees by the laws of the United
States or the State of Utah. Any business exempt from paying the license
fee as provided in this Section shall still comply with all other
requirements of this Chapter, including the application for and obtaining a
license and/or permit.
(2) Any business having gross sales of less than two thousand dollars
($2,000.00) per year shall be deemed exempt from business license fees
upon a request for exemption and sufficient evidence of gross sales. Any
business exempt from paying the license fee as provided in this Section,
shall still comply with all other requirements of this Chapter, including the
application for and obtaining a license and/or permit.
SECTION 23-5. City License Officer; Powers and Duties.
(A) Issue Licenses. The City License Officer shall issue licenses in the name of the City
to all persons qualified under the provisions of this Chapter upon payment to the City Treasurer
of all license fees required hereunder.
All information furnished to or secured by the City License Officer under the authority of
this Chapter shall be kept in accordance with State and local law governing the accumulation,
handling and dissemination of such documents and information, and those charged with
administration of this Chapter may release the names, address and nature of said business upon
request. The City License Officer shall have the power to:
(1) Adopt forms. Adopt all forms and prescribe the information
required therein as to all matters relevant to the issuance of a license.
(2) Investigate. Investigate and determine the eligibility of any
applicant or licensee, either at the time of issuance of a license or at any
reasonable time after its issuance, in such manner as may be reasonable
and necessary for the proper administration and enforcement of this
Chapter. The Chief of Police, the Fire Marshall, their authorized Officers
and Deputies, the Building Inspector, the Wastewater Treatment
Coordinator and the City Attorney are authorized and declared to be Ex-
Officio License Deputies, and are hereby authorized to examine all places
of business subject to this Chapter to see that such businesses are carried
on or transacted in accordance with this law, and to report to the City
License Officer any violation.
(3) Inspection of Premises and Records. Inspect prospective or
existing places of businesses to insure compliance with building, safety
and health code, and inspect books and records of any applicant or
licensee to determine the number of employees, or any other information
reasonably necessary to the administration and enforcement of this
Chapter, provided that all such inspections shall be at reasonable times and
upon proper advance notice to the applicant or licensee. The License
Officer shall utilize the deputies referred to in Sub-paragraph 2 above for
the purpose of the inspections.
(4) Give Notice. Notify any applicant of the acceptance or rejection of
their application, and in the event of rejection, at the applicant's request,
state in writing the reasons therefore and deliver it to the applicant.
(5) Request Enforcement. Request the City Attorney to file an action
against any applicant or licensee who conducts a business without a
license required by this Chapter.
(6) Good Standing of Applicant or Licensee. Determine that the
applicant or licensee is not in default under the provision of any City
Ordinance, or indebted or obligated in any manner to the City or the
utilities operated by it; determine that they are not in violation of any City
zoning regulation by reason of the condition of business premises or the
use to be made thereof. A favorable determination of the applicant's
standing in light of these factors shall be a condition precedent to issuance
of a license under this Chapter, but shall not bind the City to that
determination if conditions change or the License Officer’s determination
is found to be in error.
SECTION 23-6. Procedure for Issuance of License.
(A) Formal Application Required.
(1) Form of Application. A written statement shall be submitted upon forms
provided by the City License Officer; each form shall include a statement
regarding the truthfulness of the information provided and/or potential
consequences for providing false information.
(2) Contents of Application. Require the disclosure of all information which
the City License Officer shall find to be reasonably necessary to the fair
administration of this Chapter, including but not limited to the business
name; description of the proposed business; mailing address; business
telephone; owner’s name, resident address, phone number, date of birth,
and social security number; state tax number if applicable, federal tax
number if applicable, state contractor’s number if applicable, proof that
the business is state and/or federally licensed and registered, and complies
with all applicable state and federal laws, signature of applicant or
applicant’s authorized agent provided under penalty of law that all
information contained in the application is true, and such other
information as the City License Officer shall deem reasonable and
necessary to determine the fee amount or if the applicant’s business will
place additional burdens on City services, utilities, or the provision of
public safety.
(3) Payment of Fees. Payment in full of fees chargeable for such license.
(B) Issuance of Receipt. Whenever a license cannot be issued at the time application
for the same is made, the City Treasurer shall issue a receipt for the money paid in advance,
subject to the following condition:
(1) Construction. Such receipt shall not be construed as approval by the
License Officer for the issuance of a license; nor shall it entitle or
authorize the applicant to open or maintain any business contrary to the
provisions of this Chapter, except as allowed under the following
Subsection (2).
(2) Temporary License. Unless the receipt or documentation provided
with the receipt states otherwise, such receipt shall act as a temporary, 30-
day license to conduct the business for which the applicant has applied. If
the License Officer has not issued a license to the applicant by the end of
the 30-day period or the License Officer informs the applicant at any time
that the application has been denied, the applicant must immediately cease
to operate the business within the boundaries of the City until the License
Officer issues a license for that business.
(C) Due Date for Applications. All applications for renewals shall be made in writing
and submitted to the City License Officer on or before January 1 of each year on forms as set
forth herein; the fee payment in full shall accompany the annual application. Unless otherwise
notified by the licensee, the City License Officer is entitled to presume the continued operation
of any business licensed in the preceding year.
(D) Duplicate License Procedure. A duplicate license shall be issued by the License
Officer to replace any license previously issued which has been lost, stolen, defaced or destroyed
without any willful conduct on the part of the licensee upon the filing by the licensee of a new
application and paying to the License Officer a replacement fee of $5.00.
(E) Approval of Application. In the event the City shall approve an application for a
license, such approval shall be endorsed on the license and signed by the Mayor and the City
Recorder, who shall forthwith issue a license certificate.
(F) Non-Approval of License. The License Officer shall, upon disapproving any
application submitted under the provisions of this Chapter, refund all fees paid in advance to the
applicant, provided the applicant is not otherwise indebted to the City, in which case, the City
may apply the fee to any such delinquent account.
(G) Renewal License Procedure. An applicant for renewal of a license shall submit an
application for renewal to the City License Officer on such form as the License Officer may
direct.
(1) Contents. The renewal application shall require the disclosure of
such information concerning the operation of the applicant's business
during the preceding licensing period and any expected changes during the
coming or current licensing period as is reasonably necessary to the
determination by the License Officer of the applicant's eligibility for a
renewal license, of a possible adjustment in the license fee, or of any
additional burdens on City services, utilities, or the provision of public
safety.
(H) Appeal.
(1) Filing Appeal. After denial of an application, denial of a renewal
application, or suspension or revocation of any license or permit, or
application of the fee to a delinquent account, an applicant, licensee, or
permittee may appeal said decision to the City Manager. Any appeal must
be submitted in writing to the License Officer within ten (10) business
days of the decision from which the appeal is taken. Such appeal shall
describe in detail the nature of the appeal, the action complained of, and
the grounds for appeal.
(2) Decision by City Manager. The City Manager shall issue a decision
within fifteen (15) days of receiving the appeal, unless an extension of
time is agreed upon by the parties. The decision complained of shall be
reversed by the City Manager if upon review of the written appeal and
information submitted, the City Manager finds that the License Officer or
other City official made a material mistake of law or fact in making the
complained of decision.
(3) Appeal to Council. After ruling on an appeal by the City Manager, any
aggrieved party may appeal said decision to the City Council. Any appeal
must be submitted in writing to the License Officer within ten (10)
business days of the decision from which the appeal is taken. Such appeal
shall describe in detail the nature of the appeal, the action complained of,
and the grounds for appeal.
(4) Decision by Council. The City Council shall issue a decision within thirty
(30) days of receiving the appeal, unless an extension of time is agreed
upon by the parties. The decision complained of shall be reversed by the
City Council if upon review of the written appeal and information
submitted, the City Council finds that the License Officer or other City
official made a material mistake of law or fact in making the complained
of decision.
(5) Exhaustion. After the ruling of the City Council, the complaining party is
deemed to have exhausted all administrative remedies.
(6) Compliance pending legal action. When the issuance or renewal
of a license or permit is denied and any action is instituted by the applicant
to compel its issuance, such applicant shall not engage in the business for
which a license or permit was refused unless a license or permit be issued
pursuant to a judgment ordering the same.
SECTION 23-7. Determination of License Fee.
Every person engaged in business within the City shall pay an annual license fee as
required by ordinance unless specifically exempt by law. Subparagraph (A) of this Section shall
apply to all businesses except for those specifically covered in the subsequent Sections of this
Chapter, in which case the fee for such license shall be determined in accordance with the
specific Section pertaining to that business.
(A) General Business License Fee.
(1) Effective January 1, 2008, the amount of the business license fee
levied and imposed shall be the base license fee imposed under Subsection
(2)(a), plus:
a. The disproportionate impact fee imposed under
subsection (3); and
b. The enhance service fee imposed under subsection (4); if
applicable.
(2) The base license fee levied and imposed, covering licensing,
inspection, related administrative costs and cost of special regulation, as
applicable, is as follows:
a. For general businesses: $30.00
(3) Disproportionate Costs.
a. It is hereby determined by the City Council that a
disproportionate level of municipal services are provided to
commercial entities within the City in comparison with those
levels of services provided to residences within the City, based
on the disproportionate use of police and fire services and the
additional costs associated with increased usage of public
facilities by employees.
b. The “per employee” fee determined to be related to the
disproportionate costs of such municipal services is $13 per
employee.
c. The total Business License fee shall not exceed $1,000 per
business, excluding late fees.
(4) Enhanced Services. It is hereby determined by the City Council
that the businesses and residential rental units within the Downtown
Parking Authority are receiving services at a level which exceeds other
geographic areas of the City. A per-business cost for such service is
hereby assessed for stall rental and stall maintenance fee.
a. The stall rental fee is determined by computing, according to City
Ordinance, the number of stalls required by ordinance for a
particular business or rental as modified by the Downtown Parking
Authority, and deducting the number of stalls already owned by
the business or rental. If the business requires more stalls than it
owns, it must lease available stalls through the City at the rate
adopted by the Downtown Parking Authority Board.
b. The stall maintenance fee is used for crack sealing, resealing the
parking lot, snow removal, re-striping, landscape maintenance, and
the like. Each business pays a proportionate share based upon the
number of stalls required by its business.
c. The stall rental and stall maintenance fee shall be prorated based
on the number of months or partial months of the calendar year
remaining from the date the business commenced or from the date
the premises were first rented or offered for rent. Any partial
month shall be charged as a full month for the purpose of the
prorated fee.
d. Unless there is evidence to the contrary, when the City discovers,
between January 1st and June 30th, a business or rental that is or
has been unlicensed or has not paid the stall rental and
maintenance fees, the City shall presume that the business or rental
commenced on January 1st of the same year.
e. Unless there is evidence to the contrary, when the City discovers,
between July 1st and December 31st, a business or rental that is or
has been unlicensed or has not paid the stall rental and
maintenance fees, the City shall presume that the business or rental
commenced on July 1st of the same year.
(B) Term of License; Payment of License Fees. All license fees provided for in this
Chapter shall be payable annually in advance and shall be effective up and until January 1st of
the succeeding year, unless otherwise specifically provided. The licensing term for Liquor Set-
Up Licenses and Beer Licenses, but not Beer Handler’s Permits shall be as follows:
(1) For licenses issued for the term beginning July 1, 2007, the licensing term
shall expire on January 1, 2008. The fee for these licenses shall be onehalf
(1/2) the current annual licensing fee for these licenses.
(2) Beginning January 1, 2008, all Liquor Set-Up Licenses and Beer Licenses
shall expire on January 1st of the succeeding year.
(C) Adjustment of Fee; Pro Rated Fees. The License Officer shall:
(1) Change in License Status. Require the payment of an additional or higher
licensee fee to be pro-rated for the balance of the license period when a
licensee changes status under this Chapter by increasing the number of
employees. No rebate or refund of all or part of a license fee shall be
given, even for a reduction in the licensee’s employees, except pursuant to
Subparagraph (D) of this Section.
(2) Date of Issuance. Any application for a license pursuant to this Chapter
filed subsequent to July 1st of any year shall authorize a pro-rated fee to
the licensee at one half (1/2) the annual license fee set forth herein, except
as otherwise indicated in this Chapter.
(D) Rebate of Fee.
(1) General Prohibition. Except as herein provided, no rebate or refund of any
license fee or part thereof shall be made by reason of non-use of such
license or by reason of a change of location or any business rendering the
use of such license ineffective.
(2) Authority in Special Cases. The License Officer shall have the authority
to refund a license fee or pro rate a portion thereof where:
(a) The license fee was collected through error;
(b) The licensee has been prevented from enjoying the full license
privilege due to death or incapacity;
(c) The licensee has entered into the armed services and thereby
rendered unable to conduct business;
(d) The licensed business is subject to eminent domain; or
(e) The licensed business is destroyed by fire or other casualty through
no fault of licensee.
(3) Basis of Rebate. A rebate as provided herein shall be based upon the
number of days in the license period that the licensee was unable to
conduct business for any of the reasons in Subsection (2) of this Paragraph
(D), based upon a 365-day year.
(E) Late Penalties. Any license fee due on January 1st that is paid later than January 15th
of any license year shall be considered to be late, and a late penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the
amount of the fee shall be added to the original amount due. If the fee is still not paid by
February 15th of each year, the business shall be considered to be operating without a business
license in violation of this Chapter, subject to criminal prosecution for every day of operation
after February 15th. For any license fee due on January 1st that is paid later than February 15th,
the original fee, not including the previously imposed fifty percent (50%) late penalty, shall be
doubled.
THIS SECTION AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 0426-17-4.
(F) License Fee Additional. The license fee herein provided for shall be in addition to
any and all licenses and taxes imposed by any other ordinance, statute, or rule of the City, State,
or federal governments.
(1) Except as provided by Subsection (2), in any case where the State of Utah
requires a business or an employee to be licensed, the obtaining of such
license is a prerequisite to receiving a license under this Chapter.
(2) In the case of any State license requiring consent by the City through a
City-issued license before the State license may be issued, the lack of such
State license shall not prevent the issuance of a City license. The licensee
shall not conduct the business authorized by the City-issued license until
the licensee has provided proof to the City that the State license has been
issued.
(G) Board of Equalization. The City Council is hereby constituted a Board of
Equalization for the equalization of license rate. Said Board shall have the authority to examine
fees and to hear complaints regarding license assessments and to make changes in assessments
which the Board deems to be illegal, unequal or unjust, provided however that any corrections
made by the Board shall be accompanied with findings of fact and the same shall be entered in
the record of license assessment kept by the License Officer.
(H) Small Overpayments. Overpayments of fifteen dollars ($15) or less shall not be
immediately refunded unless requested in person before or in writing to the License Officer, and
such small overpayments shall be treated as follows:
(1) Each small overpayment shall be kept as a credit for subsequent renewal
fees until such small overpayment is transferred to the State pursuant to
the Utah Unclaimed Property Act, Title 67, Chapter 4a, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953 as amended.
(2) Notice of the credit for small overpayments shall be provided as follows:
(a) If an annual renewal notice is sent to the licensee or permittee, a notice
of the small overpayment shall be provided with or on the annual renewal
notice; and
(b) If the small overpayment is not repaid or applied to a renewal fee as
allowed by Subsection (3) below, a notice shall be provided as required by
Section 67-4a-301, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended, but such
notice shall not be required if the License Officer knows the last-provided
address is inaccurate, undeliverable, or outdated.
(3) One year and one day following the discovery by the License Officer of a
small overpayment, the small overpayment shall be deemed abandoned for
purposes of the Utah Unclaimed Property Act, Title 67, Chapter 4a, Utah
Code Annotated, 1953 as amended, unless one of the following occurs by
March 31st of the calendar year after the overpayment is deemed
abandoned:
(a) The licensee or permittee requests in person before or in writing to the
License Officer that a refund be issued for the overpayment; or
(b) The licensee or permittee renews his or her license or permit, in which
case the small overpayment shall be applied towards the renewal fee. The
License Officer shall subtract the credit from the renewal fee before
applying any payment submitted for the renewal fee. Any resulting small
overpayment shall constitute a new small overpayment for purposes of this
Subsection (H).
SECTION 23-8. Contents of License.
(A) Information. Each license issued hereunder shall state upon its face the following:
(1) The name of the licensee and any other name under which such business is
to be conducted.
(2) The type and address of each business so licensed.
(3) The date of issuance and expiration thereof.
(4) Such other information as the License Officer shall determine.
SECTION 23-9. Regulation of Specific Businesses; Required License and Fees.
All businesses specifically set forth in the following Subsections shall pay the fee required
therein in lieu of the general license required in Section 23-7 above, unless otherwise set forth
therein.
(A) Pawn Brokers, Swap Meets, Second-Hand Dealers. Pawn brokers, swap meet
operators, and dealers in second-hand merchandise shall pay the general license fee required by
Section 23-7 above.
Any person engaged in the business of lending money upon deposit or pledge of personal
property or other thing of value, other than securities and printed evidence of indebtedness, or in
the business of purchasing personal property or things of value or selling or agreeing to sell the
same back to the seller at a price higher than the original purchase price, or who deals in secondhand
merchandise, or who operates a swap meet where booths or areas are leased out to peddlers
or individuals wishing to sell items of personal property, either new or used, shall be aware of all
merchandise purchased, received, sold or otherwise, forming a part of the business transacted on
the premises, and shall comply with the requirements of State law, including Sections 11-6-1,
13-32a-101 through 13-32a-114, 13-32-101 through 107, and 76-6-408, Utah Code Annotated,
1953 as amended, to insure that no stolen merchandise is the object of any transaction.
Swap meet operators shall keep a complete record of names, residences and driver’s
license numbers of each person selling or displaying merchandise.
All pawn brokers shall keep a complete ledger containing all information required by
Sections 13-32a-104 and 76-6-408, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended, including an
account of each and every transaction concerning both the pledging and redeeming of articles,
and setting forth the transaction date, name, address and the driver’s license number of the
pledger, a description of the goods, including serial number if any, the amount of money loaned
or paid therefore, and the number of the pawn ticket. A copy of said record shall be provided to
the City Police Department weekly.
No person shall be granted a pawn broker’s license unless they are over the age of 21
years and a citizen of the United States, nor anyone who has been convicted of a felony or a
crime involving moral turpitude within the previous ten-year period.
(B) Amusement Devices. Any machine, device, electronic mechanism or other
contrivance which is legal under the laws of the State of Utah and Cedar City, designed or
intended to be operated or used for amusement in response to the payment of some charge or
insertion of a coin or other object, shall be licensed under the general license fee required by
Section 23-7 above. A separate license shall not be required for each machine, device,
mechanism or other contrivance, but a separate license shall be required for each separate
location where one or more is located for commercial use, if the amusement device is intended to
remain or does remain at that location for one week or more during the license year.
(C) Billboard Advertising. Every person engaged in the business of supplying space for
hire for outdoor advertisement shall pay a license fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) annually, together
with a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) annual fee for each billboard owned or operated within Cedar
City, Utah, with a maximum fee of four hundred dollars ($400.00).
(D) Dance Hall. A public dance hall is any public space open to public patronage in
which a public dance is held and for which there is a charge for admission. A license fee for a
public dance shall be one hundred dollars ($100.00) per year, or any part thereof, in addition to
any other license fee charged. No license is required for dances conducted by schools, whether
public or private, if admission is generally limited to students and alumni and their guests.
(E) Itinerant Merchandising of Goods or Services. Transient or itinerant merchant
includes any person whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, whether a resident of
Cedar City or not, who engages in the business of selling and delivering of goods, wares and
merchandise within Cedar City on a temporary basis, and who in furtherance of such business
hires, leases, uses or occupies any approved building structure, public room in hotels or motels,
lodging houses, apartments, shops or other approved structure or location within Cedar City, for
the exhibition and sale of such goods, merchandise, wares or services. Temporary structures will
be permitted subject to the following conditions:
1. The structure is located by written permission of the underlying property
owner; and
2. Any issues relating to health, safety and welfare (i.e. trash receptacles,
restrooms) are in compliance as required by the City Code Enforcement Officer.
Itinerant businesses of any type including merchants, operators of closing-out sales,
hawkers, tradesman, repairman, home improvement contractors, or any others who are deemed
by the City License Officer to be transients by reason of the period of time in which they intend
to engage in such business in the City, shall pay the license fee of:
(1) Day Permit Fee $25.00
(2) Week (7 day) Permit Fee $ 50.00
(3) Fourteen-day Permit Fee $ 75.00
(4) Three-Month Business License Fee $150.00
In addition to the above schedule, they shall pay a license fee of $23.00 for each employee
beyond the first employed in said business. Day, week and fourteen-day permits for a total of
fourteen days may be issued during any calendar year. Thereafter, a three-month business
license must be purchased if a licensee continues operation.
All other requirements of this Chapter shall be applicable.
Any person who the License Officer deems to be an itinerant merchant by reason of
transience shall provide upon request of the License Officer at the time of application
information relative to type and location of previous business experience, moral character and
reputation, felony or misdemeanor convictions if any, and such information as may be
reasonably required. In addition, the License Officer may require applicants to demonstrate
origin of goods through bills of sale, purchase receipts or otherwise.
The applicant shall supply a statement of the nature of the services, goods or merchandise
and examples of coupon books or discount cards for those intending to sell coupons or discount
cards. The applicant must produce, at the time of application, a site plan of the location where
the business shall be conducted, and either a letter of permission or a copy of a lease agreement
from the owner of the property where such business shall be conducted.
(F) Junk Dealers and Junk Yards. Every person buying or selling junk, or any person
who maintains or operates a junk yard within Cedar City shall pay a license fee of $150.00 per
year. Anyone who maintains a lot for purposes of storing used metal material, wood material,
cement material, rock, plastic material, auto bodies or parts thereof, or refuse material of any
kind for the purpose of reselling all or any part thereof to the public shall be considered to be a
junk dealer or operator of a junk yard.
Any person engaged in buying or selling junk or any person who maintains or operates a
junk yard shall keep a record which shall contain all information required by Section 76-10-907,
Utah Code Annotated, as amended, including a description of every article they purchase,
including serial number if available, the name, age and residence of the vendor, the amount paid,
and the date of purchase. Said record shall at all times be open to inspection by City Police
Department and by any City official.
(G) Fireworks. Every person engaged in the business of offering fireworks for sale as
allowed by Section 18-2 of City Ordinance shall be required to pay a business license fee in the
amount of $200.00
(H) Auctioneers. The fee for an auctioneer's license shall be $100.00 per year or $25.00
per day.
For the purpose of this Subsection, an auctioneer is a person who conducts a public
competitive sale of property to the highest bona fide bidder, and an auction house is defined as a
place where personal property is sold at auction by an auctioneer. The provisions of this
Subsection shall not apply to auctions held for charitable purpose, church affair, festival or
bazaar, the sale of animals or farm produce, judicial sales, sales by executors or administrators,
or sales by the Sheriff or constable.
Before any sale is made at auction, the licensee must attach to each article to be sold
which has a retail value of $5.00 or more a card with an identifying number endorsed thereon,
and each licensee shall maintain a list of all articles sold at auction for a retail price of $5.00 or
more, giving any identifying numbers or marks which may be on the articles, indicating opposite
the description of each article whether it is new or used, showing the identifying number
assigned to the article, the name and address of the purchaser, and the date of sale. The licensee
shall keep said list for a period of one year following the date of sale.
Each licensee shall at the time of selling an article at public auction give the purchaser a
receipt which shall contain the name of licensee, date of sale, description of article sold and
identifying number assigned to the article.
No person shall act in any sale by auction as a "booster" to bid on behalf of the auctioneer
or owner, except as specifically allowed by Utah law, or to run up the price of the articles to be
sold or make any false bids. The licensee, or if a corporation, one of the officers of the licensee,
shall remain in continuous attendance during the auction. All persons participating in sales must
correctly represent at all times to the public the facts with respect to the quality of the
merchandise being sold.
It shall be the duty of the licensed auctioneer to receive all articles which may be offered
for sale at auction and give receipts therefore. At the close of any sale, the auctioneer shall
deliver a fair account of such sales and pay the amount received for such articles to the person
entitled thereto.
(I) Produce Peddlers. The fee for a permit for a farm peddler to carry on the business of
peddling shall be in accordance with Section 23-7 above.
For the purpose of this Subsection, a produce peddler is defined as any person who goes
from place to place to solicit for the sale of or offers to sell or exchange for retail at a single
location in Cedar City any garden or farm produce, fruit, butter, or eggs, or any person keeping
produce, goods, wares or merchandise of the kind described herein in a private residence and/or
soliciting trades therefore in person, by agent or by telephone.
Nothing in this Subsection shall be construed to permit the peddling of fresh or cured meat
or fish, and the peddling of the same is hereby prohibited. The provisions of this Subsection shall
not apply to persons peddling or offering for sale at their residence or farm any butter, eggs, fruit,
vegetables or poultry raised or produced by such persons.
Peddlers are hereby prohibited from displaying their wares outside of their vehicle on
public streets and sidewalks within Cedar City.
(J) Special Events, Exhibitions, Concerts and Performances. Any individuals or groups
putting on performances, exhibitions, concerts or other entertainment activities, fairs, or displays
for which a fee may or may not be charged either to the public or to the hiring entity, including
but not limited to musical aggregations, circuses, carnivals, rodeos, fight promoters, racing
promoters, demolition derbies, live shows and entertainers of any kind shall obtain a license.
All individuals or groups coming under this Subsection shall obtain a license for each
particular event during which they present a public performance, concert, exhibition, fair, live
show, or entertainer.
Should the licensee provide for the opportunity for other sub-licensees to participate in the
activity by way of contracting, encouraging, or requesting the participation of sub-licensees who
will be conducting business related activities, a permit must be submitted for each sub-licensee
and a fee of $5.00 for each sub-licensee shall be submitted with the application and payment of
the license for this special event activity. Should the licensee promoting this event be exempt
from paying a business license fee, this Section in no way relieves the licensee of the obligation
to comply with all other terms in this Chapter.
The fees shall be as follows:
(1) Exhibitions and Performances:
For Exhibitions and performances, the license fee shall be $50.00 for each
24-hour period during which such performance or exhibition is presented.
(2) Carnival, Circus or Parts Thereof:
(a) The license fee for any type of carnival or circus shall be $300.00
for each day’s performance.
(b) The license fee for operating mechanical or animal rides shall be
$25.00 for the first week in addition to any other fees required
herein. Thereafter they shall be licensed in accordance with
Section 23-7.
A license pursuant to this Section shall not be issued until arrangements are made to
conduct such activity on private property, unless the licensee has received express written
permission to conduct such activity on public property designated for such activities, and until
liability insurance acceptable to the City in accordance with AM Best Rating is provided in the
sum of $3,000,000 dollars per occurrence, $500,000 per person, and $250,000 for property
damage, which shows on its face the condition to protect and indemnify Cedar City against any
loss or liability arising from such activity.
(K) Alarms. No person shall engage in the business of selling, leasing, monitoring,
maintaining, repairing, altering, replacing, removing or installing an alarm system until, in
addition to complying with other requirements of this Chapter, the applicant shall provide to the
License Officer verification of compliance with the Utah Construction Trades Licensing Act,
Sections 58-55-101 through 58-55-604, as amended.
Both users of alarm systems and alarm companies shall comply with all guidelines
established by the Department of Public Safety. False alarms are costly and dangerous because
they divert Police Officers from calls which may be real emergencies; therefore, to discourage
repeated false alarms, a service fee will be assessed by the City to the user of said alarm system
for responding to false alarms as follows:
(1) Three false alarms per calendar year or any portion thereof -- No Charge.
(2) Fourth through the tenth false alarms within a calendar year will be
assessed ($50.00).
(3) Eleventh and each subsequent false alarm within a calendar year will be
assessed ($200.00).
Each alarm system shall make an effort to have a responsible party available to meet
police officers in a timely manner when an alarm has been activated.
Any violations of the provisions hereof or any regulations promulgated by the Department
of Public Safety or the Construction Services Commission may result in a petition to revoke or
suspend the right of an individual to maintain their business license as set forth in Sections 58-
55-101 through 58-55-604, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended.
(L) Christmas Tree Sales Lots. A license for operating a Christmas tree sales lot on a
seasonal basis in Cedar City shall be required, at the fee of $35.00 unless the Christmas tree lot is
operated by a non-profit organization, in which event there shall be no fee for the license,
however a license must be obtained.
License requirements in addition to the usual requirement. No license shall be issued to
an applicant for a Christmas tree sales lot without first providing full information to the City
License Officer as to the source of the Christmas trees and other merchandise to be sold. In the
event any tree is to be cut or procured from within the public domain of the United States or the
State of Utah, or from any private lands within or without the State of Utah, evidence, pursuant
to Subsection 78-38-45(2), Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended, must be shown to the City
License Officer of the applicant’s right and authority to cut and remove such trees. Thereafter,
the License Officer shall have the right to inspect the trees sold by the licensee from time to time
to verify they are from the source indicated by the application, and if from public domain of the
United States, or the State of Utah, that they contain the proper tag or other marking authorizing
their removal from such land. An applicant for a Christmas tree sales lot license shall agree to
properly and thoroughly clean the sales area following the sales, and dispose of all unsold trees,
rubbish and debris in a manner satisfactory to the City License Officer.
(M) Horse Drawn Carriage Operations. Horse drawn carriage businesses, applicants or
corporations shall enter into an agreement defining the conditions, terms, routes and other items
specified by way of resolution adopting such agreements for operation of horse drawn carriage
businesses. Such operations shall comply with the business license ordinance in addition to the
agreement drafted and adopted by resolution.
(N) Restaurants. No business license shall be issued or renewed to operate a food service
establishment until the establishment has been inspected and the applicant issued a valid food
service establishment permit or registration as required by the Health Department. Food service
establishment shall mean any fixed or mobile restaurant, coffee shop, cafeteria, cafe, grill, tea
room, sandwich shop, soda fountain, tavern, bar, cocktail lounge, night club, roadside stand,
industrial feeding establishment, private, public or non-profit organization or institution routinely
serving food, catering kitchen, commissary or similar place in which food or drink is prepared
for sale or for service on the premises or elsewhere, and any other eating or drinking
establishment or operation where food is served or provided to the public with or without charge.
(O) Ice Cream Vehicle Operations. For the purpose of this Subsection, an Ice Cream
Vehicle is defined as a motor vehicle engaged in the curbside vending or sale of frozen and/or
refrigerated desserts, confections, or novelties commonly known as ice cream, pre-packaged
candies, pre-packaged snack foods, or soft drinks.
It shall be unlawful for any owner of operator of an Ice Cream Vehicle to pursue the
business of Ice Cream Vehicle Operations within a one-block radius of a school building for that
period of time fifteen (15) minutes prior to when the schools are in session and continuing
through and until twenty (20) minutes after the school session has ended, or when student
activities are in progress, or in public parks or play grounds. Owners and operators of an Ice
Cream Vehicle are hereby prohibited from displaying their wares outside of their vehicle on
public streets and sidewalks within Cedar City.
(P) Retail Tobacco Specialty Businesses.
1. For purposes of this ordinance the following terms shall have the following definitions:
a. “Community location” means: (a) a public or private kindergarten, elementary,
middle, junior high, or high school; (b) a licensed child-care facility or
preschool; (c) a trade or technical school; (d) a church; (e) a public library; (f) a
public playground; (g) a public park; (h) a youth center or other space used
primarily for youth oriented activities; a public recreational facility; or a public
arcade.
a. “Tobacco Product” means: (a) any cigar, cigarette, or electronic cigarette as
defined by state law; (b) a tobacco product defined under state law including
chewing tobacco or any substitute for a tobacco product, including flavoring or
additives to tobacco; and (c) tobacco paraphernalia as defined by state law.
2. For purposes of this ordinance the following rules shall be applied to determine if
a business entity is a “retail tobacco specialty business”:
a. A business shall be presumed to be a retail tobacco specialty business if: (i)
the name of the business evidences holding oneself out as a tobacco specialty
business, such as by use in the name of the business or advertising for the
business of terms similar to “smoke shop” or “vape shop”, or; (ii) the
allocation of floor and shelf space inside the business shows a focus on
tobacco products such that forty percent (40%) or more of the floor and shelf
space inside the business is devoted to the offer, display, and/or storage or
tobacco products.
b. If a business is presumed to be a retail tobacco specialty business in
accordance with the terms of this ordinance the business may either meet the
terms and conditions established in paragraph three (3) of this section, or the
business may rebut the presumption that it is a retail tobacco specialty
business. The presumption that the business is a retail tobacco specialty
business may be rebutted by providing a statement sworn to by a certified
public accountant disclosing quarterly gross receipts for at least two (2)
consecutive calendar quarters showing that the sale of tobacco products
accounts for less than thirty-five percent (35%) of the total gross receipts for
the business. The calculation of the thirty-five percent (35%) gross receipts
shall be made for each location applying to have the presumption that it is a
retail tobacco specialty business evaluated. If the business can successfully
rebut the presumption that it is a retail tobacco specialty business it does not
have to follow the conditions established in paragraph three (3) of this section.
c. The evaluation of a business under the terms of this section shall take place on
each individual location of a business and shall be conducted upon applying
for an initial business license, or for the renewal of an existing business
license.
3. Conditions regulating a retail tobacco specialty business.
a. A business entity that conducts, or intends on conducting, a retail tobacco
specialty business in Cedar City shall comply with the provisions of this
ordinance, pay the general business license fee established herein, and
obtain a retail tobacco specialty business license.
b. No license for a retail tobacco specialty business may be issued if the
retail tobacco specialty business is located within: (a) 1,000 feet of a
community location; (b) 600 feet of another retail tobacco specialty
business; (c) 600 feet of property zoned or used for residential purposes;
or (d) any other requirement included in state law, except such separation
restrictions found in state law relating to property zoned or used for
agricultural purposes. For purposes of this ordinance the proximity
requirements shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest entrance
of the retail tobacco specialty business to the nearest property boundary
of: (a) the community location; (b) another retail tobacco specialty
business; (c) property used or zoned residential, or; (d) other such uses or
zones that may be specified in state law. Said measurement shall be made
without regard to intervening structures or zoning districts.
c. The provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to retail tobacco specialty
businesses operating in Cedar City prior to May 8, 2012, if they maintain a
business license without relapse or revocation, the business is not closed
for more than 60 consecutive days, the business does not substantially
change its operation, and the business continues to operate in accordance
with federal law, state law, and city ordinance. None of the restrictions
contained in paragraph three (3) of this section shall apply to a retail
tobacco specialty business that was lawfully licensed in a location
permitted by this ordinance prior to a change of use or zoning in property
within applicable distance requirements that would otherwise prohibit the
use of the already licensed retail tobacco specialty business.
(Q). Residential Short-Term Rentals.
(1) Residential Short-Term Rentals Defined: excluding Bed and Breakfast facilities, the
use and/or commercial use of property located in a Residential Zone (R-1, R-2-1, R-
2-2, R-3-1, R-3-M, RE, RA); by any person or entity; for occupancy, rent or lease; for
the purpose of receiving compensation, money, rent, or other bargained
consideration; for a term of thirty (30) consecutive days or less. As an exception,
Residential Short-Term Rentals are permitted in all zones for existing residential uses.
Any rental that is leased out consecutively to the same tenant in excess of thirty (30)
days will not constitute a residential short-term rental and will be governed by the
City’s rental dwelling license ordinance.
(2) Purpose. Residential Short-term rentals are to be compatible with and not adversely
impact surrounding residential uses. As an example, the use of mass transit to
transport renters to a short-term rental is not compatible with surrounding residential
uses.
(3) License Required.
a. It is unlawful for any person to keep, conduct, operate, or maintain a short-term
rental within the City without a Residential Short-Term Rental Business License. A
person who owns multiple short-term rentals is not required to obtain more than one
business license for the operation and maintenance of those rentals.
b. A Residential Short-Term Rental Business License is not transferrable between
persons or structures. Any person holding such license shall give written notice
within thirty (30) days to the License Officer after having transferred or otherwise
disposed of legal or equitable control of any rental licensed under this Section. Such
notice of transferred interest shall be deemed a request to cancel an existing
Residential Short-Term Rental Business License for such rental. No refund or rebate
shall be issued for any license cancelled under this provision, except where ownership
is transferred for one of the reasons listed in Subsection 23-7(D)(2). The new owner
shall obtain a Residential Short-Term Rental Business License as required by this
Section.
(4) License Application. An application for a Residential Short-Term Rental Business
License shall conform to all applicable requirements of Section 23-6. In order to qualify
for a residential short-term rental license, an application must meet all requirements
outlined in Section 23-9 which shall include but not be limited to the following:
a. the address of each building containing a residential short-term rental;
b. proof of liability insurance for the residential short-term rental;
c. proof of adequate parking as required by 26-V-5;
d. lodging sales tax number;
e. identify the number of bedrooms in the residential short-term rental;
f. a submitted diagram identifying the number of available 9”x18” parking
stalls;
g. the signature of the owner of the residential short-term rental(s) certifying
that the owner of the rental shall collect and remit on a timely basis
transient lodging taxes;
h. the property owner must designate a local property representative’s name,
address and telephone number, who shall be available for the purpose of:
i. responding within twenty-four (24) hours to complaints regarding
the condition, operation, or conduct of occupants of the short-term
rental;
ii. taking remedial action to resolve such complaints; and
iii. the name, address, and telephone contact number of the property
owner and the local property representative shall be kept on file at
the city.
h. The property owner must certify that:
i. that the use and occupancy of the residential short-term rental(s)
conforms to applicable local, state, and federal laws including all
applicable building codes and safety standards;
ii. that the property owner or a local property representative will be
available twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven days per week, for
the purpose of responding within twenty-four (24) hours to
complaints regarding the condition, operation or conduct of
occupants of the short-term rental and that remedial action will be
taken to resolve such complaints;
iii. that per Cedar City Ordinance 26-V-5, the property contains an
adequate amount of off-street parking;
iv. that they understand that a renter may not use a short-term rental
for a purpose not incidental to a normal residential use. At no time
may the tenants of a short-term rental violate state and municipal
law concerning nuisances, noise, and/or disturbing the peace;
v. that they understand that they are assuming responsibility for all
guests’ activities; and that violations may result in fines to owner
and/or guests; and/or license denial, suspension, or revocation;
vi. that they will use best efforts to ensure that the occupants and/or
guests of the residential short-term rental do not create
unreasonable noise or disturbances, engage in disorderly conduct,
or violate any provisions of the City’s ordinances or State law,
including but not limited to noise, disorderly conduct, the illegal
consumption of alcohol, or the use of illegal drugs;
vii. that the short-term rental will not involve the use of any accessory
building(s), mobile structures or yard space for activities outside of
the dwelling not normally associated with residential use;
viii. that there is no HOA and/or CC&R’s that restrict the owner from
using the residence as a short-term rental;
ix. that each bedroom and corridor leading to a bedroom contains a
smoke detector; and
x. that each floor contains a working carbon monoxide detector.
(5) License Procedure. Notice by the applicant shall be given to all owners of record of
property zoned residential or used for a residential purpose within a 300-foot radius from
the boundary of the proposed residential short-term rental. Said notice shall be sent by
mail or hand-delivered to the property owners in accordance with the most current Iron
County Assessment Roll. Proof of mailing and/or a certificate documenting hand
delivery to property owners as required herein shall be delivered to the City Building
Official. Notice shall contain language directing property owners who wish to discuss the
location of the residential short-term rental to contact the City Building Official within
ten (10) days of receipt of notice. The Building Official’s name, address and contact
number shall be listed in the notice. A short-term business license will be issued if all
requirements of Chapter 23-9 are met.
(6) License Term. All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on January 1st of each year
unless sooner canceled and shall be issued for one year only.
(7) License Fee. The fee for a Residential Short-Term Rental Business License shall be
identified on the City’s consolidated fee schedule.
(8) Restrictions on Use.
a. A renter may not use a short-term rental for a purpose not incidental to a normal
residential use. At no time may the tenants of a short-term rental violate state and
municipal law concerning nuisances, noise, and/or disturbing the peace.
b. Maximum occupancy of a residential short-term rental shall be no more than two
(2) guests per bedroom plus four (4) guests per home.
(9) Signage. No outdoor advertising signs related to the rental dwelling shall be allowed
on the site.
(10) Inspection. Prior to licensure the City Building Official shall conduct an onsite
inspection to verify adequate off-street parking.
(11) Effect of License Issuance. The issuance of a Residential Short-Term Rental
Business License shall not have the effect of changing the legal status of a rental
dwelling, including, but not limited to:
a. legalizing an illegally created dwelling unit, use, or other circumstances, or
b. recognizing a nonconforming use, structure, or other nonconformity.
(12) Owner Certification. Owner understand that he assumes responsibility for all
guests’ activities; violations may result in fines to owners and/or guests; and/or licensee
denial, suspension, or revocation.
(13) License Denial, Suspension, or Revocation. The City may deny, suspend, or revoke
a Residential Short-Term Rental Business License for any of the following reasons:
a. The licensee does not meet the qualifications for a license as provided under
this Chapter.
b. For nonpayment of all required fees for the Residential Short-Term Rental
Business License, including late fees and inspections, when applicable.
c. The licensee gave false or incomplete information on the licensee’s
application.
d. The licensee has allowed or intends to allow the licensed premises to be
occupied or operated in a manner contrary to the conditions set forth in the
license, application, and this Chapter.
e. Failure to provide the contact information, failure to keep the contact
information current, and failure to respond within twenty-four (24) hours to
complaints.
f. Owner will use best efforts to ensure that the occupants and/or guests of the
residential short-term rental do not create unreasonable noise or disturbances,
engage in disorderly conduct, or violate any provisions of the City’s ordinances or
State law, including but not limited to noise, disorderly conduct, the illegal
consumption of alcohol, or the use of illegal drugs.
Three (3) or more citations based on any violations of any state or local law including but
not limited to Chapter 23-9 within a twelve (12) month period may result in license
denial, suspension, or revocation. Any decision denying, suspending or revoking a shortterm
rental license may be appealed to the Cedar City Manager.
(14) Safety. Cedar City acknowledges that the State of Utah restricts the City from
requiring the alteration of existing residences to meet current building code and safety
standards; however, the City strongly recommends that each room contain adequate
ingress and egress, and that each floor contains a minimum 2A:10BC fire extinguisher.
Cedar City requires that:
a. each bedroom and corridor leading to a bedroom contains a smoke detector; and
b. that each floor contains a working carbon monoxide detector.
THIS SECTION AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 0925-13-1, 1012-16-1,
0426-17-4, 0509-18-2, 0613-18 and 0123-19-6.
SECTION 23-10. Rental Dwelling License.
(A) Definitions: The following definitions are applicable to this Section:
(1) Owner Occupied.
(a) A natural person who possesses fifty percent (50%) ownership or
more in the dwelling and said dwelling is the primary residence of
such person; or
(b) A family trust created for the primary purpose of estate planning
by one or more trustors who create the trust, place the dwelling in
such trust, and whose primary residence is such dwelling.
(2) Property Owner. An individual, corporation, partnership, association,
joint stock company, business trust, or any unincorporated organization
that is the owner of a rental dwelling or has a financial interest in the
rental dwelling.
(3) Rental Dwelling. A building or portion of a building that is:
(a) used or designated for use as a residence by one or more persons;
and
(b) (i) available to be rented, loaned, leased, or hired out for a
period of one month or longer; or
(ii) arranged, designed, or built to be rented, loaned or hired
out for a period of one month or longer.
(B) License Required.
(1) It is unlawful for any person to keep, conduct, operate, or maintain a rental
dwelling within the City without a Rental Dwelling Business License for
such dwelling. A person who owns multiple rental dwellings is not
required to obtain more than one business license for the operation and
maintenance of those rental dwellings.
(2) A Rental Dwelling Business License is not transferrable between persons
or structures. Any person holding such license shall give written notice
within thirty (30) days to the License Officer after having transferred or
otherwise disposed of legal or equitable control of any rental dwelling
licensed under this Section. Such notice of transferred interest shall be
deemed a request to cancel an existing Rental Dwelling Business License
for such rental dwelling(s) and shall include the name, address, and
information regarding the person(s) succeeding to the ownership or
control thereof. No refund or rebate shall be issued for any license
cancelled under this provision, except where ownership is transferred for
one of the reasons listed in Subsection 23-7(D)(2). The new owner shall
obtain a Rental Dwelling Business License as required by this Section.
(3) A Rental Dwelling Business License shall not be required for a dwelling
unit that is ordinarily owner occupied but is temporarily rented because:
(a) the owner is placed in a hospital, nursing home, assisted living
facility, or other similar facility, or
(b) the owner has a bona fide, temporary absence of three (3) years or
less for activities such as temporary job assignments, sabbaticals,
or voluntary service. Indefinite periods of absence from the
dwelling shall not qualify for this exception.
(C) License Application. An application for a Rental Dwelling Business License shall
conform to all applicable requirements of Section 23-6 and shall include the following additional
information:
(1) the address of each building containing rental dwellings which are owned,
operated, or maintained by the applicant;
(2) total number of units;
(3) the number of bedrooms in each unit;
(4) the occupancy status of each rental dwelling unit at the time of
application;
(5) the number of parking spaces provided on the premises; a dwelling unit in
the R-2-2 and R-3-M zones rented to more than 4 unrelated persons shall
have 1.30 parking stalls for each bedroom; a dwelling unit in the SHD
zone rented to more than 4 unrelated persons shall have 0.75 parking stalls
for each bedroom (rental dwelling units may not have more than 4
unrelated persons in any other zone);
(6) the number of current tenants with a vehicle;
(7) does the rental comply with the requirements of City ordinance 26-V-2;
(8) if the owner of the rental dwelling is not a Utah resident, the name,
address, and both home and business telephone numbers of a legal
representative and agent who resides in the State of Utah for service of
process;
(9) the name, address, and both home and business telephone numbers of a
local agent who:
(a) resides not more than thirty (30) miles from the rental dwelling(s),
and
(b) is authorized to manage the rental dwelling(s);
(10) proof of liability insurance for the rental dwellings to be licensed; and
(11) the signature of the owner of the rental dwellings(s) certifying to the best
of their knowledge and belief:
(a) that the use and occupancy of the rental dwelling(s) conforms to
applicable local, state, and federal laws,
(b) that the use and occupancy of the rental dwelling shall contain no
more than four (4) unrelated persons per unit,
(c) that per Cedar City Ordinance Chapter 26 Section V, the required
parking spaces have been provided,
(d) that the property owner will keep and maintain all fire lanes free
from unlawful parking and obstructions, and
(e) that the property owner will agreeing to comply with all applicable
laws and ordinances.
(D) License Procedure. A Rental Dwelling Business License shall be issued pursuant to
the requirements of Section 23-6, except as modified by this Section.
(E) License Term. All licenses issued hereunder shall expire on January 1st of each year
unless sooner canceled and shall be issued for one year only.
(F) License Fee. The fee for a Rental Dwelling Business License shall be forty dollars
($40) per license.
(G) Effect of License Issuance. The issuance of a Rental Dwelling License shall not have
the effect of changing the legal status of a rental dwelling, including, but not limited to:
(1) legalizing an illegally created dwelling unit, use, or other circumstances,
or
(2) recognizing a nonconforming use, structure, or other nonconformity.
(H) License Denial, Suspension, or Revocation. The City may deny, suspend, or revoke
a Rental Dwelling Business License for any of the following reasons:
(1) The licensee does not meet the qualifications for a license as provided
under this Chapter.
(2) For nonpayment of all required fees for the Rental Dwelling Business
License, including late fees and inspections, when applicable.
(3) The licensee gave false or incomplete information on the licensee’s
application.
(4) The licensee has allowed or intends to allow the licensed premises to be
occupied or operated in a manner contrary to the conditions set forth in the
license and this Chapter.
(5) The rental dwelling does not comply with applicable Health Department
regulations governing the premises, or any City, State, or federal law.
(I) If the property owner fails to comply with all of the conditions set forth in the license
and this Chapter, Cedar City shall impose the following administrative penalties:
(1) Upon the first violation per the calendar year, the property owner
shall receive a written warning concerning the violation;
(2) Upon the second violation per the calendar year, the property owner shall
pay a civil fine of $250;
(3) Upon the third or subsequent violation per the calendar year, the
property owner shall pay a civil fine of $500 for each violation, and a
petition may be initiated to suspend or revoke their Rental Dwelling
Business License.
AMENDED BY ORDINANCE NUMBER 0207-18 and 1113-19-6.
SECTION 23-11. Liquor Set-Up License.
(A) It shall be unlawful to operate an association, restaurant, club, or similar business that
allows customers, members, guests, visitors, or other persons to possess liquor of which the seal
has been broken, or to consume alcoholic beverages on the club, association, restaurant, or
similar business premises without a business license.
(B) It shall be unlawful for a licensee, operator, employee, or any other person to store,
possess, or consume any liquor in or on any place of business licensed by this Section except as
allowed by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, Title 32B, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as
amended. Persons other than the licensee, operator or employee of the licensee may, with
consent of the licensee possess and consume liquor on the licensed premises to the extent
authorized by Subsection 32B-5-307, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended.
(C) Each application for an annual license provided for by this Section shall be
accompanied with a fee of $50.00. Applications for this license shall be an affidavit and shall be
sworn to by the applicant. Such affidavit shall show applicant's age, citizenship or immigration
status, moral character and reputation, and any conviction of a felony or misdemeanor involving
moral turpitude and list a banking reference and two character references. The applicant shall
also provide a BCI background check, meaning an original or copy, dated no older than 180 days
prior to the date of the application, of a Utah Department of Public Safety Bureau of Criminal
Identification verified criminal history report personal to the permit applicant. If the applicant is
a partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or other type of association, the same
information shall be obtained with respect to each partner, member, corporate officer or director,
and any other person holding a twenty percent (20%) or greater interest in the ownership in the
partnership, limited liability company, corporation, or association.
(D) Each licensee must be over 21 years of age, of good moral character and lawfully
present in the United States. No license shall be granted to any applicant who has been convicted
of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. If the applicant is a partnership,
association or corporation, each partner, association member, corporate director or officer shall
meet all of the foregoing qualifications.
(E) The Chief of Police or his designee shall make an examination of all applicants and
shall make recommendations in writing as to whether said applicant shall be granted a license.
(F) No place of business governed by this Section shall permit the consumption of liquor
on the premises by a person under the age of 21 years of age; nor shall any place of business
permit any person on the premises under 21 years of age to have liquor in their possession. It
shall be the affirmative duty of the place of business to ask the age of each and every person
consuming liquor or having liquor in their possession on said premises. In the event of
prosecution for allowing violation of this Section by a person under 21 years of age, said place of
business shall be deemed prima facie to have allowed the consumption or possession of liquor as
prohibited by this Section by a person under the age of 21, unless said place of business has on
file a liquor permit identification card as set forth by State law.
THIS SECTION AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 0426-17-4.
SECTION 23-12. Beer Licenses.
(A) Definitions. The following words and phrases used in this Section shall have the
following meaning:
(1) Beer: as defined in the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act in the Utah State
code.
(2) Retailer: Any person engaged in sale or distribution of alcoholic
beverages to the consumer.
(3) “Sell,” “Sale,” and “To Sell”: Any transaction, exchange or barter
whereby for any consideration an alcoholic beverage whether directly or
indirectly transferred, solicited, ordered, delivered for value, or by any
means or under any pretext is promised or obtained; whether done by a
principal, proprietor, agent, servant or employee.
(4) Small Brewer: Any brewer who manufactures less than 60,000 barrels of
beer and heavy beer per year.”
(5) Wholesaler: Any person other than a licensed small brewer selling beer
manufactured by that brewer, engaged in the importation for sale, or in the
sale of beer, malt liquor or malted beverages in wholesale or jobbing
quantities to retailers.
(B) Unlawful to Sell Beer Without a License. It shall be unlawful for any person to
engage in the business of selling beer at retail, in bottle or draft, within the corporate limits of
Cedar City without first having procured a license from the City Council as hereinafter
provided. A separate license shall be required for each place of sale and a license shall at all
times be conspicuously displayed. All licenses shall comply with the Alcohol Beverage Control
Act of Utah and the regulations of the Alcohol Beverage Control Commission.
(C) Retail License Privileges. Retail licenses issued hereunder shall be of the following
classes, and shall carry the following privileges:
(1) CLASS "A": Retail License which entitles the licensee to sell beer in
original containers for off-premise consumption only in accordance with
the Alcohol Beverage Control Act.
(2) CLASS "B": Retail License which entitles the licensee to sell beer in
original containers or on draft for on premise consumption or off-premise
consumption in accordance with the Alcohol Beverage Control Act.
It shall be unlawful for any person to purchase or acquire or to have or possess for the
purpose of sale or distribution, any beer except that which has been lawfully purchased
from a brewer or wholesaler licensed under the privileges of the Alcohol Beverages
Control Act. Unless otherwise specifically stated herein, all portions of this Section apply
equally to licenses, licensees, and permit holders of both CLASS “A” and CLASS “B”
businesses.
(D) Fees. Applications for a license as provided for in this Section shall be accompanied
by the fees hereinafter provided, which may be set from time to time by resolution of the City
Council:
Class "A" Retail License -- $150.00 per annum or any part thereof
Class "B" Retail License -- $250.00 per annum or any part thereof
Said fee shall be non-refundable upon approval of the retail license. Prior to approval of
said license, the application fee shall be refunded upon request.
(E) Application. All applications for license authorized by this Section shall be verified
and filed with the City Council of Cedar City and shall state the status of the entity
(i.e. partnership, corporation); the name, address, social security number, date of birth, place of
residence during the previous five years, and any felony or misdemeanor conviction of the
applicant and of all partners, officers, and/or directors; a statement that applicant has complied
with all requirements specified under the Alcohol Beverage Control Act; any such other
information as requested by the License Officer; and a sworn statement to the effect that all facts
set forth in the application are true. The applicant shall also provide a BCI background check,
meaning an original or copy, dated no older than 180 days prior to the date of the application, of
a Utah Department of Public Safety Bureau of Criminal Identification verified criminal history
report personal to the permit applicant.
(F) Qualifications of Licensee. No person shall be granted a retail beer license until they
show they of are good moral character, are over the age of 21 years, lawfully present in the
United States, and have not been convicted of any crime listed in Subsection 32B-1-304, Utah
Code Annotated, 1953 as amended.
(G) Additional Licenses.
(1) Except as provided by Subsection (2), no retail beer license shall be issued
until the applicant has first procured all necessary licenses and permits
from any State or local health board.
(2) In the case of any State license requiring consent by the City through a
City-issued license before the State license may be issued, the lack of such
State license shall not prevent the issuance of a City license. The licensee
shall not conduct the business authorized by the City-issued license until
after the licensee has provided proof to the City that the State license has
been issued.
(H) Transfer of License Prohibited. Licenses issued under this Section shall not be
transferable.
(I) Restrictions. No licensee under this Section shall employ any individual under the age
of 21 years of age whose primary duty is to sell alcoholic beverages. All provisions of the
Alcohol Beverage Control Act concerning age requirements for sale of alcoholic beverage must
be strictly observed.
No person shall sell beer at any public dance, except if otherwise provided by ordinance.
No license shall be granted to sell beer in any dance hall, except as otherwise provided by
ordinance, or in the proximity of any church or school. No person shall sell beer to any person
actually, apparently, or obviously intoxicated; known habitual drunkard; or known interdicted
person. No person shall sell beer to any person under the age of 21 years. It shall be unlawful to
sell beer, or to consume or to permit any person to consume beer on any licensed premise within
Cedar City, between 1:00 a.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the same day, except as allowed by the Utah
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
(J) Beer Handler’s Permit.
(1) Persons Required to Have Permit. All persons involved in the transaction
of retail beer sales, whether CLASS “A” or CLASS “B,” shall possess and
display a Beer Handler’s Permit while on duty. The licensees for CLASS
“A” and CLASS “B” establishments shall require all of the following
employees to obtain a Beer Handler’s Permit from the Cedar City Police
Department:
(a) For CLASS “A,” an individual who:
(i) Directly supervises the sale of beer to a customer for
consumption off the premises of the CLASS “A” licensee;
or
(ii) Sells beer to a customer for consumption off the premises
of the CLASS “A” licensee; and
(b) For CLASS “B,” an individual who:
(i) Manages operations at the premises of the licensee engaged
in the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on
the premises of the licensee;
(ii) Supervises the serving of alcoholic beverages to a customer
for consumption on the premises of the licensee; or
(iii) Serves alcoholic beverages to a customer for consumption
on the premises of the licensee.
(2) Application Procedure. Each person listed in Subsection (J)(1) of this
Section, hereinafter “Permit Applicant,” shall apply for a Beer Handler’s
Permit from the Cedar City Police Department as follows:
(a) Fully and accurately complete a Beer Handler’s Permit application
available from the Cedar City Police Department, which shall
require, among other relevant information:
(i) The permit applicant’s name, including any aliases; home
address, both street and mailing, if different; home phone
number; Social Security number; and date of birth;
(ii) History of administrative actions, if any, against the permit
applicant for a violation of any law involving the sale of an
alcoholic beverage to a minor, including but not limited to
warnings, suspensions, and revocations;
(iii) Certification that the permit applicant has not been
convicted and that charges are not currently pending for
any disqualifying criminal act in the State of Utah or any
other state; and
(iv) Any other information reasonably required by the Police
Department.
(b) Provide a BCI background check. As used in this Subsection,
“BCI background check” means an original or copy, dated no older
than 180 days prior to the date of the application, of a Utah
Department of Public Safety Bureau of Criminal Identification
verified criminal history report personal to the permit applicant;
(c) A signed copy of a waiver whereby the applicant agrees to allow
the City to obtain a criminal background check, whether through
BCI or otherwise, on the permit applicant for purposes of
enforcement of this Chapter;
(d) Produce acceptable photographic identification; and
(e) Provide a certificate that the permit applicant has completed an
alcohol training and education seminar required by Sections 32B-
5-403 and 62A-15-401, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended.
If the Cedar City Police Department provides an alcohol training
and education seminar that has been approved by the State of Utah,
the permit applicant must provide a certificate that the permit
applicant has completed the Cedar City Police Department’s
alcohol training and education seminar. If the Cedar City Police
Department ceases to provide an approved alcohol training and
education seminar, the permit applicant may provide a certificate
from any State-approved alcohol training and education seminar.
(3) New Application Deadline. All employees required to obtain a Beer
Handler’s Permit under Subsection (J)(1) of this Section shall apply for a
Beer Handler’s Permit within the deadline for completion of the alcohol
training and education seminar, as provided in Subsections 32B-5-403 and
62A-15-401(2)(b).
(4) Expiration of Beer Handler’s Permits. All beer handler’s permits either
issued before or after the enactment of this provision are only valid for a
period of three (3) years.
(5) Renewal Application. All persons required to obtain a Beer Handler’s
Permit under Subsection (J)(1) of this Section shall be required to renew
their Beer Handler’s Permit prior to the expiration of their current permit.
In order to renew a permit, the holder shall completely fill out an
application for a beer handler permit with the Cedar City Police
Department and pass a background check.
(6) Licensee Reporting Requirements. A licensee shall inform the Cedar City
Police Department of any employee possessing a Beer Handler’s Permit
whose employment is terminated for conduct that would be punishable
under the statutes or ordinances regulating alcoholic beverages. The
report shall be made within fifteen (15) days following the employee’s
termination.
(7) Permit Holder Identification Badge.
(a) Licensees shall require each holder of a Beer Handler’s Permit to
wear a unique identification badge as required by Subsection 32B-
7-202(6), Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended, while engaging
in or directly supervising the retail sale of beer. A unique
identification badge issued by the Cedar City Police Department
with or as a Beer Handler’s Permit shall be used for this purpose,
unless the Cedar City Police Department ceases to provide such
badges.
(b) Licensee shall maintain a record of all current employee’s unique
identification badges assigned to each such employee and make
such record available for immediate inspection by any peace
officer or other representative of the City as required by Subsection
32B-7-202(6), Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended.
(c) Any licensee that does not comply or require its employees to
comply with this Subsection (6) shall pay a fine of $250. Each day
of non-compliance shall constitute a separate violation.
(8) Qualification. The Police Department may not grant a permit or a renewal
permit to any person who fails to meet the qualification requirements of
Section 32B-1-304, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended.
(9) Licensee’s Failure to Require Training. Any licensee that allows an
employee to directly supervise the sale of beer or to sell beer to a customer
without having a valid certificate that the sale of beer or to sell beer to a
customer without having a valid certificate that the individual completed
an alcohol training and education seminar as required by this Subsection
(J) and State law, shall be subject to the administrative penalties provided
below.
(a) On a first offense, the licensee’s license shall be immediately
suspended until the later of:
(i) A showing by the licensee that he is now in compliance
with State and local law, including proof of all required
certifications; or
(ii) Ninety (90) days from the date of suspension.
(b) On a second or subsequent offense, the licensee’s license shall be
immediately suspended until the later of:
(i) A showing by the licensee that he is now in compliance
with State and local law, including proof of all required
certifications; and
(ii) One (1) year from the date of suspension.
(c) The City shall expunge from the records maintained by the City all
administrative penalties imposed under this Subsection (8) for the
for the purpose of determining future administrative penalties
under this Subsection (8) if the licensee has not been found in
violation of the alcohol training provisions of this Subsection (J)
and State law for a period of 36 consecutive months from the day
on which the licensee was last adjudicated as violating these
provisions.
(10) Violation of Law by Permit Holder.
(a) Effect on Permitee. In addition to any criminal penalties that may
be imposed, any permitee found in violation of any law involving
the sale of an alcoholic beverage to a minor shall be subject to the
administrative penalties provided by Subsection 32B-7-303(1)(b),
Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended.
(b) Effect on Licensee. In addition to any criminal penalties that may
be imposed, any licensee whose employee is found in violation of
any law involving the sale of an alcoholic beverage to a minor
shall be subject to the administrative penalties provided by
Subsection 32B-7-303(1)(b), Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as
amended.
(K) Denial of License or Permit. The City reserves the right to deny any application for a
license or permit hereunder, pursuant to the terms of this Chapter and State law. The City
Council shall further have discretion to either grant or deny a license or permit.
(L) License Suspension and Revocation.
(1) Permitting Minors on Premises. In addition to any criminal penalties that
may be imposed, any licensee, permittee, or employee of a licensee that
allows a minor on premises in violation of Section 27-9 of the Cedar City
Ordinances shall be subject to the administrative penalties provided by
Subsections 32b-7-303(1)(b), Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended.
For the purpose of determining administrative penalties under this
Subsection (1), violations of Section 27-9 shall be counted separately from
violations of Subsection 23-12(J)(9), Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as
amended.
(2) Record Expungement. The City shall expunge from the records
maintained by the City all administrative penalties imposed under
Subsection (1) for the purpose of determining future administrative
penalties under Subsection (1) if the licensee or permittee has not been
found in violation of Section 27-9 for a period of 36 consecutive months
from the day on which the licensee or permittee was last adjudicated as
violating these provisions.
(3) No Refund. No refund shall be provided for the period a license or permit
is suspended or revoked under this Chapter.
(M) Wholesale License. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of
selling beer at wholesale within the City without first obtaining a wholesale license from the
Alcohol Beverage Control Commission of Utah. However, any such wholesaler maintaining a
premise within the City in connection with their wholesale business must obtain a City business
license. It shall be unlawful for any wholesaler to obtain a retail beer license.
(N) Late Penalty. Any license fee due on July 1st that is paid later than August 15th of
any license year shall be considered to be late and a late penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the
amount of the fee shall be added to the original amount due. If the fee is still not paid by
October 1st of each year, the business shall be considered to be operating without a beer license
in violation of this Chapter, subject to criminal prosecution for every day of operation after
October 1st. For any license fee due on July 1st that is paid later than October 1st, the original
fee, not including the previously imposed fifty percent (50%) late penalty, shall be doubled.
THIS SECTION OF CHAPTER 23 WAS AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO.
0428-10-2, 0708-15-1, and 0426-17-4.
SECTION 23-12-A. Single Event Permits.
(A) Council's Power to Grant Permits.
(1) The Council may issue a single event permit to a bonafide corporation,
church, political organization, incorporated association, State agency, or
Iron County, or to a recognized subordinate lodge, chapter or other local
unit thereof that is conducting a convention, civic, or community
enterprise.
(2) The single event permit shall authorize, for a period not to exceed one
hundred twenty (120) consecutive hours, the storage, sale, service and
consumption of beer at an event at which this would otherwise be
prohibited.
(3) The Council may not issue more than four (4) single event permits in any
one calendar year to the same organization.
(4) The six hundred foot and two-hundred-foot proximity limitations to
educational, religious, and recreational facilities that are applicable to state
stores, package agencies, and licensees, do not apply to single event
permits. Nothing in this Section however prevents the council from
considering the proximity of any such facility, or any other relevant factor
in deciding whether to grant a single event permit.
(B) Application Requirements.
(1) A qualified applicant for a single event permit shall file a written
application as prescribed by the City.
(2) The application shall be accompanied by:
(a) a single event permit fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) which is refundable if a
permit is not granted;
(b) the times, dates, location, nature and purpose of the event;
(c) a description of the floor plan designating:
(i) the area in which the applicant proposes that beer be stored;
(ii) the site from which the applicant proposes that beer be sold or
served; and
(iii) the area in which the applicant proposes that beer be allowed to be
consumed;
(d) a statement of the purpose of the organization holding the event;
(e) a statement that the person signing the application or an authorized agent
will be present at all times during the single event to insure compliance
with Subsection (d) herein;
(f) a signed consent form stating that City Officials will have unrestricted
right to enter the premises during the event for purposes of enforcement;
(g) verification evidencing that the person signing the application is
authorized to act on behalf of the association or organization; and
(h) any other information that the City may direct.
(C) Qualifications.
(1) In order to qualify for a single event permit, the applicant shall have been
in existence as a bonafide organization for at least one year prior to the
date of application:
(2) (a) The Council may not grant a single event permit to any person who
has been:
(i) convicted of a felony under any federal or state laws;
(ii) convicted of any violation of any federal or state law, or local
ordinance concerning the sale, manufacturing, distribution,
warehousing, adulteration, or transportation of alcoholic
beverages; or
(iii) convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude.
(iv) on two or more occasions within the five years before the day on
which the permit is granted, driving under the influence of alcohol,
any drug, or the combined influence of alcohol and any drug.
(b) In the case of a partnership, corporation, or limited liability
company the proscription under Subsection (a) applies if any
partner, managing agent, officer, director, stock holder who holds
at least twenty percent (20%) of the total issued and outstanding
stock of an applicant corporation, or member who owns at least
twenty percent (20%) of an applicant limited liability company has
been convicted of any offense as provided in this Subsection.
(c) The proscription under Subsection (2)(a) applies if any person
employed to act in a supervisory or managerial capacity for the
single event permittee has been convicted of any offense described
in Subsection (2)(a).
(3) Upon the arrest of any single event permittee on any charge set forth in
Subsection (2), the City may take emergency action by immediately
revoking the permit as permitted by law.
(4) (a) The Council may not grant a single event permit to any person or
organization who has had any type of beer license, agency or
permit revoked within the last three years.
(b) For purposes of a partnership, corporation, or limited liability
company the proscription under Subsection (a) applies to any
partner, managing agent, officer, director, stock holder who holds
at least twenty percent (20%) of the total issued and outstanding
stock of an applicant corporation, or member who owns at least
twenty percent (20%) of an applicant limited liability company.
(5) A minor may not be granted a single event permit or be employed by a
single event permittee to handle alcoholic beverages, nor may the City
grant a permit to an applicant that is a partnership, corporation, or limited
liability company if any of the following is a minor:
(a) a partner or managing agent of the applicant partnership;
(b) a managing agent, officer, director, or stockholder who holds at
least twenty percent (20%) of the total issued and outstanding
stock of the applicant corporation; or
(c) a manager or member who owns at least twenty percent (20%) of
the applicant limited liability company.
(6) The City may immediately suspend or revoke a single event permit if after
the day on which the permit is granted, a person described in Subsection
(2):
(a) is found to have been convicted of any offense described in
Subsection (2)(a) prior to the permit being granted; or
(b) on or after the day on which the permit is granted:
(i) is convicted of an offense described in Subsection (2); or
(ii) is convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol, any
drug, or the combined influence of alcohol and any drug
within five years following a prior conviction of driving
under the influence of alcohol, any drug, or the combined
influence of alcohol and any drug.
(7) If any person to whom a permit has been issued pursuant to this Section no
longer possesses the qualifications required by this Section for obtaining a
permit, the City may suspend or revoke that permit.
(D) Operational Restrictions.
(1) Any organization granted a single event permit shall abide by this Chapter
and the special conditions set forth in this Section. Failure to do so may
result in immediate revocation of the permit, forfeiture of the surety bond,
immediate seizure of all beer present, and disqualifies the organization
from applying for a single event permit for a period of three years from the
date of revocation of the permit. Any beer seized under this Subsection
shall be returned to the organization after the event if forfeiture
proceedings are not instituted under Title 24, Chapter 1, Utah Uniform
Forfeiture Procedures Act, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended.
(2) Special conditions and requirements for single event permittees include,
but are not limited to the following:
(a) The applicant or an authorized agent shall be present at all times
during the single event to insure compliance with all requirements
set forth herein.
(b) All persons involved in the storage, sale or service of alcoholic
beverage at the event do so under the supervision and direction of
the permittee.
(c) All beer stored, sold, served and consumed at the event shall be
purchased by the permittee as required by law, and is considered
under the control of permittee during the event. Attendees of the
event may not bring any alcoholic beverage other than that
furnished by the permittee onto the premises of the event.
(d) A permittee may not charge more than the maximum amount set
forth in the State-issued permit for any alcoholic beverage.
(e) Each permittee shall post in a prominent place in the area in which
beer is being sold, served, and consumed, a copy of the permit,
together with a list of the operational restrictions and requirements
of single event permittees set forth in this Section.
(f) Beer purchased for the event may not be stored in any place other
than that described in the application and designated on the permit.
(g) Beer purchased for the event may not be sold or served in any
place other than that described in the application and designated on
the permit.
(h) Beer purchased for the event may not be consumed in any area
other than that described in the application and designated on the
permit.
(i) Beer may not be sold, served, or consumed between the hours of 1
a.m. and 10 a.m. unless a more restrictive ordinance applies.
(j) Beer may not be sold, served, delivered or furnished to any:
(i) minors;
(ii) person actually, apparently, or obviously drunk;
(iii) known habitual drunkard; or
(iv) known interdicted person.
(k) Minors may not sell, serve, dispense, or handle any alcoholic
beverage at the event.
(l) Public advertising of the event may not include reference to the
availability of any alcoholic beverage at the event.
(m) No person involved in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages at
the event may, while on duty, consume an alcoholic beverage or be
intoxicated.
(2) The permittee shall maintain an expense and revenue ledger or record
showing:
(a) Expenditures made for alcoholic beverages; and
(b) The revenue from sale of alcoholic beverages.
(3) Single event permits are not transferrable.
THIS SECTION AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 0426-17-4 and
0509-18-2.
SECTION 23-13. Treatment Facilities.
(1) Residential Treatment Facilities. Residential treatment facilities as defined in Chapter
26 shall be assessed business license fees as contained in Section 23-7(A). Furthermore,
residential treatment facilities shall be required to provide a sworn statement when a business
license is issued that they comply with the following, to wit:
A. Their facility is more than 700 feet from another residential treatment facility,
a protective housing facility, transitional housing facility, assisted living facility or
rehabilitation/treatment facility, a non-residential treatment facility or an elementary
school.
B. That their facility complies with all provisions of the Americans with
Disabilities Act.
C. That no person will remain in the facility once it is shown that their tenancy
would constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or result in
substantial damage to the property of others.
D. That the facility is located in an appropriately zoned district throughout the
City.
(2) Treatment Facilities, Transitional Housing, Assisted Living Facilities, and Protective
Housing. Treatment facilities, transitional housing, assisted living facilities and protective
housing as defined in Chapter 26 shall be assessed business license fees as contained in Section
23-7(A). Furthermore, residential treatment facilities shall be required to provide proof when a
business license is issued that they comply with the following, to wit:
A. Their facility is more than 700 feet of a similar type facility, protective housing
facility, transitional housing facility, rehabilitation/treatment facility, residential facility
for persons with a disability a non-residential facility or residential facility for the elderly.
B. They are in compliance with all requirements of Chapter 26, Cedar City
Ordinances.
(3) Non-Residential Treatment Facilities. Non-residential treatment facilities as defined
in Chapter 26 shall be assessed business license fees as contained in Section 23-7(A).
Furthermore, non-residential treatment facilities shall be required to comply with the following,
to wit:
A. The facility be more than 700 feet from another residential treatment facility, a
protective housing facility, transitional housing facility, assisted living facility or
rehabilitation/treatment facility, a non-residential treatment facility or an elementary
school.
B. The facility complies with the Americans with Disabilities Act.
C. The facility is located in an appropriately zoned district.
(4) Additional Requirements. In order to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the
general public, staff, and customers, all Residential Treatment Facilities, Treatment Facilities,
Transitional Housing, Assisted Living Facilities, Protective Housing, and Non-Residential
Treatment Facilities, prior to the issuance of an original license, or a license renewal must
comply with the following provisions prior to obtaining a business license, to whit:
A. The facility must provide proof that its facility has passed an inspection to
insure it complies with the State and Federal Americans with Disabilities Acts. The
inspection must be conducted by an inspector certified by the State of Utah to conduct the
abovementioned inspections, and
B. The facility must provide proof that its facility has passed an inspection to
insure that it complies with the provisions of the State and Federal Occupational Health
and Safety Acts. Said inspection must be conducted by an inspector certified by the State
of Utah to conduct the abovementioned inspections.
(5) Additional License Fees. When the State of Utah Department of Licensing approves
a training program that will allow a City employee to become certified to inspect for State
licensing compliance, the cost of the additional expense to the City shall be calculated by staff.
Once said calculations are complete, they shall be presented to the City Council for inclusion in
this Section.
SECTION 23-14. Duties of Licensees, Permittees, and Applicants.
(A) General Standards of Conduct. Every licensee, permittee, and every applicant for a
license or permit under this Chapter shall:
(1) Permit Inspection. Permit all reasonable inspections of the business and
examination of the books by a public authority so authorized by law.
(2) Comply with Governing Law. Ascertain and at all times comply with all laws
and regulations applicable to such business.
(3) Operate Properly. Avoid all forbidden, improper or unnecessary practices
which may affect the public health, morals or welfare.
(4) Cease Business. Refrain from operating the business on premises after
expiration of the license or permit or during the period when a license or
permit is revoked or suspended.
(B) Display of License or Permit. Every licensee and permittee under this Chapter shall
post and maintain such license or permit upon the licensed or permitted premises in a place
where it may be seen at all times. The licensee or permittee shall carry such license or permit on
their person when there are no licensed or permitted business premises.
(C) Unlawful Possession. A licensee or permittee shall not loan, sell, give or assign to
any other person, or allow any other person to use or display, or to destroy, damage or remove,
or to have in their possession, except as authorized by the License Officer or by law, any license
or permit which has been issued to said licensee or permittee.
(D) New Location Desired. A licensee shall have the right to change the location of the
licensed business provided the following is complied with:
(1) Approval by License Officer. Obtain written permission from the License
Officer for such change of location.
(2) Payment of fee. The License Officer may endorse a change of location for
any business upon approval and upon payment of a five dollar ($5.00)
service fee.
(3) Transitional license. The License Officer may grant a business lice3nse for
a new, transitional location for a period of up to six (6) months in the
applicant can show:
a) The business had a regular City business license at a previous Cedar
City location immediately preceding the application for the license at
the transitional location; consecutive transitional licenses shall not be
granted;
b) A new, permanent location will be established and licensed within the
next six (6) months;
c) The applicant has paid a full annual business license fee as contained
in Section 23-7(A); and
d) All fire, safety, and zoning requirements are satisfied for the
transitional business location.
(E) Keep Records. Keep all records and books necessary to the computation of the
applicable fees and to the enforcement of this Chapter.
SECTION 23-15. Transfer of License or Permit.
No license or permit granted or issued under any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be
assignable or transferable in any manner.
SECTION 23-16. Non-Established Businesses; Non-Residents.
This Chapter shall apply to persons engaged in business whether the business is conducted
with or without an established place of business and shall also include those who conduct
business from a hotel room, an automobile or other type of mobile unit.
This Chapter shall be applied equally to and without discrimination between resident
community businesses and nonresident community businesses.
SECTION 23-17. Undue Burden on Interstate Commerce.
None of the requirements for a license or permit provided for by this Chapter shall be
applied so as to occasion an undue burden on interstate commerce. In any case where a fee is
levied on a licensee or permittee or applicant for license or permit, and the levy is alleged to
place an undue burden upon interstate commerce, such person may make application for hearing
pursuant to the provisions set forth in Section 23-7 before the Board of Equalization, and may
utilize all other applicable remedies set forth herein.
SECTION 23-18. Enforcement.
(A) Inspections. All persons authorized herein to inspect licensees, permittees, and
businesses shall have the authority to enter, with or without search warrant, at all reasonable
times. It shall be unlawful for any person licensed or holding a permit under the provisions of
this Chapter to refuse permission to an inspector of the City or any law enforcement officer to
enter the licensed or permitted premises to inspect the same.
(B) Provisional Order. When an inspector has reported any violation of this Chapter or
any law or ordinance, unless otherwise provided in this Chapter, the License Officer shall issue
to the affected person a provisional order to comply:
(1) Nature of Notice. The provisional order shall be in writing, shall be
personally served and shall apprise the person affected of the specific
violation and of the right to a hearing before the City Manager if requested
within ten (10) days of service. In absence of the person affected or agent
or employee, a copy of such notice shall be affixed to some structure on
the business premises as personal service. Depositing such notice in
United States Mail to the last-provided address shall also constitute
personal service.
(2) Period of Compliance. The provisional order shall require proof of
compliance within 10 days of service on the affected person.
(3) Hearing. Upon written application by the person affected before the
expiration of the 10-day period for compliance, the License Officer shall
order a hearing before the City Manager pursuant to Subsection 23-6(H)
of this Chapter. Notice of such hearing shall be given to the affected
person as prescribed above, but if a hearing is scheduled five (5) days or
less from the date of service, service shall not be by mail.
(C) Final Order. Upon the failure or refusal of the violator to comply with the provisional
order or with any order made after hearing, the License Officer shall then declare and make the
provisional order final.
(1) Authority of License Officer. The License Officer shall have the authority
to suspend or revoke licenses or permits upon making and declaring a
provisional order final.
(2) Effect of Revocation or Suspension. Upon revocation or suspension, no
refund of any portion of the license or permit fee shall be made to the
licensee or permittee and they shall immediately cease all business under
such license or permit.
(D) Summary Action. When the conduct of any licensee, permittee, agent, or employee is
so inimical to the public health, safety and general welfare so as to constitute a nuisance and thus
give rise to an emergency, the License Officer shall have the authority to summarily order the
cessation of business and the close of premises, or to suspend or revoke the license or permit.
(1) Special Hearing. Unless waived in writing, within 10 days after acting
summarily, the License Officer shall conduct a special hearing for such
action before the City Manager on the summary order; said hearing shall
be treated as an appeal under Subsection 23-6(H) of this Chapter. Notice
of such hearing shall be given to the affected person in the manner
prescribed in Subsection (B)(3) of this Section.
(E) Effect of Denial, Suspension or Revocation; Waiting Period. No person who has been
denied a license or permit, or whose license or permit has been suspended or revoked under the
provisions of this Chapter, and no person associated with such person in the conduct of such
business shall be granted a license or permit for the same purpose under the provisions of this
Chapter for a period of six (6) months after such denial, suspension or revocation, unless
otherwise specifically provided for herein. The City Council may, however, at its discretion,
waive the prohibition against persons associated with an individual who has been denied a
license or permit.
(F) Liability of Violator:
(1) Unpaid fee Constitutes Debt. The amount of any unpaid fee, the payment
of which is required hereunder, shall constitute a debt due the City.
(2) Action by City Attorney. The City Attorney shall, at the direction of the
License Officer, institute civil suit in the name of the City to recover any
such unpaid fee and/or enjoin the operation of said business.
(3) Civil Judgment No Bar. No civil judgment, or any act by the City
Attorney, the License Officer or the violator shall bar criminal prosecution
as set forth below for each and every violation of this Chapter.
SECTION 23-19. Penalty.
(A) Except as otherwise provided in this Chapter, any violations of this Chapter shall be a
class B misdemeanor. Where applicable, each day of non-compliance shall constitute a separate
violation.
(B) Additional Penalty for Doing Business Previously Without a License. In addition to
the above, in the event that it is discovered that any person or applicant for a business license or
permit has done business in the City during a previous year or years without a valid license or
permit as required by this Chapter, the City shall not issue a license or permit to such person or
applicant for the current year until said applicant pays to the City the license or permit fee which
would have been applicable for the business during the preceding years, together with a penalty
fee of $25.00 for each year assessed.
SECTION 23-20. Constructive Notice of Time Periods.
(A) All businesses, owners, licensees, permittees and applicants are obligated to be aware
of and are deemed to have constructive notice of all time periods and/or deadlines and the effect
of noncompliance with said time periods and/or deadlines as set forth in this Chapter relating to
the application, issuance, renewal, expiration, appeal or other action relating to business licenses,
alcohol licenses or any other licensing or permit matters set forth in this Chapter.
(B) Nothing in this Chapter shall be construed as requiring the City to take any
affirmative action to notify businesses, owners, licensees, or applicants of any time periods
and/or deadlines or the effect of non-compliance with said time periods and/or deadlines set forth
in this Chapter relating to the application, issuance, renewal, expiration, appeal or other action
relating to business licenses, alcohol licenses, permits or any other licensing matters set forth in
this Chapter.
SECTION 23-21. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or a portion of this Chapter is for any
reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any Court of competent jurisdiction, such portion shall
be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the
validity of the remaining portions hereof.
SECTION 23-23. Business License Exemption
(A) Pursuant to State law, the City will not require a business license or permit for businesses that
are operated:
(i) only occasionally; and
(ii) by an individual who is under 18 years of age.
(B) Pursuant to State law, the City will not require a business license or permit for home-based
business, unless the combined offsite impact of the home-based business and the primary
residential use materially exceeds the offsite impact of the primary residential use alone.
(C) A business exempt from licensure under this section may still obtain a license from the City
after paying a processing fee.
THIS SECTION AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 0628-17-2.
SECTION 23-23. Ordinances Repealed.
All Ordinances or parts of Ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this Ordinance are
hereby repealed.
SECTION 23A
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION 23A-1 Purpose and Findings
SECTION 23A-2 Definitions
SECTION 23A-3 Classification
SECTION 23A-4 License Required
SECTION 23A-5 Issuance of License
SECTION 23A-6 Fees
SECTION 23A-7 Inspection
SECTION 23A-8 Expiration of License
SECTION 23A-9 Suspension
SECTION 23A-10 Revocation
SECTION 23A-11 Transfer of License
SECTION 23A-12 Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses
SECTION 23A-13 Defective Nonconforming Businesses
SECTION 23A-14 Signs
SECTION 23A-15 Regulations Pertaining to Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films or
Videos in Viewing Rooms
SECTION 23A-16 Additional Regulations for Escort Agencies
SECTION 23A-17 Additional Regulations Concerning Licensee Employees
SECTION 23A-18 Prohibition Against Children in a Sexually Oriented Business
SECTION 23A-19 Hours of Operation
SECTION 23A-20 Injunction; Penalty
SECTION 23A-21 Severability
SECTION 23A-22 Repealer
SECTION 23A-23 Enactment
23A- 1
CHAPTER 23A
SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES
SECTION 23A-1. Purpose and Findings.
(A) Purpose. It is the purpose of this ordinance to regulate sexually oriented businesses
in order to promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens of the City, and
to establish reasonable and uniform regulations applicable thereto. The provisions of this
ordinance have neither the purpose nor effect of imposing a limitation or restriction on the content
of any communicative materials, including sexually oriented materials. Similarly, it is not the
intent nor effect of this ordinance to restrict or deny access by adults to sexually oriented
materials protected by the First Amendment, or to deny access by the distributors and exhibitors
of sexually oriented entertainment to their intended market. Neither is it the intent nor effect of
this ordinance to condone or legitimize the distribution of obscene material. It is a purpose hereof
to protect the citizenry from the detrimental secondary effects caused by sexually oriented
businesses.
(B) Findings. Based on evidence concerning the adverse secondary effects of adult uses
on the community, and on findings incorporated in the cases of City of Renton v. Playtime
Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986) Young v. American Mini Theatres, 426 U.S. 50 (1976), and
Barnes v. Glen Theatre, Inc., 501 U.S. 560 (1991), and on studies in other communities including
but not limited to Phoenix, Arizona; Minneapolis, Minnesota; Houston, Texas; Indianapolis,
Indiana; Amarillo, Texas; Garden Grove, California; Los Angeles, California; Whittier, California;
Austin, Texas; Seattle, Washington; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; Cleveland, Ohio; and Beaumont,
Texas; and also on findings from the Report of the Attorney General’s Working Group On The
Regulation Of Sexually Oriented Businesses, (June 6, 1989, State of Minnesota), the Council
finds:
(1) Sexually oriented businesses lend themselves to ancillary unlawful and
unhealthy activities. Thus, the City desires to make the owners of these establishments
responsible for activities that occur on the premises.
(2) Certain employees of sexually oriented businesses defined in this ordinance
as adult theatres and cabarets engage in higher incidence of certain types of illicit behavior
than employees of other establishments.
(3) Sexual acts, including masturbation, and oral and anal sex, occur at sexually
oriented businesses, especially those which provide private or semi-private booths or
cubicles for viewing films videos, or live sex shows.
(4) Offering and providing such space encourages such activities, which creates
unhealthy conditions.
(5) Persons frequent certain adult theatres, adult arcades, and other sexually
oriented businesses for the purpose of engaging in sex within the premises of such sexually
oriented businesses.
(6) At least 50 communicable diseases may be spread by activities occurring in
23A- 2
sexually oriented businesses, including, but not limited to, syphilis, gonorrhea, human
immunodeficiency virus infection (HIV-AIDS), genital herpes, hepatitis B, Non A, Non B
amebiasis, salmonella infections and shigella infections.
(7) Since 1981 and to the present, there has been an increasing cumulative
number of reported cases of AIDS caused by the human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) in
the United States – 600 in 1982; 2,200 in 1983; 4,600 in 1984; 8,555 in 1985; 253,448 in
1992; and 621,329 as of August 31, 1997.
(8) As of September 26, 1997, there are 1467 reported cases of AIDS in the
State of Utah.
(9) Since 1981 and to the present, there have been an increasing cumulative
number of persons testing positive for the HIV antibody test in Utah.
(10) The number of cases of early (less than one year) syphilis in the United
States reported annually has risen with 33,613 cases reported in 1982 and 45,200 through
November of 1990.
(11) The number of cases of gonorrhea in the United States reported annually
remains at a high level, with over one-half million cases being reported in 1990.
(12) The office of the surgeon general of the United States, in a report dated
October 22, 1986, advised the American public that AIDS and HIV infection may be
transmitted through sexual contact, intravenous drug abuse, exposure to infected blood
and blood components, and from an infected mother to her newborn.
(13) According to the best scientific evidence, AIDS and HIV infection, as well
as syphilis and gonorrhea, are principally transmitted by sexual acts.
(14) Sanitary conditions in some sexually oriented businesses are unhealthy, in
part, because the activities conducted there are unhealthy, and, in part, because of the
unregulated nature of the activities and the failure of the owners and the operators of the
facilities to self-regulate those activities and maintain those facilities.
(15) Numerous studies and reports have determined that semen is found in the
areas of sexually oriented businesses where persons view “adult” oriented films.
(16) The findings noted in Paragraphs (1) through (15) raise substantial
governmental concerns.
(17) Sexually oriented businesses have operational characteristics which should
be reasonably regulated in order to protect those substantial governmental concerns.
(18) A reasonable licensing procedure is an appropriate mechanism to place the
burden of that reasonable regulation on the owners and the operators of the sexually
oriented businesses. Further, such a licensing procedure will place an incentive on the
operators to see that the sexually oriented business is run in a manner consistent with the
health, safety and welfare of its patrons and employees, as well as the citizens of the City.
It is appropriate to require reasonable assurances that the licensee is the actual operator of
the sexually oriented business, and in possession and control of the premises and activities
occurring therein.
(19) Prohibiting doors or similar partitions on adult booths and requiring
sufficient lighting on premises with adult booths advances a substantial governmental
interest in curbing the illegal and unsanitary sexual activity occurring in adult theatres.
23A- 3
(20) Requiring licensees of sexually oriented businesses to keep information
regarding current employees and certain past employees will help reduce the incidence of
certain types of criminal behavior by facilitating the identification of potential witnesses or
suspects, and by preventing minors from working in such establishments.
(21) The disclosure of certain information by those persons ultimately
responsible for the day-to-day operation and maintenance of the sexually oriented
business, where such information is substantially related to the significant governmental
interest in the operation of such uses, will aid in preventing the spread of sexually
transmitted diseases.
(22) It is desirable in the prevention of the spread of communicable diseases to
obtain a limited amount of information regarding certain employees who may engage in
the conduct which this ordinance is designed to prevent or who are likely to be witnesses
to such activity.
(23) The fact that an applicant for an adult use license has been convicted of a
sexually related crime leads to the rational assumption that the applicant may engage in
that conduct in contravention of this ordinance.
(24) The barring of such individuals from the management of adult uses for a
period of years serves as a deterrent to and prevents conduct which leads to the
transmission of sexually transmitted diseases.
(25) The general welfare, health, morals and safety of the citizens of the City
will be promoted by the enactment of this ordinance.
SECTION 23A-2. Definitions.
“Adult Arcade” means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coinoperated,
slug-operated, or for any form of consideration, or electronically, electrically, or
mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors, video or laser disc players, or
other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per
machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by
the depicting, or describing of “specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
“Adult Bookstore, Adult Novelty Store, or Adult Video Store” means a commercial
establishment which, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any
form of consideration, and one or more of the following:
(1) books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films,
motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides, or other visual
representations which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas”; or
(2) instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designed or marketed for use
in connection with “specified sexual activities.”
A commercial establishment may have other principal business purposes that do not
involve offering for sale or rental of material depicting or describing “specified sexual activities”
23A- 4
or “specified anatomical areas” and still be categorized as ADULT BOOKSTORE, ADULT
NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEOS TORE. Such other business purposes will not serve
to exempt such commercial establishments from being categorized as an ADULT BOOKSTORE,
ADULT NOVELTY STORE, or ADULT VIDEO STORE so long as one of its principal
business purposes is the offering for sale or rental for consideration the specified materials which
are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual activities” or “specified
anatomical areas.” It shall constitute a “principal business purpose” if the establishment has gross
receipts of over twenty percent (20%) from such materials.
“Adult Cabaret” means a nightclub, bar, restaurant, or similar commercial establishment
which regularly features:
(1) persons who appear in a state of dress that covers no more that the “specified
anatomical areas;”
(2) live performances or dancers whose attire covers no more than the “specified
anatomical areas”; or
(3) films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic
reproductions which are characterized by the depiction or description of “specified sexual
activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
“Adult Motion Picture Theater” means a commercial establishment where, for any form
of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic
reproductions are regularly shown which are characterized by the depiction or description of
“specified sexual activities” or “specified anatomical areas.”
“Adult Theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial
establishment which regularly features persons who appear in a state of dress that covers no more
than the “specified anatomical areas,” or live performances or dancers whose attire covers no
more than the “specified anatomical areas.”
“Employee” means a person who performs any service on the premises of a sexually
oriented business on a full-time, part-time or contract basis, whether or not the person is
denominated an employee, independent contractor, agent or otherwise and whether or not said
person is paid a salary, wage or other compensation by the operator of said business. Employee
does not include a person exclusively on the premises for repair or maintenance of the premises or
equipment on the premises, or for the delivery of goods to the premises.
“Escort”means a person who, for consideration, agrees or offers to act as a companion,
guide, or date for another person, or who agrees or offers to privately model lingerie or to
privately perform a striptease for another person.
“Escort Agency,”also known as an “Outcall Service,” means a person or business
association who furnishes, offers to furnish, or advertises to furnish escorts as one of its primary
23A- 5
business purposes for a fee, tip, or other consideration. No activity or services by any Escort shall
be performed on the Agency’s premises.
“Establishment” means and includes any of the following:
(1) the opening or commencement of any sexually oriented business as a new
business;
(2) the conversion of an existing business, whether or not a sexually oriented
business, to any sexually oriented business;
(3) the additions of any sexually oriented business to any other existing sexually
oriented business; or
(4) the relocation of any sexually oriented business.
“Licensee” means a person in whose name a license to operate a sexually oriented
business has been issued, as well as the individual listed as an applicant on the application for a
license; and in the case of an employee, a person in whose name a license has been issued
authorizing, employment in a sexually oriented business.
“Sexually Oriented Business” includes, but is not limited to, an adult arcade, adult
bookstore, adult novelty store, adult video store, adult cabaret, adult motion picture theater, adult
theater, or escort agency.
“Specified Anatomical Areas” means:
(1) the human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and
opaquely covered; or
(2) less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals, pubic region,
buttocks or a female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
“Specified Criminal Activity” means any offense, regardless of title, involving the
following:
(1) prostitution or promotion of prostitution; dissemination of obscenity; sale,
distribution or display of harmful material to a minor; sexual performance by a child;
possession or distribution of child pornography; public lewdness; indecent exposure;
indecency with a child; engaging in organized criminal activity; sexual assault; molestation
of a child; gambling; or distribution of a controlled substance; or any similar offenses to
those described above under the criminal or penal code of other states or countries;
(2) for which:
(a) less than three years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the
date of release from confinement imposed for the conviction, whichever is the later
date, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense;
(b) less than five years have elapsed since the date of conviction or the date
of release from confinement for the conviction, whichever is the later date, if the
conviction is of a felony; or
(c) less than five years have elapsed since the date of the last conviction or
23A- 6
the date of release from confinement for the last conviction, whichever is the later
date, if the convictions are of two or more misdemeanor offenses or combination
of misdemeanor offenses occurring within any thirty-six (36) month period.
(3) The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the
disqualification of the applicant or a person residing with the applicant.
“Specified Sexual Activities”means any of the following offenses:
(1) the fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks,
anus, or female breasts;
(2) sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral
copulation, masturbation, or sodomy; or
(3) excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set
forth in (1) through (2) above.
“Substantial Enlargement” of a sexually oriented business means the increase in
inventory or floor areas occupied by the business by more than ten percent (10%), as the floor
areas exist on the date this ordinance takes effect.
“Transfer of Ownership or Control” of a sexually oriented business means and includes
any of the following:
(1) the sale, lease, or sublease of the business;
(2) the transfer of securities which constitute a controlling interest in the business,
whether by sale, exchange, or similar means; or
(3) the establishment of a trust, gift, or other similar legal device which transfers
the ownership or control of the business, including transfer by bequest or other operation
of law upon the death of the person possessing the ownership or control.
SECTION 23A-3. Classification.
Sexually oriented businesses are classified as follows:
(A) adult arcades;
(B) adult bookstores, adult novelty stores, or adult video stores;
(C) adult cabarets;
(D) adult motion picture theaters;
(E) adult theaters;
(F) escort agencies.
SECTION 23A-4. License Required.
(A) It is unlawful:
(1) for any person to operate a sexually oriented business without a valid sexually
23A- 7
oriented business license issued by the City pursuant to this Chapter;
(2) for any person who operates a sexually oriented business to employ a person to
work for the sexually oriented business who is not licensed as a sexually oriented business
employee by the City pursuant to this Chapter;
(3) for any person to obtain employment with a sexually oriented business without
having secured a sexually oriented business employee license pursuant to this Chapter.
(B) An application for a license must be made on a form provided by the City.
(C) All applicants must be qualified according to the provisions of this Chapter. The
application may request and the applicant shall provide such information (including fingerprints)
as to enable the City to determine whether the applicant meets the qualifications established in this
Chapter.
(D) If a person who wishes to operate a sexually oriented business is an individual, the
person must sign the application for a license as applicant. If a person who wishes to operate a
sexually oriented business is other than an individual, each individual or entity that has a twenty
percent (20%) or greater interest in the business must sign the application for a license as
applicant. Each applicant must be qualified under the following Section and each applicant shall
be considered a licensee if a license is granted.
(E) The completed application for a sexually oriented business license shall contain the
following information and shall be accompanied by the following documents:
(1) If the applicant is:
(a) an individual, the individual shall state his/her legal name and any aliases
and submit proof that he/she is eighteen (18) years of age;
(b) a partnership, the partnership shall state its complete name, and the
names of all partners, whether the partnership is general or limited, and a copy of
the partnership agreement, if any;
(c) a corporation, the corporation shall state its complete name, the date of
its incorporation, evidence that the corporation is in good standing under the laws
of its state of incorporation, the names and capacity of all officers, directors and
principal stockholders, and the name of the registered corporate agent and the
address of the registered office for service of process.
(2) If the applicant intends to operate the sexually oriented business under a name
other than that of the applicant; he or she must state:
(a) the sexually oriented business’s fictitious name; and
(b) submit the required registration documents.
(3) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has been
convicted of a specified criminal activity as defined in this Chapter, and, if so, the specified
criminal activity involved, the date, place, and jurisdiction of each.
(4) Whether the applicant, or a person residing with the applicant, has had a
previous license under this Chapter, or other similar sexually oriented business ordinances
from another city or county, denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and
location of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or
revoked, as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation, and whether the applicant
or a person residing with the applicant has been a partner in a partnership or an officer,
23A- 8
director or principal stockholder of a corporation that is licensed under this Chapter whose
license has previously been denied, suspended or revoked, including the name and location
of the sexually oriented business for which the permit was denied, suspended or revoked
as well as the date of denial, suspension or revocation.
(5) Whether the applicant or a person residing with the applicant holds any other
licenses under this Chapter or other similar sexually oriented business ordinance from
another city or county and, if so, the names and locations of such other licensed
businesses.
(6) The single classification of license for which the applicant is filing.
(7) The location of a proposed sexually oriented business, including a legal
description of the property, street address, and telephone number(s), if any.
(8) The applicant’s mailing address and residential address.
(9) A recent photograph of the applicant(s).
(10) The applicant’s driver’s license number, Social Security Number, and/or
his/her state of federally issued tax identification number.
(11) A sketch or diagram showing the configuration of the premises, including a
statement of total floor space occupied by there business. The sketch or diagram need not
be professionally prepared, but it must be drawn to a designated scale or drawn with
marked dimensions of the interior of the premises to any accuracy of plus or minus six (6)
inches.
(12) A current certificate and straight-line drawing prepared within thirty (30) days
prior to application by a registered land surveyor depicting the proper lines and the
structures containing any existing sexually oriented businesses within one thousand
(1,000) feet of the property to be certified; the property lines of any established religious
institution/synagogue, school, or public park or recreation area within one thousand
(1,000) feet of the property to be certified. For purposes of this Section, a use shall be
considered existing or established if it is in existence at the time an application is
submitted.
(13) If an applicant wishes to operate a sexually oriented business which shall
exhibit on the premises in a viewing room or booth of less than one hundred fifty (150)
square feet of floor space films, video cassettes, other video reproductions, or live
entertainment which depict specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, then
the applicant shall comply with the application requirements set forth herein.
(14) If the property on which the sexually oriented business is to be located, is
owned by any person or entity other than the applicant, the applicant shall submit a letter,
signed by said owner, stating that the applicant has fully disclosed to the owner that the
business to be operated is a sexually oriented business, and that the type and nature of the
inventory has also been disclosed.
(F) Before any applicant may be issued a sexually oriented business employee license, the
applicant shall submit on a form to be provided by the City the following information:
(1) The applicant’s name or any other name (including “stage” names) or aliases
23A- 9
used by the individual;
(2) Age, date, and place of birth;
(3) Height, weight, hair and eye color;
(4) Present residence address and telephone number;
(5) Present business address and telephone number;
(6) Date, issuing state and number of driver’s permit or other identification card
information;
(7) Social Security number; and
(8) Proof that the individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age.
(G) Attached to the application form for a sexually oriented business employee license as
provided above, shall be the following:
(1) A color photograph of the applicant clearly showing the applicant’s face, and
the applicant’s fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. Any fees for the
photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant.
(2) A statement detailing the license history of the applicant for the five (5) years
immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including, whether such
applicant previously operated or is seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city,
state, or country has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied,
revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state
the name, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and describe in full the reason
for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or
suspension shall be attached to the application.
(3) A statement whether the applicant has been convicted of a specified criminal
activity as defined in this Chapter and, if so, the specified criminal activity involved, the
date, place and jurisdiction of each.
SECTION 23A-5. Issuance of License.
(A) Upon the filing of said application for a sexually oriented business employee license,
the application shall be referred to the appropriate city departments for an investigation to be
made on such information as is contained on the application. The application process shall be
completed within thirty (30) days from the date the completed application is filed. After the
investigation, the City shall issue a license, unless it is determined by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
(1) The applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for
issuance of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the
application form;
(2) The applicant is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
(3) The applicant has been convicted of a “specified criminal activity,” as defined
in this Chapter.
(4) The sexually oriented business employee license is to be used for employment
in a business prohibited by local or state law, statute, rule or regulation or prohibited by a
23A- 10
particular provision of this Code; or
(5) The applicant has had a sexually oriented business employee license revoked by
the City within three (3) years of the date of the current application. However, if the
revocation was based on a criminal conviction, no application will be accepted for five (5)
years from the termination of all probation, formal or informal, and all other sentencing
conditions. Denial, suspension, or revocation of a license issued pursuant to this
Subsection shall be subject to appeal as set forth in this chapter.
(B) A license granted pursuant to this Section shall be subject to annual renewal upon the
written application of the applicant and a finding by the City that the applicant has not been
convicted of any specified criminal activity as defined in this Chapter or committed any act during
the existence of the previous license, which would be grounds to deny the initial license
application. The renewal of the license shall be subject to the payment of the fee as set forth in
the Consolidated Fee Schedule.
(C) Within thirty (30) days after receipt of a completed sexually oriented business
application, the City shall approve or deny the issuance of a license to an applicant. The City shall
approve the issuance of a license to an applicant unless it is determined by a preponderance of the
evidence that one or more of the following findings is true:
(1) An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
(2) An applicant or a person with whom applicant is residing is overdue in payment
to the City of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against or imposed upon him/her in
relation to any business.
(3)An applicant has failed to provide information reasonably necessary for issuance
of the license or has falsely answered a question or request for information on the
application form.
(4) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been denied a
license by the City to operate a sexually oriented business within the preceding twelve (12)
months or whose license to operate a sexually oriented business has been revoked within
the preceding twelve (12) months.
(5) An applicant or a person with whom the applicant is residing has been
convicted of a specified criminal activity defined in this Chapter.
(6) The premises to be used for the sexually oriented business have not been
approved by the health department, fire department, and the building official as being, in
compliance with applicable laws and ordinances.
(7) The license fee required by this Chapter has not been paid,
(8) An applicant of the proposed establishment is in violation of or is not in
compliance with any of the provisions of the Cedar City Ordinance, or state law.
(D) The license, if granted shall state on its face the name of the person or persons to
whom it is granted, the expiration date, the address of the sexually oriented business and the
classification for which the license is issued. All licenses shall be posted in a conspicuous place at
or near the entrance to the sexually oriented business so that they may easily read at any time.
(E) The health department, fire department, and the building official shall complete their
certification that the premises is in compliance or not in compliance within twenty (20) days of
receipt of the application by the City.
23A- 11
(F) A sexually oriented business license shall issue for only one classification as set forth
herein.
SECTION 23A-6. Fees.
(A) Every application for a sexually oriented business license, whether for a new license or
for renewal of an existing license, shall be accompanied by a non-refundable application and
investigation fee.
(B) In addition to the application and investigation fee required above, every sexually
oriented business that is granted a license (new or renewal) shall pay to the City an annual nonrefundable
license fee within thirty (30) days of license issuance or renewal.
(C) Every application for a sexually oriented business license, whether for a new license or
for renewal of an existing license, shall be accompanied by an annual non-refundable application
investigation, and license fee.
(D) All fees required hereunder are as follows:
(1) Regulatory yearly business regulatory license fees:
(a) Adult business and seminude dancing bars, one hundred dollars ($100);
(b) Outcall business, two hundred dollars ($200);
(c) Seminude dancing agencies and seminude entertainment businesses, on
hundred fifty dollars ($150);
(2) For each business applicant, an initial investigation fee of one hundred dollars
($100) is required for each applicant directed to submit a separate disclosure application;
(3) Yearly sexually oriented business employee license fees:
(a) Any employee providing outcall business services away from the
premises of the business, one hundred fifty dollars ($150);
(b) Adult business employees, outcall business employees requiring a
license but not performing any services outside the licensed premises, seminude
entertainment business employees requiring a license but not individually providing
seminude entertainment services to customers, seminude dancing bar employees
requiring a license but who are not performers, and employees of seminude
dancing agencies requiring licenses but who are not performers, fifty dollars ($50);
(c) Employees of seminude entertainment business personally providing
seminude entertainment to patrons, one hundred fifty dollars ($150);
(d) Professional dancers performing in seminude dancing bars, one hundred
dollars ($100).
(B) Any individual applying for more than one license at the same time shall pay the higher
of any applicable fee, plus an additional twenty dollars ($20) for each additional license requested.
(C) These fees shall be in addition to the other licenses and fees required to do business in
the City.
(D) License and Bond. Each application for a sexually oriented business license shall post
with the City’s Director of Business Licenses a cash or corporate security bond payable to the
City of Cedar in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000).. Any fines assessed against the
23A- 12
business, officers or managers for violations of City ordinances shall be taken from this bond if not
paid in cash within ten (10) days after notice of the fine, unless an appeal is filed as provided by
this Chapter. In the event the funds are drawn against the cash or surety bond to pay such fines
the bond shall be replenished to two thousand dollars ($2,000) within fifteen days of the date of
notice of any draw against it. In the event the bond is not replenished within the fifteen days, the
license granted by this chapter shall automatically be suspended until such time as the bond is
replenished.
SECTION 23A-7. Inspection.
(A) An applicant or licensee shall permit representative of the Police Department, Health
Department, Fire Department or other City departments or agencies to inspect the premises of a
sexually oriented business for the purpose of ensuring compliance with the law, at any time it is
occupied or open for business.
(B) A person who operates a sexually oriented business or an agent or employee thereof
commits a misdemeanor if they refuse to permit such lawful inspection of the premises at any time
it is occupied or open for business.
SECTION 23A-8. Expiration of License.
(A) Each license shall expire one year from the date of issuance and may be renewed only
by making application as provided herein. Application for renewal shall be made at least thirty
(30) days before the expiration date, and when made less than thirty (30) days before the
expiration date, the expiration of the license will not be affected.
(B) When the City denies renewal of a license, the applicant shall not be issued a license
for one year from the date of denial. If, subsequent to denial, the City finds that the basis for
denial of the renewal license has been corrected or abated, the applicant may be granted a license
if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date denial became final.
SECTION 23A-9. Suspension.
(A) The City shall suspend a license for a period of not less than ten (10) days nor more
than thirty (30) days if it determines that a licensee or an employee of a licensee has:
(1) violated or is not in compliance with any Section of this Title;
(2) refused to allow an inspection of the sexually oriented business premises as
authorized by this Chapter.
SECTION 23A-10. Revocation.
(A) The City shall revoke a license if a cause of suspension occurs and the license has been
suspended within the preceding twelve (12) months;
(B) The City shall revoke a license if it determines that:
(1) a licensee gave false or misleading information in the material submitted during
23A- 13
the application process;
(2) a licensee knew, or should have known that possession, use, or sale of
controlled substances occurred on the premises;
(3) a licensee knew, or should have known that prostitution occurred on the
premises;
(4) a licensee knew, or should have known the sexually oriented business operated
during a period of time when the licensee’s license was suspended;
(5) a licensee knew, or should have known that any act of sexual intercourse,
sodomy, oral copulation, masturbation, or other sex act occurred in or on the licensed
premises;
(6) a licensee knew or should have known that obscene materials, child
pornography in any form, or any other contraband is on the licensed premises; or
(7) a licensee is delinquent in payment to the City, County, or State for any taxes
or fees past due.
(C) When the City revokes a license, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year and the
licensee shall not be issued a sexually oriented business license for one (1) year from the date the
revocation became effective. If, subsequent to revocation, the City finds that there are substantial
mitigating factors, or substantial corrective measures have been employed by the licensee, the
applicant may be granted a license if at least ninety (90) days have elapsed since the date the
revocation became effective. An example of substantial mitigating factors would be the wilful
acts of an employee or customer disregarding the directions of the licensee. An example of
substantial corrective measures would be termination of an offending employee or prohibiting the
return of an offending patron.
(D) If any licensee has a license revoked three (3) times within any five (5) year period,
said licensee will thereafter be precluded from regaining any such license.
(E) After denial of an application, or denial of a renewal of an application or suspension or
revocation of any license, the applicant or licensee may appeal said decision to the City Manager.
Any such appeal shall be in writing and submitted to the office of the City Manager within fifteen
(15) days of the decision. The City Manager may review the matter on the record or may conduct
a hearing. The City Manager may affirm, reverse or modify the decision. The City Manager shall
issue a decision with thirty (30) days of receiving the appeal. Any appeal thereafter shall be to the
District Court, which shall have plenary review. Unless either party
obtains an injunction or mandamus, the status quo ante will be maintained during the appeal
process, however, additional enforcement actions will not be precluded hereby.
SECTION 23A-11. Transfer of License.
A licensee shall not transfer his/her license to another, nor shall a licensee operate a
sexually oriented business under the authority of a license at any place other than the address
designated in the application.
SECTION 23A-12. Location of Sexually Oriented Businesses.
23A- 14
It is a Class C misdemeanor for any person to operate or cause to be operated a sexually
oriented business in a zoning district other than Industrial and Manufacturing 2, as recommended
by the Cedar City Planning Commission.
In order to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of
sexually oriented businesses or their locations in areas deleterious to the City, regulate the signage
of such businesses, control the adverse effects of such signage, and prevent inappropriate
exposure to such businesses to the community. The City hereby establishes the following
regulation of time, place, and manner of the operation of these businesses, consistent with the
United States and Utah Constitutions.
(A) All sexually oriented businesses shall be subject to the following restrictions:
(1) No sexually oriented business shall be located within 1000 feet of:
(a) a church, synagog, mosque, temple or building which is used primarily
for religious worship and related religious activities;
(b) a public or private educational facility including but not limited to child
day-care facilities, nursery schools, pre-schools, kindergartens, elementary
schools, private schools, intermediate schools, junior high schools, middle
schools, high schools, vocational schools, secondary schools, continuation
schools, special education schools, junior colleges, and universities. School
includes the school grounds, but does not include facilities used primarily
for another purpose and only incidentally as a school;
(c) a public park or recreation area which has been designated for park or
recreational activities including, but not limited to a park, playground,
nature trails, swimming pool, reservoir, athletic field, basketball or tennis
courts, pedestrian/bicycle paths, wilderness areas, or other similar public
land within the City which is under the control, operation, or management
of the City Park and Recreation authorities;
(d) an entertainment business which is oriented primarily towards children
or family entertainment.
(2) No sexually oriented business shall be located within 600 feet of:
(a) a boundary of a residential district as defined in the Cedar City Zoning
code; or
(b) the property line of a lot devoted to a residential use as defined in the
Cedar City Zoning code;
(B) A person commits a misdemeanor if that person causes or permits the operation,
establishment, substantial enlargement, or transfer of ownership or control of a sexually oriented
business within one thousand feet (1000') of another sexually oriented business.
(C) For the purpose of this Section, measurements shall be made in a straight line, without
regard to the intervening structures or objects from the nearest portion of the building or structure
used as part of the premises where a sexually oriented business is conducted, to the nearest
property lien of the premises of a use listed above. Presence of a City, County, or other political
23A- 15
subdivision boundary shall be irrelevant for purposes of calculating and applying, the distance
requirements of this Section.
(D) For the purpose of this Section, the distance between any two sexually oriented
businesses shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to the intervening structures or
objects or political boundaries, from the closest exterior wall of the structure which each business
is located.
SECTION 23A-13. Defective Nonconforming Businesses.
Any sexually oriented business lawfully operating upon adoption of this Ordinance that is
in violation hereof shall be deemed as a non-conforming use. The non-conforming use will be
permitted to continue for a period not to exceed one year, unless sooner terminated for any
reason or voluntarily discontinued for a period of thirty (30) days or more. Such non-conforming
use shall not be increased, enlarged, extended, or altered excerpt that the use may be changed to a
conforming use.
SECTION 23A-14. Signs.
Notwithstanding anything contrary contained within, Sign Regulations, of Cedar City, the
more restrictive requirements for signs shall prevail. Signs for sexually oriented businesses shall
be limited as follows:
(A) No more than one exterior sign shall be allowed.
(B) No sign shall be allowed to exceed eighteen (18) square feet.
(C) No animation shall be permitted on or around any sign or on the exterior walls or roof
of such premises.
(D) No descriptive art or designs depicting any activity related to or inferring the nature of
the business shall be allowed on any sign. Said signs shall contain alphanumeric copy only.
(E) Only flat wall signs and/or awning signs shall be permitted.
(F) Painted wall advertising shall not be allowed.
(G) Other than the signs specifically allowed by this Chapter, sexually oriented businesses
shall not attach, construct, or allow to be attached or constructed, any temporary signs, banners,
lights, or other devices designed to draw attention to the business location.
SECTION 23A-15. Regulations Pertaining to Exhibition of Sexually Explicit Films or
Videos in Viewing Rooms.
(A) A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business, which
exhibits on the premises in a viewing room of less than one hundred fifty (150) square feet of
floor space, a film, video cassette, or other video reproduction which depicts specified sexual
activities or specified anatomical areas, shall comply with the following requirements.
(1) Upon application for a sexually oriented business license, the application shall
be accompanied by a diagram of the premises showing a plan thereof specifying the
location of one or more manager’s stations and the location of all overhead lighting
23A- 16
fixtures and designating any portion of the premises in which patrons will not be
permitted. A manager’s station may not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet of floor area.
The diagram shall also designate the place at which the permit will be conspicuously
posted, if granted. A professionally prepared diagram in the nature of an engineer’s or
architect’s blueprint shall not be required; however, each diagram should be oriented to
the north or to some designated street or object and should be drawn to a designated scale
or with marked dimensions sufficient to show the various internal dimensions of all areas
of the interior of the premises to an accuracy of plus or minus six (6") inches. The City
may waive the foregoing diagram for renewal applications if the applicant adopts a
diagram that was previously submitted and certifies that the configuration of the premises
has not been altered since it was prepared.
(2) The application shall be sworn to be true and correct by the applicant.
(3) No alteration in the configuration or location of a manager’s station may be
made without the prior approval of the City.
(4) It is the duty of the licensee of the premises to ensure that at least one licensed
employee is on duty and situated in each manager’s station at all times that any one (1)
patron is present inside the premises.
(5) The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is
an unobstructed view from a manager’s station of every area of the premises to which any
patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. Restrooms shall not
contain video reproduction equipment nor shall any video be viewed from within the
restrooms. If the premises has two or more manager’s stations designated, then the
interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed
view of each area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose
from at least one of the manager’s stations. The view required in this Subsection must be
by direct line of sight from the manager’s station.
(6) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the view area specified in
Subsection (5) remains unobstructed by any doors, curtains, partitions, walls,
merchandise, display racks or other materials and, at all times, to ensure that no patron is
permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in
which patrons will not be permitted in the application filed pursuant to Subsection (1) of
this Section.
(7) No viewing room may be occupied by more that one person at a time.
(8) The premises shall be equipped with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient
intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination
of not less than five (5) foot candles as measured at the floor level.
(9) It shall be the duty of the licensee to ensure that the illumination described
above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises.
(10) No licensee shall allow openings of any kind to exist between viewing rooms
or booths.
(11) No person shall make or attempt to make an opening of any kind between
viewing booths or rooms.
23A- 17
(12) The licensee shall, during each business day, regularly inspect the walls
between the viewing booths to determine if any opening or holes exist.
(13) The licensee shall cause all floor coverings in viewing booths to be
nonporous, easily cleanable surfaces, with no rugs or carpeting.
(14) The licensee shall cause all floor wall surfaces and ceiling surfaces in viewing
booths to be constructed of, or permanently covered by, nonporous, easily cleanable
material. No wood, plywood, composition board or other porous material shall be used
within forty eight (48") inches of the floor.
(B) It is a Class B misdemeanor for a person having a duty under Subsections (1) through
(14) of Subsection (A) to fail to fulfill that duty.
SECTION 23A-16. Additional Regulations for Escort Agencies.
(A) An escort agency shall not employ any person under the age of 18 years.
(B) A person commits an offense if the person acts as an escort or agrees to act as an
escort for any person under the age of 18 years.
(C) In addition to the restrictions set forth herein applying to any escort agencies’
premises, said restrictions also apply to the conduct of the employee during the period of time that
the escort service is provided, regardless of location.
SECTION 23A-17. Additional Regulations Concerning Licensee Employees.
It is unlawful for any physical contact between licensees and any other person during the
performance of the licensee’s employment responsibilities.
SECTION 23A-18. Prohibition Against Children in a Sexually Oriented Business.
A person commits a misdemeanor if the person allows another under the age of 18 years
on the premises of a sexually oriented business. A licensee has an affirmative obligation to ensure
that no person on the premises is under the age of eighteen (18).
SECTION 23A-19. Hours of Operation.
No sexually oriented business may remain open at any time between the hours of one
o’clock (1:00) A.M. and eight o’clock A.M.
SECTION 23A-20. Injunction; Penalty.
A person who operates or causes to be operated a sexually oriented business without a
valid license or in violation of this Ordinance is subject to a suit for injunction as well as
23A- 18
prosecution for criminal violations. Each day a sexually oriented business so operates is a
separate offense or violation. A violation of this Chapter is a Class B misdemeanor and is
punishable as such.
SECTION 23A-21. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is declared invalid
or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, said portion shall be severed and such
declaration shall not affect the validity of the remainder of this ordinance.
SECTION 23A-22. Repealer. If any provisions of the City’s Ordinance heretofore adopted are
inconsistent herewith they are hereby repealed.
SECTION 23A-23. Enactment. Chapter 23A of the Cedar City Ordinance is hereby adopted.
(Adopted 5/98)
CHAPTER 23B
DOOR TO DOOR SOLICITATION ORDINANCE
SECTION 23B - 1 Purpose
SECTION 23B - 2 No Other City License or Approval Required
SECTION 23B - 3 Definitions
SECTION 23B - 4 Exemptions from Chapter
SECTION 23B - 5 Solicitation Prohibited
SECTION 23B - 6 Registration of Solicitors
SECTION 23B - 7 Application Form
SECTION 23B - 8 Written Disclosures
SECTION 23B - 9 When Registration Begins
SECTION 23B - 10 Issuance of Certificates
SECTION 23B - 11 Form of Certificate and Identification Badge
SECTION 23B - 12 Maintenance of Registry
SECTION 23B - 13 Non-Transferability of Certificates
SECTION 23B - 14 Denial, Suspension or Revocation of a Certificate of Registration
SECTION 23B - 15 Appeal
SECTION 23B - 16 Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited
SECTION 23B - 17 “No Soliciting” Notice
SECTION 23B - 18 Duties of Solicitors
SECTION 23B - 19 Time of Day Restrictions
SECTION 23B - 20 Buyer’s Right to Cancel
SECTION 23B - 21 Penalties
SECTION 23B - 1 Purpose.
Residents of the City have an inalienable interest in their personal safety, wellbeing,
and privacy in their residences, as well as their ability to provide or receive information
regarding matters of personal belief, political or charitable activities, and goods and services
lawfully in commerce. The City has a substantial interest in protecting the well-being,
tranquility, personal safety, and privacy of its citizens, which includes the ability to protect
citizens from unwanted intrusions upon residential property. The City also has a substantial
interest in protecting citizens from fraud or otherwise unfair consumer sales practices as well as
criminal activity.
There must be a balance between these substantial interests of the City and its
citizens, and the effect of the regulations in this Chapter on the rights of those who are regulated.
Based on the collective experiences of City officials derived from regulating business activity,
protecting persons and property from criminal conduct, responding to the inquiries of citizens
regarding Door-to-Door Solicitation, the experience of its law enforcement officers and those
affected by Door-to-Door canvassing and solicitation, as well as judicial decisions outlining the
boundaries of constitutional protections afforded and denied persons seeking to engage in Doorto-
Door Solicitation, the City adopts this Chapter to promote the City’s substantial interests in:
(1) respecting citizen’s decisions regarding privacy in their residences;
(2) protecting persons from criminal conduct;
(3) providing equal opportunity to Advocate for and against Religious Belief,
Political Position, or Charitable Activities; and
(4) permitting truthful and non-misleading Door-to-Door Solicitation
regarding lawful Goods or Services in intrastate or interstate commerce.
The City finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in this Chapter
are narrowly tailored to preserve and protect the City interests referred to herein while at the
same time balancing the rights of those regulated.
SECTION 23B - 2 No Other City License or Approval Required.
(1) Registered Solicitors and persons exempt from Registration need not apply for,
nor obtain, any other license, permit, or registration from the City to engage in Door-to-Door
Solicitation.
(2) Any Business licensed by the City under another City Ordinance that uses
employees, independent contractors, or agents for Door-to-Door Solicitation in an effort to
provide any tangible or intangible benefit to the Business, shall be required to have such
Solicitors obtain a Certificate, unless otherwise exempt from Registration.
(3) Those Responsible Persons or Entities associated with Registered Solicitors need
not apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or registration from the City, provided they
do not establish a temporary or fixed place of business in the City.
(4) Nothing herein is intended to interfere with or supplant any other requirement of
federal, state, or other local government law regarding any license, permit, or certificate that a
Registered Solicitor is otherwise required to have or maintain.
SECTION 23B - 3 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
(1) “Advocating” means speech or conduct intended to inform, promote, or support
Religious Belief, Political Position, or Charitable Activities.
(2) “Appeals Officer” means the City Council or designee of the City responsible
for receiving the information from the City and Appellant regarding the denial or suspension of a
Certificate and issuing a decision as required by this Chapter.
(3) “Appellant” means the person or entity appealing the denial or suspension of a
Certificate, either personally as an Applicant or registered Solicitor, or on behalf of the
Applicant or Registered Solicitor.
(4) “Applicant” means an individual who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and not
a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful entity who applies for a
Certificate permitting Door-to-Door Solicitation.
(5) “Application Form” means a standardized form provided by the City to an
Applicant to be completed and submitted as part of Registration.
(6) “B.C.I.” means an original or copy, dated no older than 180 days prior to the date
of the Application, of either: (1) a Utah Department of Public Safety Bureau of Criminal
Identification verified criminal history report personal to the Applicant; or (2) verification by the
Utah Department of Public Safety Bureau of Criminal Identification that no criminal history
rising to the level of a Disqualifying Status exists for the Applicant.
(7) “Business” means a commercial enterprise licensed by the City as a person or
Entity under this Title, having a fixed or temporary physical location within the City.
(8) “Certificate” means a temporary, annual, or renewal Certificate permitting Doorto-
Door Solicitation in the City applied for or issued pursuant to the terms of this Chapter.
(9) “Charitable Activities” means Advocating by persons or Entities that either are,
or support, a Charitable Organization.
(10) “Charitable Organization” includes any person, joint venture, partnership,
limited liability company, corporation, association, group, or other Entity:
A. that is:
(I) a benevolent, educational, voluntary health, philanthropic,
humane, patriotic, religious or eleemosynary, social welfare or
advocacy, public health, environmental or conservation, or civic
organization;
(ii) for the benefit of a public safety, law enforcement, or firefighter
fraternal association; or
(iii) established for any charitable purpose; and
B. That is tax exempt under applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue
Code of 1986 as amended, and qualified to solicit and receive tax
deductible contributions from the public for charitable purposes.
C. Charitable Organization includes a chapter, branch, area, or office, or
similar affiliate or any person soliciting contributions within the state for a
Charitable Organization that has its principal place of business outside the
City or State of Utah.
(11) “Competent Individual” means a person claiming or appearing to be at least
eighteen (18) years of age and of sufficiently sound mind and body to be able to engage in
rational thought, conversation, and conduct.
(12) “Completed Application” means a fully completed Application Form, a B.C.I,
two copies of the original identification relied on by the Applicant to establish Proof of Identity,
and the tendering of Fees.
(13) “Criminally Convicted” means the final entry of a conviction, whether by a plea
of no contest, guilty, entry of a judicial or jury finding of guilt, which has not been set aside on
appeal or pursuant to a writ of habeas corpus. The criminal conviction is that offense of which
the Applicant or Registered Solicitor was convicted, without regard to the reduced status of the
charge after completion of conditions of probation or parole, and charges dismissed under a plea
in abeyance or diversion agreement.
(14) “Disqualifying Status” means anything specifically defined in this Chapter as
requiring the denial or suspension of a Certificate, and any of the following:
A. The Applicant or Registered Solicitor has been Criminally Convicted of:
(I) felony homicide, (ii) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or
exploiting a minor, (iii) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or
(iv) sexual assault of any kind.
B. Criminal charges currently pending against the Applicant or Registered
Solicitor for: (I) felony homicide, (ii) physically abusing, sexually
abusing, or exploiting a minor, (iii) the sale or distribution of controlled
substances, or (iv) sexual assault of any kind.
C. The Applicant or Registered Solicitor has been Criminally Convicted of a
felony within the last ten (10) years;
D. The Applicant or Registered Solicitor has been incarcerated in a federal or
state prison within the past five (5) years;
E. The Applicant or Registered Solicitor has been Criminally Convicted of a
misdemeanor within the past five (5) years involving a crime of: (I) moral
turpitude, or (ii) violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or
property.
F. A Final Civil Judgment been entered against the Applicant or Registered
Solicitor within the last five (5) years indicating that: (I) the Applicant or
Registered Solicitor had either engaged in fraud, or intentional
misrepresentation, or (ii) that a debt of the Applicant or Registered
Solicitor was non-dischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 U.S.C. §
523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19);
G. The Applicant or Registered Solicitor currently on parole or probation to
any court, penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under
house arrest or subject to a tracking device;
H. The Applicant or Registered Solicitor has an outstanding arrest warrant
from any jurisdiction; or
I. The Applicant or Registered Solicitor is currently subject to a protective
order based on physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent
jurisdiction.
(15) “Door to Door Solicitation” means the practice of engaging in or attempting to
engage in conversation with any person at a Residence, whether or not that person is a
Competent Individual, while making or seeking to make or facilitate a Home Solicitation Sale, or
attempting to further the sale of Goods and or Services.
(16) “Entity” includes a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other
lawful entity, organization, society or association.
(17) “Fees” means the cost charged to the Applicant or Registered Solicitor for the
issuance of a Certificate and/or Identification Badge, which shall not exceed the reasonable costs
of processing the application and issuing the Certificate and//or Identification Badge.
(18) “Final Civil Judgment” means a civil judgment that would be recognized under
state law as a judgment to which collateral estoppel would apply.
(19) “Goods” means one or more tangible items, wares, objects of merchandise,
perishables of any kind, subscriptions, or manufactured products offered, provided, or sold.
(20) “Home Solicitation Sale” means to make or attempt to make a Sale of Goods or
Services by a Solicitor at a Residence by means of Door-to-Door Solicitation, regardless of
A. the means of payment or consideration used for the purchase;
B. the time of delivery of the Goods or Services; or
C. the previous or present classification of the Solicitor as a solicitor,
peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, or similar designation.
(21) “Licensing Officer” means the City employee(s) or agent(s) responsible for
receiving from an Applicant or Registered Solicitor the Completed Application and either
granting, suspending, or denying the Applicant’s Certificate.
(22) “No Solicitation Sign” means a reasonably visible and legible sign that states
“No Soliciting,” “No Solicitors,” “No Salespersons,” “No Trespassing,” or words of similar
import.
(23) “Political Position” means any actually held belief, or information for, against,
or in conjunction with any political, social, environmental, or humanitarian belief or practice.
(24) “Registered Solicitor” means any person who has been issued a current
Certificate by the City.
(25) “Registration” means the process used by the City Licensing Officer to accept a
Completed Application and determine whether or not a Certificate will be denied, granted, or
suspended.
(26) “Religious Belief” means any sincerely held belief, or information for, against, or
in conjunction with, any theistic, agnostic, or atheistic assumption, presumption or position, or
religious doctrine, dogma, or practice regardless of whether or not the belief or information is
endorsed by any other person or public or private entity.
(27) “Residence” means any living unit contained within any building or structure
that is occupied by any person as a dwelling consistent with the zoning laws of the City, together
with the lot or other real property on which the living unit is located. This does not include the
sidewalk, public street or public rights of way.
(28) “Responsible Person or Entity” means that person or Entity responsible to
provide the following to an Applicant, Registered Solicitor, and the Competent Individual in a
Residence to whom a Sale of Goods or Services is made or attempted to be made by means of a
Home Solicitation Sale:
A. maintaining a state sales tax number, a special events sales tax number,
computing the sales taxes owing from any Sale of Goods or Services,
paying the sales taxes, and filing any required returns or reports;
B. facilitating and responding to requests from consumers who desire to
cancel the sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or law; and
C. refunding any monies paid or reversing credit card charges to those
persons who timely rescind any sale pursuant to applicable contractual
rights or law.
(29) “Sale of Goods or Services” means the conduct and agreement of a Solicitor and
the Competent Individual in a Residence regarding a particular Good(s) or Service(s) that
entitles the consumer to rescind the same within three days under any applicable federal, state, or
local law.
(30) “Services” means those intangible goods or personal benefits offered, provided,
or sold to a Competent Individual of a Residence.
(31) “Soliciting” or “Solicit” or “Solicitation” means any of the following activities:
A. Seeking to obtain Sales or orders for the exchange of goods, wares,
merchandise or perishables of any kind, for any kind of remuneration or
consideration, regardless of whether advance payment is sought;
B. Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase
insurance, subscriptions to publications, or publications;
C. Seeking to obtain contributions of money or any other thing of value for
the benefit of any person or Entity;
D. Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for Goods or
Services.
E. Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a Residence for the
purpose of promoting or facilitating the receipt of information regarding
Religious Belief, Political Position, Charitable Conduct, or a Home
Solicitation Sale.
F. Other activities falling within the commonly accepted definition of
Soliciting, such as hawking or peddling.
(32) “Solicitor” or “Solicitors” means a person(s) engaged in Door-to-Door
Solicitation.
(33) “Submitted in Writing” means the information for an appeal of a denial or
suspension of a Certificate, submitted in any type of written statement to the City offices by
certified, registered, priority, overnight or delivery confirmation mail, facsimile, or hand
delivery.
(34) “Substantiated Report” means an oral, written, or electronic report:
A. That is submitted to and documented by the City;
B. By any of the following:
1. A Competent Individual who is willing to provide law enforcement
or other City employees with publicly available identification of
their name, address, and any other reliable means of contact;
2. City law enforcement or Licensing Officer; or
3. Any other regularly established law enforcement agency at any
level of government;
C. That provides any of the following information regarding a Registered
Solicitor:
1. Documented verification of a previously undisclosed Disqualifying
Status of a Registered Solicitor;
2. Probable cause that the Registered Solicitor has committed a
Disqualifying Status which has not yet been determined to be a
Disqualifying Status;
3. Documented, eye-witness accounts that the Registered Solicitor
has engaged in repeated patterns of behavior that demonstrates
failure by the Registered Solicitor to adhere to the requirements of
this Chapter; or
4. Probable cause that continued licensing of the Registered Solicitor
creates exigent circumstances that threaten the health, safety, or
welfare of any individuals or entities within the City.
(35) “Waiver” means the written form provided to Applicant by the City wherein
Applicant agrees that the City may obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on the
Applicant for licensing purposes under this Chapter, and which contains Applicant’s notarized
signature.
SECTION 23B - 4 Exemptions From Chapter.
The following are exempt from Registration under this Chapter:
(1) Persons specifically invited to a Residence by a Competent Individual prior to the
time of the person’s arrival at the Residence;
(2) Persons whose license, permit, certificate or registration with the State of Utah
permits them to engage in Door to Door Solicitation to offer Goods or Services to an occupant of
the Residence;
(3) Persons delivering Goods to a Residence pursuant to a previously made order, or
persons providing Services at a Residence pursuant to a previously made request by a Competent
Individual;
(4) Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against, or in conjunction
with, any Religious Belief, or Political Position regardless of whether Goods, Services, or any
other consideration is offered or given, with or without any form of commitment, contribution,
donation, pledge, or purchase; and
(5) Persons representing a Charitable Organization. The charitable exemption shall
apply to students Soliciting contributions to finance extracurricular social, athletic, artistic,
scientific or cultural programs, provided that the Solicitation has been approved in writing by the
school administration, and that such student Solicitors carry current picture student identification
from the educational institution for which they are Soliciting.
Those Persons exempt from Registration are not exempt from the duties and prohibitions
outlined in Sections SECTION 23B - 17, SECTION 23B - 18 and SECTION 23B - 19 while
Advocating or Soliciting.
SECTION 23B - 5 Solicitation Prohibited.
Unless otherwise authorized, permitted, or exempted pursuant to the terms and provisions
of this Chapter, the practice of being in and upon a private Residence within the City by
Solicitors, for the purpose of Home Solicitation Sales or to provide Goods or Services, is
prohibited and is punishable as set forth in this Chapter.
SECTION 23B - 6 Registration of Solicitors.
Unless otherwise exempt under this Chapter, all persons desiring to engage in Door-to-
Door Solicitation within the City, prior to doing so, shall submit a Completed Application to the
Licensing Officer and obtain a Certificate.
SECTION 32B - 7 Application Form.
The Licensing Officer shall provide a standard Application Form for use for the
Registration of Solicitors. Upon request to the Licensing Officer, or as otherwise provided, any
person or Entity may obtain in person, by mail, or facsimile, a copy of this Application Form.
Each Application Form shall require disclosure and reporting by the Applicant of the following
information, documentation, and fee:
(1) Review of Written Disclosures. An affirmation that the Applicant has received
and reviewed the disclosure information required by this Chapter.
(2) Contact Information.
A. Applicant’s true, correct and legal name, including any former names or
aliases used during the last ten (10) years;
B. Applicant’s telephone number, home address and mailing address, if
different;
C. If different from the Applicant, the name, address, and telephone number
of the Responsible Person or Entity; and
D. The address by which all notices to the Applicant required under this
Chapter are to be sent.
(3) Proof of Identity. An in-person verification by the Licensing Officer of the
Applicant’s true identity by use of any of the following which bear a photograph of said
Applicant:
A. A valid drivers license issued by any State;
B. A valid passport issued by the United States;
C. A valid identification card issued by any State;
D. A valid identification issued by a branch of the United States military.
Upon verification of identity, the original identification submitted to establish
Proof of Identity shall be returned to the Applicant.
(4) Proof of Registration with Department of Commerce. The Applicant shall
provide proof that either the Applicant, or the Responsible Person or Entity, has registered with
the Utah State Department of Commerce;
(5) Special Events Sales Tax Number. The Applicant shall provide a special events
sales tax number for either the Applicant, or for the Responsible Person or Entity for which the
Applicant will be soliciting;
(6) Marketing Information.
A. The Goods or Services offered by the Applicant, including any commonly
known, registered or trademarked names;
B. Whether the Applicant holds any other licenses, permits, registrations, or
other qualifications required by federal or state law to promote, provide,
or render advice regarding the offered Goods or Services.
(7) BCI Background Check. The Applicant shall provide:
A. An original or a copy of a BCI background check as defined in SECTION
23B - 3; and
B. A signed copy of a Waiver whereby Applicant agrees to allow the City to
obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on Applicant for
purposes of enforcement of this Chapter.
(8) Responses to Questions Regarding “Disqualifying Status.” The Applicant
shall be required to affirm or deny each of the following statements on the Application Form:
A. Has the Applicant been Criminally Convicted of: (I) felony homicide, (ii)
physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, (iii) the sale
or distribution of controlled substances, or (iv) sexual assault of any kind.
B. Are any criminal charges currently pending against the Applicant for: (I)
felony homicide, (ii) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a
minor, (iii) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or (iv) sexual
assault of any kind.
C. Has the Applicant been Criminally Convicted of a felony within the last
ten (10) years;
D. Has the Applicant been incarcerated in a federal or state prison within the
past five (5) years;
E. Has the Applicant been Criminally Convicted of a misdemeanor within
the past five (5) years involving a crime of: (I) moral turpitude, or (ii)
violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property.
F. Has a Final Civil Judgment been entered against the Applicant within the
last five (5) years indicating that: (I) the Applicant had either engaged in
fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or (ii) that a debt of the Applicant
was non-dischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 U.S.C. § 523(a)(2),
(a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19);
G. Is the Applicant currently on parole or probation to any court, penal
institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest or
subject to a tracking device;
H. Does the Applicant have an outstanding arrest warrant from any
jurisdiction; or
I. Is the Applicant currently subject to a protective order based on physical
or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
(9) Fee. The Applicant shall pay such fees as determined applicable by the City,
which shall not exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application and issuing the
Certificate and/or Identification Badge.
(10) Execution of Application. The Applicant shall execute the Application Form,
stating upon oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that based on the present knowledge
and belief of the Applicant, the information provided is complete, truthful and accurate.
SECTION 23B - 8 Written Disclosures.
The Application Form shall be accompanied by written disclosures notifying the
Applicant of the following:
(1) The Applicant’s submission of the Application authorizes the City to verify
information submitted with the Completed Application including:
A. the Applicant’s address;
B. the Applicant’s and/or Responsible Person or Entity’s state tax
identification and special use tax numbers, if any;
C. the validity of the Applicant’s Proof of Identity;
(2) The City may consult any publically available sources for information on the
Applicant, including but not limited, to databases for any outstanding warrants, protective orders,
or civil judgments.
(3) Establishing Proof of Identity is required before Registration is allowed;
(4) Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by Applicant with a
Completed Application;
(5) The Applicant must submit a BCI background check with a Completed
Application;
(6) To the extent permitted by State and/or federal law, the Applicant’s BCI
background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not available for public
inspection;
(7) The City will maintain copies of the Applicant’s Application Form, Proof of
Identity, and Identification Badge. These copies will become public records available for
inspection on demand at the City offices whether or not a Certificate is denied, granted, or
renewed.
(8) The criteria for Disqualifying Status, denial, or suspension of a Certificate under
the provisions of this Chapter.
(9) That a request for a temporary Certificate will be granted or denied the same
business day that a Completed Application is submitted.
SECTION 23B - 9 When Registration Begins.
The Licensing Officer shall not begin the Registration process unless the Applicant has
submitted a Completed Application. The original identification submitted to establish Proof of
Identity shall be returned after the Licensing Officer verifies the Applicant’s identity. A copy of
the identification may be retained by the Licensing Officer. If an original B.C.I. background
check is submitted by the Applicant, the Licensing Officer shall make a copy of the B.C.I. and
return the original to the Applicant.
SECTION 23B - 10 Issuance of Certificates.
The Licensing Officer shall review the Completed Application submitted by the
Applicant and issue a Certificate in accordance with the following:
(1) Temporary Certificate.
A. A temporary Certificate shall issue allowing the Applicant to immediately
begin Door-to-Door Solicitation upon the following conditions:
(I) Applicant’s submission of a Completed Application;
(ii) Applicant’s submission of the required fee;
(iii) Applicant establishes Proof of Identity;
(iv) the Applicant’s representations on the Application Form do not
affirmatively show a Disqualifying Status;
(v) the B.C.I. does not affirmatively show a Disqualifying Status; and
(vi) the Applicant has not previously been denied a Certificate by the
City, or had a Certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a
Disqualifying Status under this Chapter.
B. A temporary Certificate will automatically expire after twenty-five (25)
calendar days from issuance, or upon grant or denial of an annual
Certificate, whichever period is shorter.
(2) Annual Certificate. Within twenty-five (25) calendar days of the issuance of a
temporary Certificate the City shall:
A. Take any and all actions it deems appropriate to verify the truthfulness and
completeness of the information submitted by the Applicant, including,
but not limited to those disclosed with the Application Form.
B. Issue written notice to the Applicant and the Responsible Person or Entity,
if any, that the Applicant either:
(I) will be issued an annual Certificate, eligible for renewal one year
from the date of issuance of the temporary Certificate; or
(ii) will not be issued an Annual Certificate for reasons cited in
SECTION 23B - 14 of this Chapter.
(3) Renewal Certificate. An annual Certificate shall be valid for one year from the
date of issuance of the temporary Certificate and shall expire at midnight on the anniversary date
of issuance. Any annual Certificate that is not suspended, revoked, or expired may be renewed
upon the request of the Registered Solicitor and the submission of a new Completed Application
and payment of the Fee, unless any of the conditions for the denial, suspension or revocation of a
Certificate are present as set forth in SECTION 23B - 14, or a Disqualifying Status is present.
SECTION 23B - 11 Form of Certificate and Identification Badge.
(1) Certificate Form. Should the Licensing Officer determine that the Applicant is
entitled to a Certificate, the Licensing Officer shall issue a Certificate to the Applicant. The
Certificate shall list the name of the Registered Solicitor and the Responsible Person or Entity, if
any, and the date on which the Certificate expires. The Certificate shall be dated and signed by
the License Officer. The Certificate shall be carried by the Registered Solicitor at all times while
Soliciting in the City.
(2) Identification Badge. With both the temporary and annual Certificates, the City
shall issue each Registered Solicitor an Identification Badge that shall be worn prominently on
his or her person while Soliciting in the City. The Identification Badge shall bear the name of
the City and shall contain: (a) the name of the Registered Solicitor; (b) address and phone
number of the Registered Solicitor, or the name, address, and phone number of the Responsible
Person or Entity is provided; (c) a recent photograph of the Registered Solicitor; and (d) the date
on which the Certificate expires.
SECTION 23B - 12 Maintenance of Registry.
The Licensing Officer shall maintain and make available for public inspection a copy or
record of every Completed Application received and the Certificate or written denial issued by
the City. The Applicant’s BCI background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private
record not available for public inspection. The Licensing Officer may furnish to the head of the
City’s law enforcement agency a listing of all Applicants, those denied, and those issued a
Certificate.
SECTION 23B - 13 Non-Transferability of Certificates.
Certificates shall be issued only in the name of the Applicant and shall list the
Responsible Party or Entity, if any. The Certificate shall be non-transferable. A Registered
Solicitor desiring to facilitate or attempt to facilitate Home Solicitation Sales with different: (a)
Goods or Services; or (b) Responsible Person or Entity, from those designated in the originally
submitted Completed Application, shall submit a written change request to the Licensing
Officer. A new Certificate based on the amended information shall issue for the balance of time
remaining on the Solicitor’s previous Certificate before the amendment was filed. Before the
new Certificate is given to the Registered Solicitor, the Registered Solicitor shall obtain a revised
Identification Badge from the City, after payment of the Fee for the Identification Badge.
SECTION 23B - 14 Denial, Suspension or Revocation of a Certificate of Registration.
(1) Denial. Upon review, the Licensing Officer shall refuse to issue a Certificate to
an Applicant for any of the following reasons:
A. Denial of Temporary Certificate.
(I) the Application Form is not complete;
(ii) the Applicant fails to (1) establish Proof of Identity, (2) provide a
B.C.I. or (3) pay the Fees;
(iii) the Completed Application or B.C.I. indicates that the Applicant
has a Disqualifying Status; or
(iv) The Applicant has previously been denied a Certificate by the
City, or has had a Certificate revoked for grounds that still
constitute a Disqualifying Status under this chapter.
B. Denial of Annual Certificate.
(I) The information submitted by the Applicant at the time of the
granting of the temporary Certificate is found to be incomplete or
incorrect;
(ii) Since the submission of the Completed Application, the Applicant
is subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown Disqualifying
Status;
(iii) Failure to complete payment of the Fees;
(iv) Since the submission of the Application, the City has received a
Substantiated Report regarding the past or present conduct of the
Applicant;
(v) Since the submission of the Application, the City or other
governmental entity has either Criminally Convicted or obtained a
civil injunction against the Applicant for violating this Chapter or
similar Federal, State, or municipal laws in a manner rising to the
level of a Disqualifying Status; or
(vi) Since the submission of the Application, a Final Civil Judgment
has been entered against the Applicant indicating that: (I) the
Applicant had either engaged in fraud, or intentional
misrepresentation, or (ii) that a debt of the applicant was nondischargeable
in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 U.S.C. § 523(a)(2),
(a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
C. Denial of Annual Certificate Renewal.
(I) The information submitted by the Applicant when seeking renewal
of a Certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
(ii) Since the submission of the renewal Application, the Applicant is
subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown Disqualifying
Status;
(iii) Failure to complete payment of the Fees;
(iv) Since the submission of the Application or granting of a
Certificate, the City has received a Substantiated Report regarding
the past or present conduct of the Solicitor;
(v) The City or other governmental entity has either Criminally
Convicted or obtained a civil injunction against the Applicant for
violating this Chapter or similar Federal, State, or municipal laws
in a manner rising to the level of a Disqualifying Status; or
(vi) Since the submission of the Application, a Final Civil Judgment
has been entered against the Applicant indicating that: (I) the
Applicant had either engaged in fraud, or intentional
misrepresentation, or (ii) that a debt of the applicant was nondischargeable
in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 U.S.C. § 523(a)(2),
(a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
(2) Suspension or Revocation. The City shall either suspend or revoke a Certificate
when any of the reasons warranting the denial of a Certificate occurs.
(3) Notice of Denial or Suspension. Upon determination of the Licensing Officer to
deny an Applicant’s Completed Application or to suspend a Registered Solicitor’s Certificate,
the City shall cause written notice to be sent to the Applicant or Registered Solicitor by the
method indicated in the Completed Application. The Notice shall specify the grounds for the
denial or suspension, the documentation or information the City relied on to make the decision,
the availability of the documentation for review by Applicant upon one (1) business day notice
to the City, and the date upon which the denial or suspension of the Certificate shall take effect.
It shall further state that the Applicant or Registered Solicitor shall have ten (10) business days
from the receipt of the notice of denial or suspension to appeal the same. The denial or
suspension of the Certificate shall be effective no sooner than two (2) calendar days from the
date the notice is sent, unless that suspension is because of exigent circumstances outlined in
Section 23B - 3(34)(C)(4), in which case, the suspension is effective immediately. The denial or
suspension shall remain effective unless and until the order is rescinded, overturned on appeal, or
determined by a court to be contrary to equity or law. Failure to appeal the suspension of a
Certificate automatically results in its revocation.
SECTION 23B - 15 Appeal.
An Applicant or Registered Solicitor whose Certificate has been denied or suspended
shall have the right to appeal to the City Council or its designee. Any appeal must be submitted
by either the Applicant, the Responsible Person or Entity, or legal counsel for either who: (a)
documents the relationship with the Applicant or Responsible Person or Entity; or (b) is licensed
or authorized by the State of Utah to do so, and makes the assertion of an agency relationship.
The following procedures and requirements shall apply:
(1) Any appeal must be Submitted in Writing to the City Recorder with a copy to the
License Officer within ten (10) business days of the decision from which the appeal is
taken. Such appeal shall describe in detail the nature of the appeal, the action
complained of and the grounds for appeal.
(2) Upon request of the Applicant or Registered Solicitor, within one business day,
the City will make available any information upon which it relied in making the
determination to either deny or suspend the Certificate.
(3) The Appeals Officer shall review, de novo, all written information submitted by
the Applicant or Registered Solicitor to the Licensing Officer, any additional information
relied upon by the Licensing Officer as the basis for denial, suspension or revocation, and
any additional information supplied by the City, Applicant or Registered Solicitor. Any
additional information submitted by any party to the appeal to the Appeals Officer shall
be simultaneously submitted to the opposing party. If desired, any party shall have three
(3) business days to submit rebuttal documentation to the Appeals Officer regarding the
additional information submitted by the opposing party.
(4) The Appeals Officer will render a decision no later than fifteen (15) calendar days
from the date the appeal was taken, unless an extension of time is agreed upon by the
parties. In the event that any party to the appeal submits rebuttal information as allowed
in SECTION 23B - 15(3), the fifteen (15) calendar days shall be extended to include the
additional three (3) days for rebuttal.
A. The denial or suspension of the Certificate shall be reversed by the
Appeals Officer if upon review of the written appeal and information
submitted, the Appeals Officer finds that the Licensing Officer made a
material mistake of law or fact in denying or suspending the Applicant or
Registered Solicitor’s Certificate.
B. If the written appeal and information submitted indicates that the
Licensing Officer properly denied or suspended the certificate of the
Applicant or Registered Solicitor, the denial or suspension of the
Certificate shall be affirmed and constitute a determination that the
suspended Certificate is revoked.
C. The decision of the Appeals Officer shall be delivered to the Applicant or
Registered Solicitor by the means designated in the completed
Application, or as otherwise agreed upon when the Appeal was filed.
(5) After the ruling of the Appeals Officer, the Applicant or Solicitor is deemed to
have exhausted all administrative remedies with the City.
(6) Nothing herein shall impede or interfere with the Applicant’s, Solicitor’s, or
City’s right to seek relief in a court of competent jurisdiction.
SECTION 23B - 16 Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited.
(1) No Solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or fraudulent statement
in the course of Soliciting.
(2) A Solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during face-to-face
Solicitation; (I) the name of the Solicitor; (ii) the name and address of the entity with whom the
Solicitor is associated; and (iii) the purpose of the Solicitor's contact with the person and/or
Competent Individual. This requirement may be satisfied through the use of the Badge and an
informational flyer.
(3) No Solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other than his or her
true and correct name.
(4) No Solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the granting of a
Certificate of Registration implies any endorsement by the City of the Solicitor's Goods or
Services or of the individual Solicitor.
SECTION 23B - 17 "No Solicitation" Notice.
(1) Any occupant of a Residence may give notice of a desire to refuse Solicitors by
displaying a “No Solicitation” sign which shall be posted on or near the main entrance door or
on or near the property line adjacent to the sidewalk leading to the Residence.
(2) The display of such sign or placard shall be deemed to constitute notice to any
Solicitor that the inhabitant of the Residence does not desire to receive and/or does not invite
Solicitors.
(3) It shall be the responsibility of the Solicitor to check each Residence for the
presence of any such Notice.
(4) The provisions of this Section shall apply also to Solicitors who are exempt from
Registration pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter.
SECTION 23B - 18 Duties of Solicitors.
(1) Every person Soliciting or Advocating shall check each Residence for any "No
Soliciting" sign or placard or any other notice or sign notifying a solicitor not to solicit on the
premises, such as, but not limited to, "No Solicitation" signs. If such sign or placard is posted
such Solicitor shall desist from any efforts to solicit at the Residence or dwelling and shall
immediately depart from such property. Possession of a Certificate of Registration does not in
any way relieve any solicitor of this duty.
(2) It is a violation of this Chapter for any person Soliciting or Advocating to knock
on the door, ring the doorbell, or in any other manner attempt to attract the attention of an
occupant of a Residence that bears a “No Solicitation” sign or similar sign or placard for the
purpose of engaging in or attempting to engage in Advocating, a Home Solicitation Sale, Doorto-
Door Soliciting, or Soliciting.
(3) It is a violation of this Chapter for any Solicitor through ruse, deception, or
fraudulent concealment of a purpose to Solicit, to take action calculated to secure an audience
with an occupant at a Residence.
(4) Any Solicitor who is at any time asked by an occupant of a Residence or dwelling
to leave shall immediately and peacefully depart.
(5) The Solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical contact with,
or touch another person without the person’s consent;
(6) The Solicitor shall not follow a person into a Residence without their explicit
consent;
(7) The Solicitor shall not continue repeated Soliciting after a person and/or
Competent Individual has communicated clearly and unequivocally their lack of interest in the
subject, Goods or Services of the Solicitor;
(8) The Solicitor shall not use obscene language or gestures.
SECTION 23B - 19 Time of Day Restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to Solicit at a Residence
before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m Mountain Time, unless the Solicitor has express prior
permission from the resident to do so.
SECTION 23B - 20 Buyer's Right to Cancel.
In any Home Solicitation Sale, unless the buyer requests the Solicitor to provide Goods
or Services without delay in an emergency, the seller or Solicitor shall present to the buyer and
obtain buyer's signature to a written statement which informs the buyer of the right to cancel
within the third business day after signing an agreement to purchase. Such notice of "Buyer's
right to cancel" shall be in the form required by § 70C-5-103, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, or a
current version thereof or any State or Federal law modifying or amending such provision.
SECTION 23B - 21 Penalties. Any person who violates any term or provision of this Chapter
shall be guilty of a Class B Misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed
$1,000.00 and/or a jail sentence of not to exceed six (6) months.
CHAPTER 24
MOBILE HOME/TRAILER COURT ORDINANCE
REPEALED
11/98
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE I - NUISANCES
Section 25-1 Purpose
Section 25-2 Definitions
Section 25-3 Nuisance - Definition
Section 25-4 Exceptions
Section 25-5 Responsibility for Nuisances
Section 25-6 Nuisance Abatement - Ad ministration
Section 25-7 Finding of Nuisance/Written Notice
Section 25-8 Remedies to Abate a Nuisance
Section 25-9 Appeals
ARTICLE II - WEEDS AND OFFENSIVE ACCUMULATIONS
Section 25-10 Inspection and Notice
Section 25-11 Compliance with the Notice
Section 25-12 Abatement by City
Section 25-13 Appeals
ARTICLE III - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 25-14 Severability Clause
Section 25-15 Enforcement of Nuisances found elsewhere in City
Ordinance in accordance with this chapter
Section 25-16 Repealing specific provisions of existing City Ordinance
Ch. 25 Pg. 1
CHAPTER 25
HEALTH AND SANITATION
ARTICLE 1. NUISANCES
Section 25-1 Purpose
Section 25-2 Definitions
Section 25-3 Nuisance - Definition
Section 25-4 Exceptions
Section 25-5 Responsibility for Nuisances
Section 25-6 Nuisance Abatement - Administration
Section 25-7 Finding of Nuisance/Written Notice
Section 25-8 Remedies to Abate a Nuisance
Section 25-9 Appeals
SECTION 25-1. Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide a means for the City and individuals to
identify nuisances within the City and to provide a means for correcting or abating the nuisances.
The City needs the ability to abate nuisances in order to protect the health and safety of the
public, to foster neighborhood stability, to preserve the appearance, character and beauty of
neighborhoods, to encourage community pride, to preserve the value of property, and to protect
the general welfare of the City and its citizens, businesses and visitors.
SECTION 25 -2. Definitions.
“Abate” means to repair, replace, remove, destroy, correct or otherwise remedy a
condition which constitutes a nuisance by such means, in such a manner and to such an extent as
the Code Enforcement Officer determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety
and welfare of the community.
“Completion Date” means the date by which the Responsible Person must abate a
nuisance. The Completion Date is set by the Code Enforcement Officer.
“Developed Property” means property which has been altered from its natural state by
the construction or erection of materials located upon the land which, per city ordinance, requires
a building permit.
“Dwelling Unit” One or more rooms providing complete living facilities for one family,
including equipment for cooking or provisions for the same, and including room or rooms for
living, sleeping and eating.
Ch. 25 Pg. 2
“Emergency” means a situation, which, in the opinion of the Code Enforcement Officer,
requires immediate action to prevent or eliminate an immediate threat to the health or safety of a
person or property.
“Graffiti” means any form of unauthorized printing, writing, spraying, scratching,
affixing, etching, or inscribing on the property of another regardless of the content or the nature
of the material used in the commission of the act.
“Hearing Officer” means the person(s) designated to hear appeals pursuant to this
ordinance. The Hearing Officer shall be the Cedar City Manager or his or her designee. The
designee need not be a City employee.
“Code Enforcement Officer” means a code enforcement officer, community service
officer, or police officer(s) hired by the City to enforce this ordinance.
“Owner” means any person who, alone or with others, has title or interest in any
building or premises, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof. For the purpose
of giving notice, the term Owner also includes any person in physical possession of the building
or premises.
“Premises” means a plot of ground, whether occupied or not.
“Property” means a building or structure, or the premises on which the building or
structure is located, or undeveloped land.
“Public Place” means an area generally visible to public view and includes alleys,
bridges, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks, streets, and buildings open to the
general public, including those that serve food or drink or provide entertainment, and the
doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
“Responsible Person” means the person(s) responsible for correcting or abating a
nuisance pursuant to this ordinance. The Responsible Person includes the property owner of
record according to the records of the county recorder, and any person who causes or permits a
nuisance to occur or remain upon property in the City, and includes but is not limited to the
owner(s), lessor(s), lessee(s), or other person(s) entitled to control, use and/or occupy property
where a nuisance occurs. In cases where there is more than one Responsible Persons, the City
may proceed against one, some or all of them.
SECTION 25-3. Nuisance - Definition
This section defines nuisance by providing five general definitions of what constitutes a
nuisance (subsection A), and then providing specific examples of situations, conduct or activities
that constitute nuisances (subsection B). The purpose of the general definitions is to allow the
Ch. 25 Pg. 3
City to classify an offending situation, conduct or activity as a nuisance, even though the
situation, conduct or activity may not be listed as a nuisance in the specific examples. The first
three general definitions are taken directly from Utah State law. The purpose of listing the
specific examples is to identify some of the specific situations, conduct and activities that the
City intends to abate as nuisances.
A. General Definitions of Nuisance. Any activity that meets any one or more of the
five definitions set forth below shall constitute a nuisance if it occurs within Cedar City:
1. Nuisance as Defined in U.C.A. 78B-6-1101(1). Anything which is injurious
to health, indecent, offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of
property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
2. Nuisance as Defined in U.C.A. 76-10-801. Any item, thing, manner, or
condition whatsoever that is dangerous to human life or health or renders soil, air,
water, or food impure or unwholesome.
3. Nuisance as Defined in U.C.A. 76-10-803. Unlawfully doing any act or
omitting to perform any duty, which act or omission:
a. annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety
of three or more persons;
b. offends public decency;
c. unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or
renders dangerous for passage, any lake, stream, canal, or basin, or
any public park, square, street, or highway; or
d. in any way renders three or more persons insecure in life or the use
of property.
An act which affects three or more persons in any of the ways specified in this subsection
is still a nuisance regardless of the extent to which the annoyance or damage inflicted to
individuals is unequal.
4. Nuisance. A condition which:
a. wrongfully annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose,
health or safety of others; or
b. unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or render
dangerous for passage, any public park, square, street, sidewalk or
highway, or any other public place; or
c. in any way renders other persons insecure in life, or in the use of
property, and which affects the rights of an entire community or
neighborhood, although the extent of the damage may be unequal.
Ch. 25 Pg. 4
5. Specific Nuisances Listed in Subsection B. Anything specifically listed as a
nuisance in subsection (B) below.
B. Nuisances Enumerated. Every situation, conduct or activity listed below constitutes
a nuisance and may be abated pursuant to this ordinance. The listed examples are not
exhaustive; a situation, conduct or activity not listed below, but coming within one of the general
definitions of nuisance listed above, shall also constitute a nuisance. The first six listed
nuisances are also listed as nuisances pursuant to U.C.A. 78-38-9
1. Drug Houses. Every building or premises where the unlawful sale,
manufacture, service, storage, distribution, dispensing, or acquisition of
any controlled substance, precursor, or analog specified in Title 57,
Chapter 37 of the Utah Code (Utah Controlled Substances Act) occurs.
2. Gambling. Every building or premises where gambling is permitted to be
played, conducted, or dealt upon as prohibited in Title 76, Chapter 10, Part
11 of the Utah Code (Gambling) which creates the conditions of a
nuisance as defined in Section 25-3-(A) (1) of this ordinance.
3. Gangs. Every building or premises wherein criminal activity is
committed in concert with two or more persons as provided in Section 76-
3-203.1 of the Utah Code.
4. Party Houses. Every building or premises where parties occur twice or
more per month which create the conditions of a nuisance as defined in
Section 25-3 (A) (1) of this ordinance. Some of the factors the City may
examine in determining whether a party house exists include:
a. An increase in the number of emergency response calls due to
parties being held;
b. Any pattern of activity that suggests that parties, creating a
nuisance as defined by the ordinance, are taking place;
c. Any pattern of activity which diminishes the quiet enjoyment of
those buildings and premises around the alleged party house or
which cause the immediate neighbors to fear for their safety due to
the party activity.
5. Prostitution. Every building or premises where prostitution or the
promotion of prostitution is regularly carried on by one or more persons as
provided in Title 76, Chapter 10, part 13 (Prostitution) of the Utah Code.
6. Weapons. Every building or premises where a violation of Title 76,
Chapter 10, Part 5 (Weapons) of the Utah Code occurs on the premises.
Ch. 25 Pg. 5
7. Unsafe Condition. A condition that unreasonably or unlawfully affects
the health or safety of one or more persons.
8. Fire Hazard. Defined as a condition which encourages a fire to start or
increases the intensity or severity of a fire.
9. Noxious Emanations. Emanation of noxious or unreasonable odors,
fumes, gas, smoke, soot or cinders.
10. Noxious Weeds. Noxious weeds located on vacant lots or other property,
along public sidewalks or the outer edge or any public street, or weeds in
any other location which constitute a fire hazard. Noxious Weeds also
includes all weeds designated under R68-9-2 of the Utah Administrative
Code. As applied only to subdivided lots with vertical infrastructure, and
developed property, the definition of noxious weeds shall also include all
common weeds and wild grasses exceeding twelve (12) inches in height.
11. Refuse. Keeping or storing of any refuse or waste in a manner which
interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of nearby property.
12. Stagnant Water. Polluted or stagnant water which constitutes an
unhealthy or unsafe condition.
13. Improper Accumulations. Accumulation of soil, litter, debris plant,
trimmings, or trash, visible from the street or an adjoining property.
Improper accumulations that occur on an undeveloped lot is considered a
nuisance.
14. Accumulation of Junk. Accumulation of used or damaged lumber; junk;
salvage materials; abandoned, discarded or unused furniture; stoves, sinks,
toilets, cabinets, or fixtures or equipment stored so as to be visible from a
public street, alley or adjoining property. However, nothing herein shall
preclude the placement of stacked firewood for personal non-commercial
use on the premises. Accumulation of junk that occurs on an undeveloped
lot is considered a nuisance.
15. Attractive Nuisances. Any attractive nuisance dangerous to children and
other persons including, but not limited to, abandoned foundations or
excavations, or improperly maintained or secured pools.
16. Vegetation. Dead, decayed, diseased, or hazardous trees, weeds, hedges,
and overgrown or uncultivated vegetation which is in a hazardous
Ch. 25 Pg. 6
condition, is an obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or which is
likely to harbor rats, vermin or other pests.
17. Improper Storage. The keeping, storing, depositing or accumulating on
the premises longer than sixty (60) days, or in the public right-of-way
longer than forty-eight (48) hours, any dirt, sand, gravel, concrete, or other
similar materials, or maintenance of such material. Storage of any
material on sidewalks is prohibited. Any materials left in the public right
of way shall be clearly marked with appropriate safety measures as
determined by the superintendent of streets.
18. Garbage Can. The leaving of any city, commercial, or privately owned
garbage can or refuse container in the street, other than on collection day,
for more than twenty-four (24) hours after the collection day.
A. Exception: Commercial refuse containers may be left on the
public streets as long as the party who is the primary user
of the container first obtains a thirty (30) day permit from
the streets supervisor, pays the applicable fee, and complies
with necessary and appropriate restrictions as to placement
of the container and posting of safety measures.
19. Construction Equipment.
a. Construction Equipment of any type or description parked or
stored on property when it is readily visible from the ground level
of a public street, alley, or adjoining property, except while
excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an
active building permit are in progress on the subject property or an
adjoining property or where the property is zoned for the storage of
construction equipment and/or machinery.
b. Construction equipment or machinery shall not be considered a
nuisance when stored in a zone not zoned for such storage and
covered by a tarp or similar covering, stored in a shed, garage, or
stored behind a site obscuring fence.
c. Construction equipment or machinery does not include tools and
yard equipment used to maintain personal property and home no
larger than a riding lawn mower or a four-wheeler.
20. Improper Sign. Improper maintenance or a sign; or signs which advertise
a business that is no longer extant on the property.
Ch. 25 Pg. 7
21. Improper Parking or Storage.
a. Parking or storage of inoperative, unregistered, abandoned,
wrecked, or dismantled vehicles, boats, trailers, or vehicle parts,
including recreational vehicles on a premises, or in the public
right-of-way. Storage or parking that is specifically allowed by
City Zoning Ordinance shall not be considered a nuisance.
b. Parking or storage of registered vehicle, trailers or boats in
violation of City Ordinance.
c. It shall not be considered a nuisance to park or store inoperative,
unregistered, wrecked or dismantled vehicles, boats, trailers, or
vehicle parts, including recreational vehicles, on private property
so long as said inoperative, unregistered, wrecked, or dismantled
vehicles, boats, trailers, or vehicle parts, including recreational
vehicles, are covered by a tarp or similar covering, stored in the
garage or shed, or stored behind a site obscuring fence. All of the
above items are those that are being kept temporarily for parts,
repairs, reconstruction, etc. And have a use in an ongoing project.
22. Hazardous Conditions. Any wall, sign, fence, gate, hedge, or structure
maintained in such condition of deterioration or disrepair as to constitute a
hazard to persons or property.
23. Graffiti. Graffiti which remains on the exterior of any building, fence,
sign, or other structure and is visible from a public street.
24. Improper Maintenance. Maintenance of buildings and/or structures in
such condition as to be deemed defective or in a condition of deterioration
or disrepair including, but not limited to:
a. Any building or structure which is unfit for human habitation, or
which is an unreasonable hazard to the health of people residing in
the vicinity thereof, or which presents an unreasonable fire hazard
in the vicinity where it is located; or
b. Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered,
enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the
provisions of City ordinances, or any use of land, buildings, or
premises in violation of City ordinances; or
c. Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed, or left in an
unreasonable state of partial construction for a period of six (6)
months or longer. An unreasonable state of partial construction is
Ch. 25 Pg. 8
defined as any unfinished building or structure where the
appearance or condition of the building or structure does not meet
the requirements for finished buildings or structures as required by
applicable City ordinances or building codes. The building or
structure shall not be considered to be a nuisance if it is under
active construction; or
d. Buildings having dry rot, warping, termite infestation, decay,
excessive cracking, peeling, or chalking, as to render the building
unsightly and/or in a state of disrepair; or
e. Buildings with missing doors and/or windows containing broken
glass and/or no glass at all where the window is of a type which
normally contains glass; or
f. Building exteriors, walls, fences, gates, driveways, sidewalks,
walkways, signs or ornamentation, or alleys maintained in such
condition as to render them unsightly and/or in a state of disrepair;
or
g. Buildings or conditions that violate any building, electrical,
plumbing, fire, housing or other code adopted by the City.
25. City Code Nuisances. Any violation of a Cedar City Code section that
expressly declares a specific situation, conduct or activity to be a nuisance.
26. Alcohol. Every property or premises not licensed under applicable State
law or City ordinance where any intoxicating liquors or alcohol are kept
for unlawful use, sale or distribution.
27. Inappropriate Conduct. Every property or premises where there exists
an environment which causes, encourages or allows individuals or groups
of individuals to commit one or more of the following acts on the
property, premises or adjacent public place, including but not limited to
a. Illegally using or possessing any controlled substance, precursor,
analog or drug paraphernalia.
b. Illegally consuming intoxicating liquor or alcohol;
c. Public urinating or defecating;
d. By physical action, intentionally causing or attempting to cause
another person to reasonably fear imminent bodily injury or the
commission of a criminal act upon their person or upon property in
their immediate possession;
e. Engaging in acts of violence, including fighting amongst
themselves;
f. Discharging a firearm or explosive in violation of City ordinance
or State law;
g. Creating unreasonable noise which disturbs others;
Ch. 25 Pg. 9
h. Intentionally obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or
i. Soliciting acts of prostitution.
28. Dangerous Conditions. Any fence, wall, shed, deck, house, garage,
building, structure on any part of any of the aforesaid; or any tree, pole,
smokestack; or any excavation, hole, pit, basement, cellar, sidewalk,
subspace, dock, or loading dock; or any lot, land, yard premises or
location which in its entirety, or in any part thereof, by reason of the
condition in which the same is found or permitted to be or remain, shall or
may endanger the health, safety, life, limb or property, or cause any hurt,
harm inconvenience, discomfort, damage, or injury to any one or more
individuals in the City, in any one or more of the following particulars:
a. By reason of being a menace, threat and/or hazard to the general
health and safety of the community.
b. By reason of being a fire hazard.
c. By reason of being unsafe for occupancy, or use on, in, upon,
about or around the aforesaid property.
d. By reason of lack of sufficient or adequate maintenance of the
property, and/or being vacant, any of which depreciates the
enjoyment and use of the property in the immediate vicinity to
such an extent that it is harmful to the community in which such
property is situated or such condition exists
29. Parking on Landscaping. Parking in an area required to be landscaped
by City ordinance.
30. Required Landscaping. Failure to install or maintain landscaping
required by City ordinance.
SECTION 25-4. Exceptions
No act which is done or maintained under the express authority of a statute, ordinance or
court ruling shall be declared a nuisance.
SECTION 25-5. Responsibility for Nuisances
The Responsible Person(s) is responsible for abating nuisances pursuant to this
ordinance. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or occupant, who creates, aids in creating, or
contributes to a nuisance, or who supports, continues, or retains a nuisance, is responsible for the
nuisance and is therefore a Responsible Person pursuant to this ordinance. Every successive
owner or tenant of a property or premises who fails to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the
use of such property or premises caused by a former owner or tenant is responsible therefore in
the same manner as the one who first created it.
Ch. 25 Pg. 10
SECTION 25-6. Nuisance Abatement - Administration
This ordinance shall be administered by the Police Department. In case of nuisances
involving dangerous buildings or violations of codes typically administered and enforced by the
Building Department, this ordinance may also be administered and enforced by the Building
Department.
SECTION 25-7. Finding of Nuisance/Written Notice
A. Finding of Nuisance. If a Code Enforcement Officer has probable cause to believe a
nuisance exists, the Code Enforcement Officer may attempt to have the Responsible Person abate
the nuisance.
B. Written Notice. Once a Code Enforcement Officer has probable cause to find that a
nuisance exits, the Code Enforcement Officer must serve written notice of the nuisance finding
to the Responsible Person. The written notice may be served in person or by mail to the
Responsible Person as defined by this ordinance.
1. The written notice shall:
a. identify the Responsible Person according to the records of the county
recorder;
b. describe the property;
c. describe the nuisance contained on the property; and
d. request the Responsible Person to abate the nuisance within 14 days of
notice.
SECTION 25-8. Remedies to Abate a Nuisance
This section applies whenever the Code Enforcement Officer determines that a nuisance
exists. The Code Enforcement Officer may pursue any remedy or combination of remedies
available pursuant to this ordinance, State law or common law in order to abate the nuisance.
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit the City from engaging in its standard
prosecution practices. Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted to prevent the City from
enforcing applicable City ordinances, building codes, or the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
Code without first treating the offending conduct, situation or activity as a nuisance pursuant to
this ordinance.
A. Voluntary Correction. Before taking other steps to abate the nuisance, the Code
Enforcement Officer may make a reasonable attempt to secure voluntary
correction or abatement of the nuisance by:
1. Contacting the Responsible Person, where possible;
2. Explaining the nuisance;
Ch. 25 Pg. 11
3. Requesting the Responsible Person to abate the nuisance; by an agreed
upon completion date. The completion date shall be no less than ten (10)
days from the day on which the written notice is delivered in person or
post-marked, or offer to have the City abate the nuisance at the
Responsible Person’s expense as outlined in Section 25-8(C); and
4. Agree to terms. The responsible person and the officer may agree as to
what actions must be taken to abate the nuisance. Failure to abide by the
agreement can result in further action being taken, as outlined in this
Chapter.
If the Responsible Person has shown due diligence and/or substantial
progress in correcting or abating the nuisance, but unforeseen circumstances
render abatement under the agreed to terms unattainable, the Code Enforcement
Officer, with consent of their Sergeant, may give the Responsible Person seven
(7) additional days to abate the nuisance.
B. Criminal Citation. When the Code Enforcement Officer has probable cause to
believe a nuisance exists, they may issue a criminal citation to the Responsible
Person. The Code Enforcement Officer may issue a criminal citation without
having attempted to secure voluntary correction as provided in Section 25-8(A).
1. When a criminal action is pursued, any restitution ordered by the court on
behalf of the City is to be collected and received by the City and deposited into
the Nuisance Abatement account whereby the City may access, and use said funds
to help pay for the costs associated to abate nuisances.
C. Abatement by the City.
1. The City may abate a nuisance when:
a. The Responsible Person gives consent for the City to enter the
subject property and abate the nuisance; or
b. Whenever a nuisance is occurring which constitutes an emergency
as defined in Section 25-2, the City may summarily and without
prior notice abate the condition. Notice of such abatement,
including the reason for it, shall be given to the Responsible Person
as soon as reasonably possible either before or after the abatement.
2. Using any lawful means, the City may enter upon the subject property and
may remove or correct the condition which is subject to abatement. The
City may seek, but is not required to seek, such judicial process as it
deems necessary to affect the removal or correction of such condition.
Ch. 25 Pg. 12
3. During an abatement proceeding, any personal property constituting a
nuisance, as defined by this Article, may be confiscated as part of the
abatement process. Any property that has been confiscated by the City as
part of an abatement will be held pending the resolution of the nuisance.
The owner of the abated property may recover the property upon showing
that the nuisance has been corrected or that substantial efforts, as
determined by the Code Enforcement Officer in collaboration with the
Cedar City Policy Department, have been made to correct the nuisance.
The property owner shall pay the cost of storage of the property. If, after
90 days of the property being confiscated, the property owner fails to
claim the confiscated property, after complying with the requirements of
Section 77-24a-5 U.C.A., the City may dispose of the property, to include
sale at auction, disposal, etc. and seek to collect the cost of storage from
the property owner and any other remedies as provided by law.
4. The cost, including incidental expenses, of correcting or abating the
nuisance shall be billed to the responsible person and/or the owner, lessor,
tenant, or other person entitled to control, use and/or occupancy of the
property and shall become due and payable to the City within thirty (30)
days of actual receipt of the bill, or thirty (30) of the date of mailing if the
bill is mailed. The term incidental expenses includes but is not limited to:
a. Personnel costs, both direct and indirect, including attorney’s fees
and costs;
b. Costs incurred in documented violation;
c. Hauling, storage and disposal expenses;
d. Actual expenses and costs for the City in preparing notices,
specifications and contracts, and in accomplishing and contracting
and inspecting the work; and
e. The cost of any required printing and mailing.
5. Lien for Costs. If the Responsible Person fails to pay any costs and
expenses related to the nuisance abatement when due, the City may record
a lien on the property or premises for the full amount of the unpaid costs
and expenses.
6. Costs Included in Tax Notice. As authorized by Utah State Code Title 10
Chapter 11, if the Responsible Person fails to pay any costs and expenses
related to the nuisance abatement, the City may request the County
Ch. 25 Pg. 13
Treasurer to enter this amount on the assessment and tax rolls of the
County.
D. Civil Actions. Either the City or any private person directly affected by a
nuisance may bring a civil action to abate or enjoin the nuisance, or for damages
for causing or maintaining the nuisance (including the cost, if any, of cleaning the
subject property). The civil action may be brought pursuant to this ordinance or
pursuant to State law.
E. Abatement by Eviction. Whenever there is reason to believe that a nuisance
under Section 25-3 (B) (1 - 6) is kept, maintained, or exists in the City, the City
Attorney or any citizen(s) residing in the City, or any person or entity doing
business in the City, in his or their own names, may maintain an action in a court
of competent jurisdiction to abate the nuisance and obtain an order for the
automatic eviction of the tenant of the property harboring the nuisance. The
eviction shall take place as specified in Utah law.
F. Non-exclusive Remedies. The City may take any or all of the above-mentioned
remedies (administrative, civil or criminal) to abate a nuisance and/or to punish
any person or entity that creates, causes or allows a nuisance to exist. The
abatement of a nuisance does not prejudice the right of the City or any person to
recover damages or penalties for its past existence.
SECTION 25-9 Appeals.
A. Grounds. Any person receiving written notice of a nuisance may appeal the
notice to the Hearing Officer. Only the following issues may be appealed to the
Hearing Officer.
1. The person identified in the written notice as the Responsible Person, is
not the Responsible Person as defined by this ordinance.
2. The condition described is not a nuisance as defined by this ordinance.
3. The time period given to abate the nuisance is unreasonable.
4. The Code Enforcement Officer refused to approve a corrective action that
met the agreed upon terms.
5. The Responsible Person claims that the requirement(s) of the nuisance
finding violates his/her constitutional rights.
Ch. 25 Pg. 14
B. Filing.
1. The person desiring to appeal the finding of a nuisance must file a notice
of appeal at the City’s Police Department within ten (10) days of being
served with the written notice.
2. The notice of appeal shall clearly and concisely set forth all the reasons for
the appeal. The Hearing Officer shall examine the notice of appeal to
determine whether a valid appeal has been stated. If the appellant has not
stated a valid cause for appeal as set forth in Section 25-9(A), or if the
appellant has failed to show by a preponderance of the evidence, that
he/she has an appealable issue, the appeal shall be denied and no hearing
shall be held.
3. If the appellant has filed an appeal, the filing of such appeal will not
prevent law enforcement officers from responding to the property on
reports of new nuisance violations.
C. Hearing. The hearing before the Hearing Officer shall be informal according to
rules and procedures established by the Hearing Officer. The appellant may, but
is not required to, bring an attorney or other representative to assist him or her.
The appellant and the Code Enforcement Officer may each call witnesses at the
hearing. The Hearing Officer may, with or without the parties present, visit the
site of the alleged nuisance. If the Hearing Officer allows the parties at the site
visit, both parties must be given the opportunity to be present. The Hearing
Officer shall schedule the hearing within thirty (30) days of when the notice of
appeal is filed with the City. The City Attorney, or his designee, shall be present
for the hearing and act as legal adviser for the Hearing Officer.
D. Burden of Proof.
1. In appellant’s notice of appeal, the appellant shall have the initial burden
of proof to demonstrate by a preponderance of the evidence that he/she has
stated a legitimate ground for an appeal based upon reasons as set forth in
Section 25-9(A).
2. If the appellant has timely filed his/her appeal and a hearing has been
scheduled, the burden then shifts to the City to show by a preponderance
of the evidence that a nuisance does exist.
Ch. 25 Pg. 15
E. Order. The Hearing Officer shall issue a written Order to the appellant and the
City notifying them of his/her decision. The Order shall include the Hearing
Officer’s findings of fact and ultimate decision. The Hearing Officer shall mail a
copy of the Order to the appellant and the City within five (5) working days of the
close of the hearing.
F. Appeal to District Court. Either the City or the appellant may appeal the
Hearing Officer’s Order by filing a petition for review of the Order. The petition
must be filed in District Court within thirty (30) calendar days from the date the
Hearing Officer’s Order was mailed to the appellant. In the petition, the plaintiff
may only allege that the Hearing Officer’s order was arbitrary, capricious or
illegal. The Hearing Officer shall transmit to the reviewing court the record of its
proceedings, including any minutes, findings, orders and, if available a true and
correct transcript of its proceedings. If, in the opinion of the District Court, there
is a sufficient record to review the Hearing Officer’s Order, the Court’s review is
limited to the record provided by the Hearing Officer. The District Court may not
accept or consider any evidence outside of the Hearing Officer’s record unless the
evidence was offered to the Hearing Officer and the Court determines that it was
improperly excluded by the Hearing Officer. If, in the opinion of the District
Court, there is not a sufficient record to review the Hearing Officer’s Order, the
Court may call witnesses and take evidence. No petition or appeal may be filed in
District Court unless the Responsible Person first appeals to the Hearing Officer
pursuant to the terms set forth in this ordinance
ARTICLE II. WEEDS AND OFFENSIVE ACCUMULATIONS
Section 25-10 Inspection and Notice
Section 25-11 Compliance with the Notice
Section 25-12 Abatement by City
Section 25-13 Appeals
SECTION 25-10 Inspection and Notice
Developed or undeveloped lots which have weeds, grass or other growth which constitute
an existing or potential fire hazard shall be abated by the owner of the property. Weed abatement
compliance shall be accomplished by discing, plowing or mowing weeds within 4 inches of the
ground. The City shall survey properties within the City and identify those needing abatement and
then serve notice in writing upon the owner or occupant at the last known post office address as
indicated by the records of the County Assessor. The notice shall require the owner or occupant
as the case may be to abate the weeds by a specific time, which shall not be less than ten (10) days
from the date of service of such notice. One notice shall be deemed sufficient on any lot or parcel
Ch. 25 Pg. 16
of property for the entire season of weed growth during that year. The City shall make proof of
service of such notice.
SECTION 25-11 Compliance with the Notice
The failure of any person to comply with a notice issued pursuant to this article shall be
unlawful.
SECTION 25-12 Abatement by City
If any owner or occupant of land fails or neglects to eradicate or destroy and remove weeds,
or growth, in accordance with this ordinance, the City may employ the necessary assistance and
cause such weeds to be removed or destroyed. As outlined in Section 25-10(A), the City may seek
to be reimbursed for its costs and expenses to abate the nuisance.
SECTION 25-13 Appeals
Any person aggrieved by a weed abatement decision is entitled to a hearing by filing a
request for such in the Police Department within ten (10) days of receiving notice from the City.
The hearing shall be before the Hearing Officer. The Hearing Officer shall have the authority to
uphold or overturn any decision properly before him or her regarding weed abatement under this
article. Either the City or the appellant may appeal the Hearing Officers Order by filing a petition
for review of the Order as outlined in Chapter 25-9.
ARTICLE III MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
Section 25-14 Severability Clause
Section 25-15 Enforcement of Nuisances found elsewhere in City
Ordinance in accordance with this chapter
Section 25-16 Repealing specific provisions of existing City
Ordinance
Section 25-14 Severability Clause
Should a court of competent jurisdiction hold any portion of this Chapter, or the application
of any provision of this Chapter to any person or circumstance invalid, then: (1) the invalid portion
or application shall be severed; and (2) the remainder of this Chapter shall remain in effect without
the invalid portion or application.
Section 25-15 Enforcement of Nuisances found elsewhere in City Ordinance in
accordance with this chapter
Ch. 25 Pg. 17
Any activity or condition that is defined as a nuisance anywhere in Cedar City Ordinance
shall be abated in accordance with the procedures set forth in this chapter.
Section 25-16 Repealing Specific Provisions of Existing City Ordinance
The passage of this ordinance shall serve to repeal the following provisions of existing
Cedar City Ordinance, to whit:
(A) All of Chapter 25, Nuisance
(B) Section 26-105, Nuisance Abatement
(C) Section 26-106, Nuisance Abatement
(D) Section 26-107, Nuisance Abatement
(E) Section 27-22, Weed Abatement
AMENDED BY ORDINANCE NUMBER 0111-17-1 and 0902-20.
Chapter 26 - Table of Contents - Page 1
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
TABLE OF CONTENTS
ARTICLE I. INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
Section 26-I-1. Purpose
Section 26-I-2. Interpretation
Section 26-I-3. Scope
Section 26-I-4. Definitions
ARTICLE II. GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
Section 26-II-1. Establishment of Zones
Section 26-II-2. Interpretation of Zone District Boundaries
Section 26-II-3. Application of Regulations
Section 26-II-4. Transition Zoning
Section 26-II-5. Non-Conforming Uses
Section 26-II-6. Zoning of Annexed Territory
ARTICLE III. ZONES
Section 26-III-1 Zones Defined
Section 26-III-2. R-1 Residential Zone
Section 26-III-3. R-2 Residential Zone
Section 26-III-4. R-3 Residential Zone
Section 26-III-5. RE Residential Estate Zone
Section 26-III-6 Master Planned Development Zone
Section 26-III-7 Development Agreements
Section 26-III-8. GC General Commercial Zone
Section 26-III-9. CC Central Commercial Zone
Section 26-III- 10. DC Downtown Commercial Zone
Section 26-III- 11. HS Highway Service Zone
Section 26-III-12. NC Neighborhood Commercial Zone
Section 26-III- 13. I&M-1 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone
Section 26-III- 14. I&M-2 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone
Section 26-III- 15. AT Annexed Transition Zone Section
Section 26-III-16. Permitted and Conditional Uses
ARTICLE IV. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
Section 26-IV-1. General Regulations
Section 26-IV-2. Height of Buildings
Chapter 26 - Table of Contents - Page 2
Section 26-IV-3. Clear View of Intersecting Streets
Section 26-IV-4. Fences
Section 26-IV-5. Curb, Gutter & Sidewalk
Section 26-IV-6. Dwelling Sites to Have Frontage on Deeded Streets
Section 26-IV-7. Exceptions to Front & Side Set-back Requirements
Section 26-IV-8. Flood Channel & Water Courses
Section 26-IV-9. Swimming Pool
Section 26-IV-10. Concessions on Public Parks and Playgrounds
Section 26-IV-11. Land Previously Subdivided
Section 26-IV-12. Prohibition
Section 26-IV-13. Health Department Approval Required for Rest Homes, Etc.
Section 26-IV-14. Location of Gasoline Pumps
Section 26-IV-15. Electronic Communications Facilities
Section 26-IV-16 Commercial and Industrial Building Materials
ARTICLE V REQUIRED PARKING
Section 26-V-1. Parking Space Required.
Section 26-V-2. Required Parking; Residential Uses.
Section 26-V-3. Required Parking; Commercial Uses.
Section 26-V-4. Required Parking; Industrial Uses.
Section 26-V-5. Required Parking; Other Uses.
Section 26-V-6. Required Parking; Uses Not Mentioned.
Section 26-V-7. Joint Use Daytime and Nighttime Parking
Section 26-V-8. Parking Facilities Required for New Uses.
Section 26-V-9. Parking Facilities Required for Change of Use or Change of Occupancy.
Section 26-V-10. Parking Facilities Required for More Intensive Use.
Section 26-V-11. Parking Facilities; Non Conforming
Section 26-V-12. Permissive Parking and Loading Facilities.
Section 26-V-13. Location and Control of Parking Facilities.
Section 26-V-14. Computation of Required Parking Spaces.
Section 26-V-15. Combined Parking Areas.
Section 26-V-16. Mixed Uses.
Section 26-V-17. Size of Parking Spaces.
Section 26-V-18. Access to Parking Facilities.
Section 26-V-19. Other Access Requirements.
Section 26-V-20. Circulation within a Parking Area.
Section 26-V-21. Location of Parking Facilities Restricted.
Section 26-V-22. Development and Maintenance of Parking Areas.
Section 26-V-23. Lighting of Parking Areas.
Section 26-V-24. Limitation on Use of Required Parking Area.
Section 26-V-25. Continuing Obligation.
Section 26-V-26. Plot Plan Approval Required.
Chapter 26 - Table of Contents - Page 3
Section 26-V-27. Required Off-Street Loading Space.
Section 26-V-28. Handicapped Parking Required.
Section 26-V-29. Marking of Parking.
Section 26-V-30. Parking Surface.
Section 26-V-31. Landscaping.
ARTICLE VI LANDSCAPING.
Section 26-VI-1. Purpose
Section 26-VI-2. Scope of Requirements
Section 26-VI-3. Installation of Landscaping
Section 26-VI-4. Maintenance
Section 26-VI-5. Plot Plan Required
Section 26-VI-6. Non-Conforming Status
ARTICLE VII. MOBILE HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLES.
Section 26-VII-1. Purpose
Section 26-VII-2. Permitted Uses
Section 26-VII-3. Procedure
Section 26-VII-4. Mobile Home Park Development Standards
Section 26-VII-5. Recreational Vehicle Park Development Standards
ARTICLE VIII. PLANNING COMMISSION
Section 26-VIII-1. Creation of Planning Commission
Section 26-VIII-2. Term of Office
Section 26-VIII-3. Organization-Meetings
Section 26-VIII-4. Employees-Expenditures
Section 26-VIII-5. General Plan
Section 26-VIII-6. Zoning
Section 26-VIII-7. Subdivisions
Section 26-VIII-8. City Streets
Section 26-VIII-9. City Land
ARTICLE IX. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS
Section 26-IX-1. Creation
Section 26-IX-2. Powers of the Board of Adjustments
Section 26-IX-3. Variances
Section 26-IX-4. Special Exceptions
Section 26-IX-5. Other Powers & Duties
Section 26-IX-6. Vote
Chapter 26 - Table of Contents - Page 4
Section 26-IX-7. Procedure
Section 26-IX-8. Recourse and Decision of the Board
ARTICLE X. PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT
Section 26-X-1 Purpose
Section 26-X-2 Uses
Section 26-X-3 Procedure
Section 26-X-4 Development Standards and Requirements
ARTICLE XI. CONDITIONAL USES.
Section 26-XI-1. Purpose
Section 26-XI-2. Conditional use Permit
Section 26-XI-3. Special Requirements
Section 26-XI-4. Restrictions
Section 26-XI-5. Conditional Uses
ARTICLE XII. AMENDMENTS
Section 26-XII-1. Procedure
Section 26-XII-2. Public Hearing Required Before Amending Notice
ARTICLE XIII. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 26-XIII-1. Interpretation
Section 26-XIII-2. Applicability
Section 26-XIII-3. Inspector
Section 26-XIII-4. Powers and Duties of Enforcing Officer
Section 26-XIII-5. Site Plans of Buildings Required
Section 26-XIII-6. No Conflicting License or Permits Shall be Issued
Section 26-XIII-7. Utility Connections
Section 26-XIII-8. Severability
Section 26-XIII-9. Violations of Public Nuisance
Section 26-XIII-10. Responsibility for Violations
Section 26-XIII-11. Penalties
Section 26-XIII-12. Each Day Separate Violation
Section 26-XIII-13. Conflicting Provisions Repealed
ARTICLE XIV. AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONING
Section 26-XIV-1. Purpose and Findings
Section 26-XIV-2. Definitions
Chapter 26 - Table of Contents - Page 5
Section 26-XIV-3. Maps & Boundaries
Section 26-XIV-4. Airport Height Limitations
Section 26-XIV-5. Airport Compatible Land Use Regulations
Section 26-XIV-6. Nonconforming Structures & Uses
ARTICLE XV. CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITIES
Section 26-XV-1. Definitions
Section 26-XV-2. Residential Facilities for Persons with a Disability
Section 26-XV-3. Residential Facilities for Elderly Persons
Section 26-XV-4. Design Standards for Protective Housing, Rehabilitation/Treatment
Facilities (Both Residential and Nonresidential), Transitional Housing,
and Assisted Living Facilities
Section 26-XVI-5. Non-Residential Treatment Facilities
ARTICLE XVI CEDAR CITY SIGN ORDINANCE
SECTION 26-XVI-1. Introduction & Purpose
SECTION 26-XVI-2. General Provisions
SECTION 26-XVI-3. Definitions
SECTION 26-XVI-4. Prohibited Signs
SECTION 26-XVI-5. Signs Allowed Without a Permit
SECTION 26-XVI-6. Signs Requiring A Permit
SECTION 26-XVI-7. Sign Permit Procedures
SECTION 26-XVI-8. Signs in Specific Areas
SECTION 26-XVI-9. Temporary Signs
SECTION 26-XVI-10. Measurement of Regulated Sign Area
SECTION 26-XVI-11. Nonconforming Signs
SECTION 26-XVI-12. Removal of Illegal and Unsafe or Abandoned Signs
SECTION 26-XVI-13. Exhibits
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
ARTICLE I. INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
Section 26-I-1. Purpose
Section 26-I-2. Interpretation
Section 26-I-3. Scope
Section 26-I-4. Definitions
This Chapter shall be entitled THE PLANNING AND ZONING ORDINANCE OF CEDAR
CITY, UTAH, and may be so cited and pleaded.
SECTION 26-I-1. Purpose.
This Chapter is hereby declared to be enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety,
convenience, morals, and general welfare of the inhabitants of Cedar City, Utah, and:
(A) To encourage and facilitate the orderly growth and development of the City.
(B) To promote sanitation and the health of the inhabitants.
(C) To promote safety from fires, floods, traffic hazards, panic and other dangers.
(D) To lessen congestion in the streets, to provide adequate light and air, prevent the
over-crowding of land and avoid undue concentration of population.
(E) To secure economy in municipal expenditures and to facilitate adequate provisions
for transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and other public requirements.
(F) To stabilize and improve property and prevent obsolescence and degeneration of
buildings.
(G) To increase the security of home life, improve the morals, and preserve and create a
more favorable environment in which to rear children.
(H) To promote the development of a more wholesome serviceable and attractive city,
and,
(I) To maintain or improve the quality of life for present and future inhabitants.
SECTION 26-I-2. Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application, the provisions of this Chapter shall be held to be the
minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of public health, safety and welfare.
SECTION 26-I-3. Scope.
It is not intended by this Chapter to repeal, abrogate, annul or in any way impair or interfere with
existing provisions of other laws or ordinances, except those specifically repealed by this
Ordinance, or with private restrictions placed upon property by covenant, deed, or other private
agreement, or with restrictive covenants running to which the City is a party. Where this Chapter
imposes a greater restriction upon land, building, or structures than is imposed or required by
such existing provisions of law, ordinance, contract or deed, the provisions of this Chapter shall
control.
SECTION 26-I-4. Definitions.
(A) Purpose: For the purpose of this ordinance certain words and terms are defined as
follows: Words used in the present tense include the future. Words in the singular number
include the plural and the plural the singular. The word district is synonymous with the
word zone. And the word Zoning Administrator synonymous with the word Building
Inspector. Words not included herein, but defined in the Building Code shall be construed
as defined therein.
(B) Definitions: The following definitions shall apply for this chapter.
(1) Accessory Use or Building: A subordinate use or detached building clearly
incidental to and located upon the same lot occupied by the main building; also a
building clearly incidental to an agriculture or animal care land use located on a
lot in an agriculture zone, which lot meets the minimum lot size and is not under
one acre.
(2) Adult Daycare Facility: An adult daycare facility means any building or
structure furnishing care, supervision, and guidance for three (3) or more adults
unaccompanied by guardian for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day.
(3) Agriculture: The tilling of soil, raising of crops, horticulture and gardening but
not including the keeping or raising of domestic animals or fowl, and not
including any agricultural industry or business such as fur farms, animal hospitals,
farm equipment sales, or similar uses.
(4) Airport: A landing area used regularly by aircraft for receiving or discharging
passengers or cargo.
(5) Alley: Any public place or thoroughfare which affords generally a secondary
means of vehicular access to abutting lots and is not intended for general traffic
circulation.
(6) Alley Line: The boundary which separates the right-of-way of an alley from
the abutting property.
(7) Alteration: As applied to a building or structure, a change or rearrangement in
the structural parts or in the existing facilities or an enlargement, whether by
extending on a side or by increasing in height, or the moving from one location or
position to another.
(8) Amusement Enterprise: A business facility that is maintained or operated for
the amusement, patronage, or recreation of the general public. The amusement
activity may be either a principal or secondary business, and may be located either
indoors or outdoors. Accessory uses may include the preparation and serving of
food, and the sale of equipment related to the included uses.
(9) Amusement Enterprise, Indoor: An amusement enterprise where the entire
activity takes place within an enclosed building. Such activities include, but are
not limited to amusement arcades, bowling, roller and ice skating, laser tag,
miniature golf, paint ball, soccer, baseball, football, basketball, and similar
activities.
(10) Amusement Enterprise, Outdoor: An amusement enterprise where any
portion of the activity takes place outside of a building. Such activities include,
but are not limited to batting cages, miniature golf courses, golf driving ranges,
and go-cart tracks. Activities not included are outdoor activities that can be
classified as spectator sports.
(11) Animal Hospital: An establishment for the medical treatment and care of
animals, including household pets, livestock, and commercial poultry, and which
may include temporary or overnight boarding of animals that are recuperating
from treatment, all facilities to be within a completely enclosed building, except
for exercising runs and parking of automobiles.
(12) Antenna Non-commercial:
a. A transmitting or receiving device designed to radiate or capture
communication signals consisting of electromagnetic or microwave
radiation, for private, noncommercial recreational use. "Non-commercial
Antenna" includes, but is not limited to, radio and television antennas,
satellite antennas, amateur radio antennas, and antennas used for
individual delivery of low power radio communication service.
b. Antennas associated with commercial or manufacturing structures for
the purpose of transmitting or receiving signals are Non-commercial
Antennas, if the use of the antenna is incidental to the primary use of the
structure. This includes, but is not limited to, antennas for individual
delivery of low power radio communication service incidental to the
primary use of the structure.
(13) Apartment House: A building arranged, intended or designed to be occupied
by more than four (4) families living independently of each other and having
separate cooking facilities.
(14) Assisted Living Facility: An assisted living facility is a residential facility,
licensed by the State of Utah, with a home line setting that provides an array of
coordinated support of personnel and health care services, available 24-hours per
day, to residents who have been assessed under the Utah Department of Health or
the Utah Department of Human Services Rules to need any of these services.
Each resident shall have a service plan based on the assessment, which may
include:
a. Specified services of intermediate nursing care;
b. Administration of medication, and;
c. Support services promoting residence independence and selfsufficiency.
Such a facility does not include adult day care provided in
conjunction with a residential facility for elderly persons or a residential
facility for persons with a disability.
(15) Average Percent of Slope: An expression of rise or fall in elevation along a
line generally perpendicular to the contours of the land, connecting the highest
point of land to the lowest point of land within a parcel or lot. A vertical rise of
one hundred (100) feet between two points one hundred (100) feet apart,
measured on a horizontal plane, is a 100 percent grade.
(16) Basement: Any floor level below the first story in a building. To be
considered a basement, the floor level shall be more than four feet below grade,
for more than 50% of the total perimeter or is more than 8 feet below grade at any
point.
(17) Bed and Breakfast Inns: A building containing not more than one kitchen,
where for compensation, breakfast and lodging are provided persons on a nightly
basis, not to exceed one week, in contradiction to a hotel or café. Signs shall be
limited to one non-flashing sign not larger in area than eighteen square feet. If
lighted, the light shall be defused or shielded. Said signs shall be located at least
two feet back from the property line.
(18) Boarder: Boarder means a person living in a rented room in a boarding
house. The boarding house operator or member of his or her immediate family
who reside on the premises with the operator, shall not be considered to be a
boarder.
(19) Boarding House: A boarding house is a building or a portion thereof where,
for compensation, rooms are rented with meals for not more than fifteen (15)
boarders who generally do not directly utilize kitchen facilities. The operator of a
boarding house must reside on the premises of the boarding house. The work
shall include compensation in money, services, or other things of value. A
boarding house does not include a residential facility for disabled persons or a
residential facility for the elderly. A boarding house does not include a nonresidential
facility, such as a rehabilitation/treatment facility, where the primary
purpose of the facility is to deliver rehabilitation, treatment, counseling, medical,
protective or other similar services to the occupants.
(20) Building: Any structure used or intended for supporting or sheltering any use
or occupancy.
(21) Building, Public: For purposes of this section only, a public building is a
building owned and operated, or owned and intended to be operated by the City, a
public agency of the United States of America, the State of Utah, or any of its
political subdivisions. The use of a public building, with immunity, is nontransferrable
and terminates if the structure is devoted to a use other than as a
public building with immunity. A public building referred to as with immunity
under the provisions of this title includes:
a. Properties owned by the State of Utah or the United States Government
which are outside of the jurisdiction of the City zoning authority as
provided under Title 9, Chapter 10, Section 105, Utah Code Annotated,
1953, as amended; and
b. The ownership or use of a building which is immune from the City
zoning authority under the supremacy clause of the United States
Constitution.
(22) Build-able Area: The portion of a lot which is in the envelope formed by the
required yards. (see "Yard, Required.")
(23) Building, Community: A public building designed or used for community
activities or for educational, recreational or public service.
(24) Building Height: (See “Height, Building”)
(25) Building Line: The boundary of the build-able area.
(26) Building Line, Setback: (See "Setback Building Line.")
(27) Building, Principal: The building in which is conducted the principal use of
the lot in which it is situated; in a residential zoning district, any dwelling is
deemed to be the principal building on the lot on which it is situated.
(28) Caretaker Dwelling:
As long as not prohibited by the airport overlay zones, a caretaker dwelling may
be allowed in the I&M-1 zone if it meets the following restrictions:
a) the residential space may only be located on the second floor or back half
of the main building,
b) the residential space cannot exceed 750 square feet,
c) contain no more than one bedroom, and
d) the residential space may not be rented separately from the remainder of
the building. If the building is rented, a rental dwelling license issued by
the City is required.
As long as not prohibited by the airport overlay zones, a caretaker dwelling may
be allowed in the I&M-2 zone if it is a dwelling unit occupied primarily by a
person or persons employed to care for and maintain 24 hour oversight on the
principal commercial, industrial, or institutional use of the site.
(29) Carport: A private garage open and unobstructed on two sides and attached
to a dwelling.
(30) Cellar: (See “Basement”)
(31) Clinic: An outpatient medical or dental facility.
(32) Commission: The City Planning Commission of Cedar City, Utah.
(33) Common Area: Areas within a PUD that are held by all residents in common
ownership through a homeowner’s association and are available for use by all
residents. There is no required amount of common area in a PUD.
(34) Communication Antenna: Any transmitting and receiving device designed to
radiate and capture communications signals. "Communication Antenna" does not
include “noncommercial antennas”; includes roof mounted, wall mounted & whip
antennas.
(35) Communication Facility: Any communication antenna, communication
tower, accessory building, or any other structure or equipment installed for the
primary purpose of providing communication service.
(36) Communication Tower: A tower that supports or contains communications
antennas (transmitting or receiving) or related communications equipment.
"Communication Tower" also includes equipment and facilities permanently
associated with the tower, whether or not such equipment or facilities are used
directly to provide communication service. Communication tower include guyed,
lattice or mono pole towers.
(37) Community Correctional Facility: Community correctional facility means a
facility licensed or contracted by the State of Utah to provide temporary
occupancy for previously incarcerated persons which assists such persons in
making a transition from a correctional institution environment to independent
living.
(38) Conditional Use: A land use that, because of its unique characteristics of
potential for impact on the municipality, surrounding neighbors, or adjacent land
uses, may not be compatible in some areas, or may be compatible only if certain
conditions are required that mitigate or eliminate the detrimental impacts.
(39) Condominium: A unit within a building where the owner only owns the air
space occupied by his/her unit. The portion of land upon which the building is
situated, the surrounding grounds and services other than those within
independent units, etc. become joint responsibilities of all the owners as tenants in
common. Condominiums are a permitted use in planned unit developments.
(40) Contiguous: Substantial touching (at least 55 feet) between two districts or
areas of land which abut.
(41) Correctional Institution: A correctional institution means a prison, jail,
juvenile detention facility, or juvenile secure facility.
(42) Dairy: A commercial establishment for the manufacture or processing of
dairy products.
(43) Disability/Disabled Person: A disability means a physical or mental
impairment that substantially limits one or more of a person’s major life activities,
including a person having a record of such a problem or being regarded as having
such an impairment. The following definitions are incorporated into the
definition of disability, to wit:
a. disability does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, any
federally controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled
Substances Act, 21 u.f.c. 802, or as defined under Title 58, Chapter 37,
Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended:
b. A physical or mental impairment includes the following, to wit:
i. Any psychological disorder or condition, cosmetic
disfigurement, or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the
following body systems: neurological, musculoskeletal; special
sense organs; respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular,
reproductive; digestive; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin;
and endocrine; or
ii. Any mental or physiological disorder, such as mental
retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness,
and specific learning disabilities; or
iii. Such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and
hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular
dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes,
human immunodeficiency virus, (HIV), mental retardation,
emotional illness, drug addition, (other than addiction caused by
current, illegal use of controlled substances) and alcoholism.
(44) Domestic Staff: Domestic staff means persons employed or residing on the
premises of a dwelling or other residential facility to perform domestic services or
to assist residents in performing major life activities.
(45) Drive-In - Fast Food: A place of business where food and drink are sold
primarily for consumption on the premises outside the structure.
(46) Drive Up Facility: (Also known as “Drive-In” or “Drive-Through” Facilities)
An establishment that by design, physical facilities, service, or packaging
procedures encourages or permits customers to receive services, obtain goods, or
be entertained while remaining in their motor vehicles.
(47) Duplex: A building of single ownership which is designed for two separate
dwelling units. There is one set of utility connections for the building. The
dwellings may be separated vertically or horizontally.
(48) Dwelling: A building or a portion thereof containing one or more dwelling
units exclusively for residential occupancy, but not including hotels, tourist cabins
or boarding houses.
(49) Dwelling, Single Unit: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by
one family, the structure having one dwelling unit.
(50) Dwelling, Two-Unit: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by two
families, the structure having two dwelling units.
(51) Dwelling, Multiple-Unit (3 or more): A building arranged or designed to
have three or more dwelling units.
(52) Dwelling Group: A group of two or more dwellings, not more than two and
one half (2 l/2) stories in height, located on a parcel of land in one ownership and
having one yard or court in common. Dwelling groups are regulated as
apartments regarding setbacks, parking, fencing, landscaping, etc.
(53) Dwelling Unit: One or more rooms providing complete living facilities,
including equipment for cooking or provisions for the same, and including room
or rooms for living, sleeping and eating.
(54) Educational Institution: Educational institution means any elementary or
secondary school, seminary, parochial school or private educational institution
having a curriculum similar to that ordinarily given in grades 1 thru 12 in public
school systems. The term educational institution for the purpose of this title does
not include post high school educational facilities or educational facilities which
include residential facilities for its students.
(55) Educational Institution with Housing: Educational institution with housing
means a public or private educational institution with residential facilities or
housing for its students and or staff.
(56) Elderly Person: A person who is sixty (60) years old or older, who desires or
needs to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who is capable of
living independently.
(57) Family -Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage,
adoption, or guardianship, or a group of not more than four (4) unrelated persons
living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, together with any
incidental domestic staff who may or may not reside on the premises. “Family”
does not exclude the care of foster children. A family may also be defined in the
R-2-2, R-3-M and SHD zones as not more than one (1) person per bedroom when
the dwelling unit is being used as a long-term rental to unrelated individuals.
(58) Family Food Production - The keeping of not more than two cows, twenty
(20) rabbits, fifty (50) chickens, fifty (50) pheasants, ten (l0) turkeys, ten (l0)
ducks, ten (l0) geese, and twenty (20) pigeons.
(59) Fast Food Restaurant: An eating/drinking establishment that may be either
a. a freestanding operation; or
b. a non-freestanding operation incorporated into a building within which
one or more other compatible and complimentary uses exist, and whose
principal business is the sale of pre-prepared or rapidly prepared food to
the customer in a ready-to consume state for consumption either within the
restaurant building or for carry-out with consumption off the premises,
and whose design or principal method of operation includes two or more
of the following characteristics:
i. The elimination, in whole or in part, of table service, thus
requiring customers to place orders at the counter where the orders
are filled.
ii. The food is usually served in edible containers or in paper,
plastic or other disposable containers.
iii. The facilities for on premises consumption of food are
insufficient for the volume of food sold by the establishment.
iv. The restaurant provides a drive-up facility for placing and
receiving food orders.
(60) Floor Area, Gross: The gross floor area shall be the sum of the gross
horizontal areas of the several floors of the building, excluding areas used for
accessory garage purposes and such basement and cellar areas as are devoted
exclusively to uses accessory to the operation of the building. All horizontal
dimensions shall be taken from the exterior faces of walls, including walls or
other enclosures of the enclosed porches.
(61) Fraternity or Sorority House: A fraternity or sorority house means a building
occupied by and maintained exclusively for students of a social organization
affiliated with an academic or professional college or university or other
recognizable institution of higher learning who are associated together in a social
fraternity or sorority that is officially recognized by such institution and who
receives lodging and/or meals on the premises for compensation.
(62) Garage, Private: A building or part thereof accessory to a main building and
providing for the storage of automobiles and in which no occupation or business
for profit is carried on.
(63) Garage, Public or Storage: A building or part thereof other than a private
garage for the storage of motor vehicles and in which service station activities
may be carried on.
(64) Garage, Party Wall: An accessory building designed for the temporary
storage of automobiles, and which has a common wall on the property line
between two properties.
(65) General Plan: A document adopted by the City which sets forth general
guidelines
(66) Grade:
a. For building adjoining one street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at
the center of that wall facing the street.
b. For buildings adjoining more than one street, the average level of
elevations of the sidewalk at the centers of all walls adjoining streets.
c. For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of
the ground (finished surface) adjacent to the exterior walls of the building.
All walls approximately parallel to and not more than twenty-five (25) feet
from a street line are to be considered as adjoining a street.
(67) Guest: Any transient person who rents or occupies a room for sleeping
purposes.
(68) Guest House: An attached or detached dwelling structure with a total of one
(1) bedroom located on a lot with one or more main dwelling structures and used
for housing of guests or servants, and not rented, leased or sold separate from the
rental or sale of the main dwelling. Guest houses are subject to the setback
requirements of a one-family dwelling unit (not an accessory building).
(69) Guest Room: A room which is designed for occupancy by one or more
guests for sleeping purposes, but having no cooking facilities and not including
dormitories.
(70) Hard Surfaced: Asphalt, concrete or brick pavers.
(71) Height, Building: A vertical dimension measured from the highest elevation
in the front of the structure to the top of the plate line.
(72) Heliport: A landing area solely for the landing of helicopters. A heliport may
include more than one helipad.
(73) Home Occupation: An occupation carried on entirely within a dwelling by a
person residing within the dwelling, and where there is no visual indication from
outside the building that the occupation is being carried on therein.
(74) Hometel: A building or buildings containing one-bedroom dwelling units
which are primarily used for apartment style living, being rented on a monthly
basis. However, the dwelling units may also be used as a motel being rented on a
daily basis. For parking requirements see Section 26-39. Water and sewer
connections are the same as apartments. Setback requirements are the same as
motels in CC and GC zones. A Hometel is not permitted in residential zones.
(75) Hospital: Hospital means an institution licensed by the State of Utah which
provides diagnostic, therapeutic, and rehabilitative services to individuals on both
an inpatient and outpatient basis by or under the supervision of one or more
physicians. A medical clinic or professional office which offers any in-patient or
overnight care, or operates on a 24-hour basis shall be considered to be a hospital.
A hospital may include necessary support service facilities such as laboratories,
out-patient units and training and central services, together with staff offices
necessary to operate the hospital.
(76) Hotel: A hotel is a building designed for or occupied as the more or less
temporary abiding place of individuals who are, for compensation lodged with or
without meals.
(77) Household Pets: Animals or fouls ordinarily permitted in the house and kept
for company or pleasure.
(78) Intensity: The concentration of activities such as a combination of a number
of people, cars, visitors, customers, hours of operation, outdoor advertising, etc.
Also, the size of buildings or structures, the most intense being higher, longer
and/or wider.
(79) Jail: Jail means a place of incarceration owned and operated by the County.
(80) Junk: Any worn out, cast off, or discarded article or item not functioning for
its intended use, material, vehicle or equipment which is ready for destruction or
has been collected or stored for salvage or conversion to some use. Any article or
material which unaltered or unchanged and without further conditioning can be
used for its original purpose as readily as when new shall not be considered junk.
(81) Junk Yard: The use of any lot, portion of a lot, or tract of land for the storage,
keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metal or other scrap material, or
for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles,
or machinery or parts thereof, provided that this definition shall be deemed not to
include such uses which are clearly accessory and incidental to any agricultural
use permitted in the zone.
(82) Juvenile Detention Facility: Juvenile detention facility means a place of
temporary detention for delinquent juveniles, which either is owned or operated
by the State of Utah or is under contract with the State of Utah.
(83) Juvenile Secure Facility: Juvenile secure facility means a place of
incarceration for delinquent juveniles which is either owned or operated by the
State of Utah or is under contract with the State of Utah.
(84) Kitchen: Any room used for or intended to be used for cooking and preparing
food.
(85) Landfill: A land disposal site where solid waste is disposed of using sanitary
land filling techniques in accordance with law.
(86) Landscaping (Permanent): Some combination of planted trees, shrubs, vines,
groundcover, flowers, lawns, or xeriscape. In addition, the combination or design
may include rock and such structural features as fountains, pools, art works,
screens, walls, fences, or benches. Such objects alone shall not meet the
requirements of the ordinance and must be less than 30 percent of total required
landscaping. The selected combination of objects for landscaping purposes shall
be arranged in a harmonious manner to encourage pleasant and attractive
surroundings.
(87) Legislative Body: The Mayor and the Cedar City Council.
(88) Loading Space: Off-street space or berth on the same lot with a building, or
contiguous to a group of buildings, for the temporary parking of a commercial
vehicle while loading or unloading merchandise or materials, and which abuts
upon streets, alley or other appropriate means of access.
(89) Lot: A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a building or buildings,
together with such yards, open spaces, lot width, and lot area as required by this
ordinance, having a frontage on a street.
(90) Lot Area: The lot area of a horizontal plane within the lot line of a lot.
(91) Lot, Corner: A lot abutting on two intersecting or intercepting streets where
the interior angle of the intersection or interception does not exceed 135 degrees.
(92) Lot Coverage: The percentage of the area of a lot which is occupied by all
buildings or other covered structures.
(93) Lot Depth: For lots having front and rear lot lines which parallel, the shortest
horizontal distance between such lines; for lots having front and rear lot lines
which are not parallel, the shortest horizontal distance between the midpoint of a
front line and the midpoint of the rear lot line; for triangular shaped lots, the
shortest horizontal distance between the front lot lines and a line within the lot,
parallel with and at a maximum distance from the front lot line, having a length of
not less than ten feet.
(94) Lot, Interior: A lot other than a corner lot.
(95) Lot, Key: A lot adjacent to a corner lot having its side lot line in common
with the rear lot line of the corner lot and fronting on the street which forms the
side entry of the corner lot.
(96) Lot Line: Any line bounding a lot.
(97) Lot Line, Front: The front boundary line of a lot bordering on the street. In
the case of a corner lot, the side bordering on the street which has the smaller
dimension shall be the front lot line.
(98) Lot Line, Rear: A lot line which is opposite and is most distant from the front
lot line. In the case of an irregular, triangular, or gore-shaped lot, the rear line
shall be a line within the lot, parallel to and with a maximum distance from the
front lot line, having a length of at least ten feet.
(99) Lot Line, Side: Any lot boundary line not a front lot line or a rear lot line.
(100) Lot of Record: A lot which is part of a subdivision, the plat of which has
been recorded in the office of the County Recorder of Iron County; or a lot, parcel
or tract of land, the deed of which has been recorded in the office of the County
Recorder of Iron County.
(101) Lot, Through: A lot having a pair of opposite lot lines abutting two streets,
and which is not a corner lot. On such lot, both lot lines are front lot lines.
(102) Lot Width: The distance between side lot lines measured at required
minimum front yard setback line on a line parallel with the city street.
(103) Major Life Activities: Major life activities means functions such as caring
for one’s self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking,
breathing, learning and working.
(104) Mobile/Manufactured Home: The term "mobile home" or "manufactured
home" shall mean a dwelling designed and manufactured after June 14, 1976, by a
recognized fabricator of mobile homes to be transported after fabrication on its
own wheels or on detachable wheels, and which is ready for occupancy, except
for connection to utilities and/or location on a foundation.
(105) Mobile Home Park: The term "mobile home park" shall mean any area or
tract of land which is used to accommodate two or more mobile homes, generally
for long periods of time.
(106) Motel: A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms or dwelling
units, some or all of which have a separate entrance leading directly from the
outside of the building with garage or parking space located on the lot, and
designed, used, or intended, wholly or in majority part in any calendar year, for
the accommodation of the traveling public. Motel includes motor courts, motor
lodges and tourist courts, but not mobile home parks or travel trailer parks.
(107) Natural Water Ways: Those areas varying in width along streams, creeks,
gullies, springs, faults, or washes which are natural drainage channels as
determined by the City Engineer, and in which areas no building shall be
constructed.
(108) Non-Conforming Building or Structure: A building or structure or portion
thereof, lawfully existing at the time this ordinance became effective, and which
does not conform to all the height, area, and yard regulations herein prescribed for
zoning in which it is located.
(109) Nonconforming Use: A use of land that: legally existed before its current
zoning designation; has been maintained continuously since the time the zoning
regulation governing the land changed; and because of subsequent zoning
changes, does not conform with the zoning regulations that now govern the land.
(110) Non-Residential Treatment Facility: Non-residential Treatment Facility is a
facility wherein no persons will be housed on an overnight basis, and provides
services including rehabilitation, treatment, counseling, or assessment and
evaluation services related to delinquent behavior, alcohol abuse, drug abuse,
sexual offenders, sexual abuse, or mental health. Associated educational services
may also be provided to juvenile occupants.
(111) Nursery Schools, Kindergarten, Preschool, Day care Centers: Facilities
specializing in the education and/or care of children prior to their entrance in the
first grade, other than facilities owned and/or operated by the public school
system.
(112) Nursing/Rest Home: Nursing home means an intermediate care/nursing
facility or a skilled nursing facility licensed by the State of Utah, for the care of
individuals who, due to illness, advanced age, disability, or impairment require
assistance and/or supervision on a 24hour per day basis. Such a facility does not
include an adult day care facility or adult day care provider in conjunction with
residential facilities for elderly persons or a residential facility for persons with a
disability.
(113) Off-Street Parking: An area adjoining a building or business providing for
the parking of automobiles which does not include a public street, and has
convenient access to it.
(114) Open-air Businesses: Any business which sells, primarily at retail, certain
goods, products or merchandise which are displayed or otherwise merchandised
outside an enclosed building, including but not limited to fresh fruits, fresh
vegetables, flowers, landscape nurseries, home garden supplies and equipment,
auto sales, parking lot sales, camper sales, recreational vehicles, arts, crafts, and
playground equipment.
(115) Open Space: A planned open area suitable for relaxation, recreation or
landscaping which is held in common, public, or private ownership that is
unoccupied by buildings and hard surface, such as asphalt or cement, except that
such open spaces may include walkways, patios, recreational activities, picnic
pavilions, gazebos, and water features so long as such surfaces do not exceed 15
percent of the required open space.
(116) Parking Facilities: An open area other than a street for the parking of
automobiles including all parking spaces, aisles, and access driveways and is
available for public or private use, whether free, for compensation or an
accommodation for clients or customers.
(117) Parking Space: A space within a building lot or parking lot for the parking
or storage of one automobile having adequate provisions for ingress and egress
from a street by a standard-sized automobile sized as provided by this ordinance.
(118) Permitted Use: A use of land for which is allowed by this zoning ordinance
but for which no conditional use permit is required.
(119) Planned Unit Development: Complete development plan for an area
pursuant to this Ordinance.
(120) Planning and Zoning Commission: The Planning and Zoning Commission
of Cedar City, Utah.
(121) Prison: Prison means a place of incarceration owned or operated by the
State of Utah.
(122) Private Jail: Private jail means a place of incarceration established or
operated under a contract with the County.
(123) Private Prison: Private prison means a correctional facility established or
operated under a contract with the State of Utah under the provisions of the
Private Correctional Facilities Act, Chapter 13C, Title 64, Utah Code Annotated,
1953 as amended.
(124) Protective Housing Facility: Protective housing facility means a facility
either:
a. operated, licensed, or contracted by a governmental entity, or
b. operated by a charitable, non-profit organization, where no
compensation, temporary, protective housing is provided to:
i. abused or neglected children waiting placement of foster care;
ii. pregnant of parenting teens;
iii. victims of sexual abuse; or
iv. victims of domestic abuse.
(125) Public Use: A use operated by public body or quasi-public body, such use
having the purpose of serving the public health, safety or general welfare, and
including uses such as public schools, parks, playgrounds and other recreational
facilities administrative and service facilities, public utilities, and all other public
uses recognized under the law.
(126) Reasonable Accommodation: Reasonable accommodation means a change
in any rule, policy, practice, or service necessary to afford a person with a
disability equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The following words
have the following definitions, to wit:
a. Reasonable. Reasonable means a requested accommodation that will not
undermine the legitimate purpose of existing zoning regulations
notwithstanding the benefit that the accommodation will provide to a
person with a disability.
b. Necessary. Necessary means the applicant must show that, but for the
accommodation, one or more persons with a disability likely will be
denied an equal opportunity to enjoy the housing of their choice.
c. Equal Opportunity. Equal opportunity means achieving equal results as
between a person with a disability and a non-disabled person.
(127) Record of Impairment: Having a record of impairment means having a
history of, or having been miss-classified as having a mental or physical
impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.
(128) Recreational Vehicle or Camper: Any vehicle or camper which is used or
maintained primarily as a temporary dwelling for travel, vacation, or recreational
use.
(129) Recycling Center, Indoor: A building in which recyclable material is
collected, processed, and/or baled entirely within an enclosed building. Said
facility may also be used to prepare and ship materials to others who will use
those materials to manufacture new products. On site drop off containers shall be
located a minimum of thirty (30) feet back from the right of way line, and shall be
screened to mitigate blowing debris.
(130) Regarded as Having an Impairment: A person is regarded as having an
impairment when:
a. the person has a physical or mental impairment that does not
substantially limit one or more major life activity but is treated by another
person as having such a limitation;
b. has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or
more major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others towards
such an impairment; or
c. has none of the impairments defined in this section but is treated by
another person as having such an impairment.
(131) Rehabilitation/Treatment Facility: Rehabilitation/treatment facility means a
facility licensed or contracted by the State of Utah to provide temporary
occupancy and supervision of individuals (adults and/or juveniles) in order to
provide rehabilitation, treatment or counseling services. Without limitation, such
services may include rehabilitation, treatment, counseling, or assessment and
evaluation services related to delinquent behavior, alcohol abuse, drug abuse,
sexual offenders, sexual abuse, or mental health. Associated educational services
may also be provided to juvenile occupants.
(132) Residential Facility for Elderly Persons: Residential facility for elderly
persons means a dwelling unit that is occupied on a 24-hour per day basis by 8 or
fewer elderly persons in a family type arrangement. A residential facility for
elderly persons shall not include any of the following, to wit:
a. a facility which is operated as a business; provided that such facility
may not be considered to be operated as a business solely because a fee is
charged for food or for actual and necessary costs of preparation and
maintenance of the facility;
b. a facility where persons being treated of alcoholism or drug abuse are
placed; a facility where placement is not on a strictly voluntary basis or
where placement is part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or
treatment in a correctional institution; or a facility which is a health care
facility as defined by Title 26, Section 21, Chapter 2, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953 as amended; or a facility which is a residential facility for
persons with a disability.
(133) Residential Facility for Persons with a Disability: Residential facility for
persons with a disability means any residence in which more than one person with
a disability resides and which is:
a. licensed or certified by the Department of Human Services under Title
62 A, Chapter 2, of the Utah Code, licensor for programs and facilities; or
b. licensed or certified by the Department of Human Health under Title 26,
Chapter 21, Health Care Facilities Licensing and Inspection Act.
(134) Residents, Residential Facility: A resident, residential facility means any
building or portion thereof where an individual is actually living at a given point
and time and intends to remain, and not a place of temporary sojourn or transient
visit.
(135) Restaurant: A place of business where food is prepared or cooked, and
complete meals are served to the general public for consumption on the premises
(primarily indoor dining accommodations).
(136) Restaurant, Drive-In or Drive-Through: A building in which food is
prepared and served for consumption on the premises, and which includes a
facility which allows food to be ordered and taken from the premises for
consumption elsewhere, without leaving a vehicle.
(137) Retirement Home: Retirement home means a residential facility designated,
occupied, and intended for residents fifty (50) years of age or older where
common facilities for cooking and dining are available to all residents and
independent facilities are provided for living sleeping and sanitation.
(138) Rooming House: Any dwelling in which more than three persons, either
individually or as families, are housed or lodged for compensation, with or
without meals. A boarding house or furnished room house shall be deemed a
"rooming house."
(139) School: A public or private institution of learning such as elementary and
secondary schools, colleges and universities, which offers instruction in several
branches of learning and study, but not including dancing schools. On campus
student housing is subject to the housing regulations of each zone.
(140) Service Station: A building or use devoted to the retail sale of fuels,
lubricants, and other supplies for motor vehicles including repair activities which
are subordinate to the sale of petroleum products.
(141) Setback: The shortest horizontal distance between the property line and the
building or structure or part thereof on a lot.
(142) Sewage Service: Sewage service means a business that cleans, maintains
and/or constructs individual or public sewer/wastewater disposal systems and as
part of the business, parks or stores vehicles or vessels that contain or have
contained human waste.
(143) Setback, Building Line: A line which defines the shortest distance between
the property line and building or part thereof.
(144) Sheltered Workshop: Sheltered workshop means an onsite supervised
educational or vocational training facility for persons with a disability and does
not provide any residential facilities.
(145) Shelter for the Homeless: Shelter for the homeless means charitable lodging
or sleeping rooms provided on a temporary basis (usually on a daily basis) to
those members of society lacking other safe, sanitary or affordable shelter. A
shelter for the homeless may also include kitchen and cafeteria facilities.
(146) Sign: Any device for visual communication including any structure or
natural object or part thereof, that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject
thereof to the attention of the public, but not including any flag, badge or insignia
of any government or governmental agency, or of any civil, charitable, religious,
patriotic, fraternal or similar organization.
(147) Site (Sight) Obscuring Fence: A fence or wall of not less than six feet in
height nor more than eight feet in height. A site obscuring fence or wall shall be
constructed to manufacture’s specifications and or City standards and shall by
limited to one of the following options:
a. Masonry;
b. Solid composite materials as manufactured by “Trex” or an approved
equal; or
c. Chain-link which meets the minimum specifications as manufactured
by “Privacy Link” or an approved equal with factory inserted slats that
achieves a 98% privacy factor.
(148) Story: That portion of a building, other than a basement, included between
the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor above it, or, if there be no
floor above it, the space between the surface of such floor and the ceiling or roof
above it.
(149) Street: A public right-of-way, including highways, avenues, boulevards,
parkways, roads, lanes, alleys, viaducts, subways, tunnels, bridges, public
easements, and other ways.
(150) Street Line: The boundary which separates the right-of-way of a street from
the abutting property.
(151) Structural Alteration: Any change in the supporting members of a building,
such as bearing walls or partitions, columns, beams or girders, or any complete
rebuilding of the roof or exterior walls.
(152) Structure: Anything structured or erected which is either located on the
ground or attached to something having a location on the ground, including signs
and billboards, but not including fences or walls used as fences, tents, vehicles or
travel trailers.
(153) Subdivision: The division of a tract or parcel of land, as shown on the
records of the Recorder of Iron County, Utah, into two or more parts, including
the original parcel or tract, for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale
or for building development.
(154) Townhome: A dwelling unit (regardless of the number of stories) within a
building where the owner owns the land upon which his/her unit is located, and is
completely independent except for the yard surrounding the building.
(155) Trade or Vocational Schools: A post-high school educational or vocational
training facility.
(156) Transitional Housing Facility: Transitional housing facility means a facility
owned, operated or contracted by a governmental entity or a charitable, not for
profit organization, where, for no compensation, temporary housing (usually
three to twenty- four months, but in no event less than thirty days) is provided to
homeless persons, while they obtain work, job skills, or otherwise take steps to
stabilize their circumstances. A transitional housing facility shall not include a
shelter for the homeless, a dwelling unit provided to a family for the exclusive use
as part of a transitional housing program, for more than thirty days, shall not be
considered to be a transitional housing facility.
(157) Travel Trailer Court: Any area or tract of land used to accommodate two or
more travel trailers or campers for a short period of time (thirty days or less).
(158) Twin Home: Two family dwelling units of separate ownership having a
zero lot line. Each unit is structurally independent with separate utility
connections and a maintenance break. The twin homes will have zero setbacks on
adjoining sides and may be offset but not separated from each other up to a
distance of six (6) feet. All other setback requirements shall apply. Each side of
the twin home shall be considered a single family dwelling unit, however, one
building permit and certificate of occupancy shall be issued for both units.
(159) Use, Principle: The purpose for which land or a building is arranged,
designed or intended, or for which either land or a building is or may be occupied
or maintained.
(160) Use, Accessory: A use which is customarily incidental and subordinate to
the principle use of a lot or a building, including bonafide servant or caretaker
quarters, and located on the same lot.
(161) Veterinary Clinic/Hospital: An establishment for the medical treatment and
care of animals, including household pets, livestock, and commercial poultry, and
which may include temporary or overnight boarding of animals that are
recuperating from treatment, all facilities to be within a completely enclosed
building, except for exercising runs and parking of automobiles.
(162) Width of Lot: The distance between side lot lines measured at required
minimum front yard setback line on a line parallel with the city street.
(163) Yard: An open unobstructed space on a lot, unoccupied and unobstructed
from the ground upward, except as otherwise permitted.
(164) Yard, Front: A space on the same lot of a building between the front line of
the building and the front lot line and extending across the full width of the lot.
The depth of the front yard is a minimum distance between the front lot line and
the front line of the building.
(165) Yard, Rear: A space on the same lot with the building between the rear line
of the building and the rear lot line and extending the full width of the lot. The
depth of the rear yard is a minimum distance between the rear lot line and the rear
line of the building.
(166) Yard, Required: The minimum open space as required by the regulations of
this ordinance for front, rear and side yards, as distinguished from any yard area
in excess of the minimum required. (See "Buildable Area")
(167) Yard, Side: A space on the same lot with the building between the side line
of the building and the side lot line and extending from the front yard to the rear
yard. The width of the side yard shall be a minimum distance between the side lot
line and side line of the building.
(168) Zoning District: Any portion of the incorporated area of Cedar City in
which the zoning regulations apply.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance Number – 0708-09,0826-09, 0811-10, 0213-13, 1113-19-
6, 1113-19-7 and 0902-20.
Chapter 26 - Article II - Page 1
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
ARTICLE II. GENERAL ZONING PROVISIONS
Section 26-II-1. Establishment of Zones
Section 26-II-2. Interpretation of Zone District Boundaries
Section 26-II-3. Application of Regulations
Section 26-II-4. Transition Zoning
Section 26-II-5. Non-Conforming Uses
Section 26-II-6. Zoning of Annexed Territory
SECTION 26-II-1. Establishment of Zones.
The boundaries of the zones set forth herein are established as shown on a map entitled "The
Zoning Map of the City of Cedar City," on file in the office of City Engineer, which map, with
all explanatory matter thereon, shall be deemed to accompany, and is hereby made a part of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 26-II-2. Interpretation of Zone District Boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists with respect to any of the boundaries of any of the zone districts as
shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply:
(A) Where Boundaries Approximately Follow Streets, Alleys or Highways: Where district
boundaries are indicated as approximately following the center line or street line of streets,
center line or alley line of alleys, or the center line or right-of-way line of highways, such line
shall be construed to be the district boundary.
(B) Where Boundaries Parallel Street Lines, Alley Lines or Highway Right-of-Way Line:
Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the center lines
or street lines of streets, the center lines or alley lines of alleys, or the center lines or
right-of-way lines of highways, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel
thereto and at such distance as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such
dimension shall be determined by the use of a scale shown on said map.
(C) Where Boundaries Approximately Follow Lot Lines: Where district boundaries are
indicated as approximately following lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the
boundaries.
(D) Where the District Regulations Apply to Schools, Parks, Etc: Any area shown on the
zoning map as a park, playground, school, cemetery, water, or street right-of-way shall be
subject to the zoning regulations of the district in which they are located. In case of doubt, the
Chapter 26 - Article II - Page 2
zoning regulations of the most restricted adjoining district shall govern.
(E) Vacation of Public Ways: When any street, alley, or other public way is vacated in the
manner authorized by law, the zoning district adjoining each side of such street, alley, or public
way shall be automatically extended to the center of such vacation and all areas included in the
vacation shall then be subject to all regulations of the extended districts.
(F) Referral to Board of Adjustment: Where other uncertainty exists, the Board of Adjustment
shall interpret the matter.
SECTION 26-II-3. Application of Regulations.
Except as provided in this Ordinance, regulations shall be applied as follows:
(A) Conformity of Buildings and Land: No building, structure, or premises shall be used or
occupied, and no building or part thereof, or other structure shall be erected, raised, moved,
placed, reconstructed, extended, or altered, except in conformity with the regulations as set forth
herein.
(B) Conformity of Building: No building, structure, or premises shall be erected, altered, or
used so as to produce greater height, smaller yard, or less unoccupied area, and no building shall
be occupied by more families than prescribed for such building, structure, or premises for the
district in which it is located.
(C) Conformity of Open Spaces: No yard, court, or open space, or any part thereof, shall be
included as a part of the yard, or open space similarly required for any other building, structure,
or dwelling under this Ordinance.
SECTION 26-II-4. Transition Zoning.
(A) Lots in Two Districts: Where a district boundary line, as established, divides a lot
which was a single ownership and of record at the time of this Ordinance, the use thereon
and the other district requirements applying to the least restricted portion of such lot
under this Ordinance shall be considered as extending to the entire lot, provided the most
restricted portion of such lot is entirely within 100 feet of said dividing district boundary
line. The use so extended shall be deemed to be conforming.
(B) Front Yard Position: Where the frontage on one side of a street between two
intersecting streets is partly as residential and partly as business or industrial, the front
setback in the business or industrial district shall be equal to the required front setback of
the residential district.
(C) Corner Lot Transition: On every corner lot in a residential district, there shall be
provided on the side street a side yard of 20 feet in depth.
Chapter 26 - Article II - Page 3
(D) Garage Entrances: No public or private garage for more than five motor vehicles
shall have an entrance or exit for motor vehicles within twenty five feet (25') of a
residential district.
SECTION 26-II-5. Non-Conforming Uses.
The lawful use of any building, structure, or land existing at the time of the enactment of this
Ordinance may be continued, although such use does not conform with the provisions of this
Ordinance, providing the following conditions are met:
(A) Maintenance Permitted: It is the intent of this Zoning Ordinance to prohibit the addition or
enlargement of non-conforming uses, nevertheless, a non-conforming building or structure may
be maintained and may be continued to the same extent as that which existed at the time of the
effective date of this Ordinance.
(B) Repairs and Remodeling: Repairs and remodeling may also be made to a non-conforming
building or to a building housing the non-conforming use provided such repairs shall not have
the effect of increasing the floor space devoted to the non-conforming use, capacity or volume of
business.
(C) Expansion or Enlargements of Non-Conforming Uses: Land areas of any
non-conforming use shall not be increased. However, the floor area in a building or structure
occupied by a non-conforming use shall not be increased except as follows:
(1) A non-conforming use of a building may be extended to include the entire floor area
of the building as it existed at the time such use became non-conforming.
(2) Extensions or enlargements to a building containing a non-conforming use may also
be made in order to overcome unsafe or unsanitary conditions when required by an
official safety or health officer.
(D) Restoration of Damaged Buildings: A non-conforming building or structure or a building
or structure occupied by a non-conforming use which is damaged or destroyed by fire, flood,
wind, earthquake, or other calamity or act of God or public enemy, may be restored, and the
occupancy or use of such building, structure, or part thereof which existed at the time of such
damage or destruction may be continued or resumed, provided that such restoration is started
within a period of one year from the date of destruction and is diligently prosecuted to
completion and provided that such restoration does not increase the floor space devoted to the
non-conforming use over that which existed at the time the building became non-conforming.
(E) Discontinuance: A non-conforming building or structure or portion thereof or a lot
occupied by a non-conforming use which is or hereafter becomes abandoned or is discontinued
for a continuous period of one year shall not thereafter be occupied except by a use which
conforms to the use regulations of the zone in which it is located.
Chapter 26 - Article II - Page 4
(F) Change to a Conforming Use: Any non-conforming use may be changed to a conforming
use. Any non-conforming use which has been changed to a conforming use shall not thereafter
be changed back to a non-conforming use.
(G) Change to Another Non-Conforming Use: A non-conforming use of a building or lot
may be continued to the same extent as that which existed at the time of the effective date of this
ordinance but may not be changed to another non-conforming use; unless the City Council, after
receiving recommendations from the Cedar City Planning Commission, shall authorize such a
change. The Cedar City Council and Cedar City Planning Commission in considering such a
change shall not allow such a change unless the following conditions are met:
(1) That the proposed use is necessary or desirable to provide a service or facility which
will contribute to the general well-being of the neighborhood and the community, and;
(2) That the proposed change will not substantially affect the comprehensive plan of
zoning in Cedar City and that adherence to the strict letter of the ordinance will cause
difficulties and hardships the imposition of which upon petitioner is unnecessary in order
to carry out the general purpose of the plan; and,
(3) That the new or changed use will have a less adverse impact upon the surrounding
property than the original allowable non-conforming use as to the nature of the use, the
traffic involved, and other such considerations.
(H) Reclassification of Territory: The provisions pertaining to non-conforming uses of land
and buildings shall also apply to land and buildings which hereafter become non-conforming due
to any amendment in the Zoning Ordinance.
(I) Permits Granted Prior to Passage of Ordinance or Amendments: Notwithstanding the
issuance of a permit therefor, no building which becomes non-conforming upon the passage of
this ordinance or which becomes non-conforming due to an amendment to this ordinance shall
be built unless construction has taken place thereon to the extent of at least $500.00 in
replaceable value by the date on which this ordinance or said amendment becomes effective.
SECTION 26-II-6. Zoning of Annexed Territory.
In every case where territory becomes a part of the City by annexation, the zoning for said
territory shall be designated in consideration of the Cedar City General Plan - Land Use Map, as
approved by the Planning Commission and City Council. In the event that no zone is specified
in the General Plan, and the future land use is not easily determined by the City Council, after a
recommendation from the Planning Commission, the property shall be zoned AT (Annexed
Transition). The determined zoning designation shall be adopted in accordance with the zone
amendment procedure and public hearing process set forth in Article XIII, of this Chapter 26.
The processing of a zoning application for annexing property shall be processed simultaneous
with the annexation; however, it requires a separate application, public hearing, and ordinance
Chapter 26 - Article II - Page 5
from that of the annexation.
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
ARTICLE III. ZONES
Section 26-III-1 Zones Defined
Section 26-III-2 R-1 Residential Zone
Section 26-III-3 R-2 Residential Zone (replaced)
Section 26-III-4 R-2 Residential Zone (Dwelling, Single Unit)
Section 26-III-5 R-2 Residential Zone (Dwelling, Two Unit)
Section 26-III-6 R-3 Residential Zone (replaced)
Section 26-III-7 R-3 Residential Zone (Dwelling, Single Unit)
Section 26-III-8 R-3 Residential Zone (Dwelling, Multiple Unit)
Section 26-III-9 RE Residential Estate Zone
Section 26-III-10 Residential Development Overlays (RDO)
Section 26-III-11 Development Agreements
Section 26-III-12 GC General Commercial Zone
Section 26-III-13 CC Central Commercial Zone
Section 26-III-14 DC Downtown Commercial Zone
Section 26-III-15 HS Highway Service Zone
Section 26-III-16 NC Neighborhood Commercial Zone
Section 26-III-17 MU Mixed Use Zone
Section 26-III-18 I&M-1 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone
Section 26-III-19 I&M-2 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone
Section 26-III-20 AT Annexed Transition Zone Section
Section 26-III-21 Permitted and Conditional Uses
Section 26-III-22 SUU Housing District Zone (SHD)
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance Nos. 0125-12-1, 0425-12-1, 0926-12-1.
SECTION 26-III-1. Zones Defined.
In order to carry out the purpose of this Ordinance, Cedar City, Utah, is hereby divided into
zones as set forth herein. Regulations and restrictions governing the use of land, buildings,
structures, size of yards, courts and other open spaces, density of population, location, size and
height of building and structures, and the maintenance of the premises shall apply within the
several zones as herein provided.
SECTION 26-III-2. R-1 Residential Zone.
(A) Objectives and Characteristics of Zone: The objective in establishing the R-1 Residential
Zone is to encourage the creation and maintenance of a residential environment within the City
which is characterized by large lots (at least 10,000 square feet) on which single family
dwellings are situated, surrounded by well-kept lawns, trees, and other plantings. A minimum of
vehicular and pedestrian traffic and quiet residential conditions favorable to family living and the
rearing of children shall also be characteristic of this zone. Representative of the uses within R-1
zone are one-family dwellings, parks, agriculture, playgrounds, schools, churches, and other
community facilities designed in harmony with the characteristics of the zone. Boarding and
lodging houses, two-family dwellings, triplexes, apartment houses and other multiple dwellings
representative of higher density residential areas are strictly prohibited in this zone as are
commercial and industrial uses and home occupations are strictly limited. Owners and
developers of property are advised that primacy is given in this zone to one-family dwellings
situated on lots averaging from ninety (90) to one hundred (l00) feet in width and from ten
thousand (l0,000) to fifteen thousand (l5,000) square feet in area, and property should be
developed and maintained in recognition thereof. In order to accomplish the objectives and
purposes of this ordinance, and to promote the characteristics of this zone, the following precise
regulations shall apply in the R-1 Residential Zone.
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be permitted in the R-1 Residential Zone:
(1) One-family dwellings and the following accessory buildings and structures; guest
house not to exceed 800 square feet and subject to the setbacks of a one-family
dwelling, private garage and/or carport for the storage of automobiles owned by
persons residing on the premises, greenhouse for private use only, private
swimming pools, pergolas, arbors;
(2) Bulletin boards not exceeding eight (8) square feet in area pertaining to the lease
or sale of property; also name plates in connection with dwellings not exceeding
one and one half (l l/2) square feet in area and constructed and maintained in
harmony with the residential character of the zone.
(3) Fences, walls, and hedges. (See 26-IV-4);
(4) Public schools, public libraries, public recreation buildings and similar public
buildings and grounds, churches, but not including temporary revival tents or
buildings. Public utility buildings and structures, providing that no storage yard
shall be maintained on the premises;
(5) A temporary building or yard storage of construction materials and equipment
incidental and necessary to construction of a house development, utilities, or other
community facilities, provided such temporary building or yard is located on the
same tract of land on which the houses, utilities or other community facilities are
constructed. A permit therefor shall be issued only to the contractor or builder and
shall be valid for not more than two (2) years, at the expiration of which time the
said building or yard shall be removed from the premises and said use
discontinued;
(6) A temporary office building used as an office in connection with the sale of
property within a subdivision under construction provided that the temporary
office is located on the same part of land as the subdivision. A permit therefor
shall be valid for no more than two (2) years, at the expiration of which time said
use shall be discontinued;
(7) Customary household pets, including, but not limited to dogs, cats, and canaries,
but not including the breeding of dogs and cats for sale;
(8) Home occupations when approved by the Board of Adjustment;
(9) Planned Unit Developments (PUD’s) approved per this ordinance;
(10) Residential facility for persons with a disability, not to exceed four (4) residents
(see Article XVI);
(11) Public and private parks, playgrounds, green ways, trails, and open space;
(12) Public and private golf courses; and
(13) Public and private recreation centers.
(14) Raising and keeping chickens for non-commercial purposes and subject to Article
IV - Supplementary Regulations
Amended by ordinance number 0827-08-2
Amended by ordinance number 1013-10-2
Amended by ordinance number 0125-12-1
(C) Conditional Uses: See Section 26-XI-5
Amended by ordinance number 0827-08-2
(D) Lot Area Requirements: An area of not less than Ten Thousand (l0,000) square feet shall
be provided and maintained for each dwelling and uses accessory thereto.
(E) Lot Width Requirements: The minimum width of any lot for a dwelling shall be ninety
(90) linear feet.
(F) Building Setback Requirements:
(1) Side Setback: A minimum side yard of any building shall be eight (8) feet and the
total width of the two required side yards shall be not less than twenty (20). The
minimum side yard for a private garage shall be eight (8) feet, except that private garages
and other accessory buildings, located at least six (6) feet in the rear of the main building
may have a minimum side yard of one (l) foot, provided that no private garage or other
accessory building shall be located closer than sixteen (l6) feet to a dwelling on an
adjacent lot. On corner lots, the side yard which faces on a street, shall be not less than
twenty (20) feet for main buildings and not less than twenty (20) feet for accessory
buildings. A carport may be built within one (1) foot of the property line, except on the
street side of corner lots. However, all walls must comply with side yard regulations for
buildings.
(2) Front Setback: The minimum depth of the front yard for main buildings and for
private garages which have a minimum side yard of ten (l0) feet shall be twenty-five (25)
feet. Other private garages and all accessory buildings other than private garages shall be
located at least six (6) feet in the rear of the main building. No structure, fence, or barrier,
shall be constructed in a front yard where said structure, fence or barrier would be
perpendicular to the street which the front yard faces, so as to divide the front yard into
two different yards.
(3) Rear Setback: The minimum rear yard for any main building shall be thirty (30) feet;
however, minimum rear yard for main buildings on corner lots may be reduced to eight
(8) feet. For accessory buildings the minimum rear yard shall be one (l) foot, provided
that on corner lots, accessory buildings shall be set back from the rear lot line a distance
of at least eight (8) feet.
(G) Building Height Requirements: The maximum height of any building shall be two (2)
stories, not to exceed twenty (20) feet, except as provided in Section 26-24 of this ordinance.
(H) Building Size Requirements: The ground floor area of any one-family dwelling shall not
be less than one thousand (l,000) square feet, exclusive of open porches and carports.
(I) Special Provisions:
(1) There shall be no outside storage in connection with public buildings, churches,
and public utility buildings.
(2) The required front yard and the required side yard, which abuts upon a street, shall not
be used for the parking of automobiles, but shall be planted and maintained in lawn, trees,
and shrubs, or other customary landscape features, except for permitted driveways.
(J) Supplementary Regulations: See Article IV, Supplementary regulations to All Zones.
SECTION 26-III-3. R-2 Residential Zone
Prior to the enactment of Cedar City Ordinance Number 0125-12-1 Cedar City had a single R-2
Residential Zone. After the adoption of Cedar City Ordinance 0125-12-1 there are two types of
R-2 Residential Zones named R-2 Residential Zone (Dwelling, Single Unit) and R-2 Residential
Zone (Dwelling, Two unit). When R-2 was replaced and split into the single unit and two unit
designations the designation that most closely resembled the pre-existing R-2 zone is the twounit
designation. Therefore, in order to keep the vested rights of the existing property owners
under the new R-2 zoning system the same as these rights were under the old R-2 system,
property that was zoned R-2 Residential prior to the adoption of Cedar City Ordinance Number
0125-12-1 and property hereafter designated R-2 Residential on the Cedar City Zoning Map will
be allowed to develop according to the provisions of the R-2 Residential Zone (Dwelling, Two
Unit).
SECTION 26-III-4. R-2 Residential Zone. (Dwelling, Single Unit)
(A) Objectives and Characteristics: The objective in establishing the R-2 Residential zone
(Dwelling, Single Unit) is to provide a residential environment within the City which is
characterized by a more compact and somewhat denser residential development and a somewhat
higher volume of vehicular and pedestrian traffic than is characteristic of the R-1 Zone.
Attractive lawns, shrubs and trees, and other landscape plantings about the houses and on the
parking strip within the streets is also characteristic of this Zone. Representative of the uses in
this zone are single family dwellings, and boarding houses and rooming houses, home
occupations, parks, playgrounds, schools, churches, and certain other compatible uses. On the
other hand, apartment buildings, two-unit dwellings, multiple dwellings, sorority and fraternity
houses and other uses normally associated with high density dwelling areas, as well as
commercial and industrial uses, are prohibited from this Zone. In order to accomplish the
objectives and purpose of this ordinance, and to promote the essential characteristics of this zone,
the following precise regulations shall apply to the R-2 Residential Zone (Dwelling, Single
Unit):
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2 Residential Zone
(Dwelling, Single Unit):
(1) Any use permitted in the R-1 Residential Zone.
(2) Boarding and rooming houses having accommodations for not more than three (3)
boarders and roomers in addition to the residing family.
(3) Nursery Schools.
(4) Rest Homes, also dwelling groups having not more than six (6) dwelling units per
acre of land.
(5) Planned Unit Developments approved per this ordinance.
(6) Residential facility for persons with a disability, not to exceed eight (8) residents
(see Article XVI).
(7) Raising and keeping chickens and subject to Article IV - Supplementary
Regulations.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance Nos. 1013-10-2, 0125-12-1
(C) Conditional Uses: See Section 26-XI-5.
Amended by ordinance number 0827-08-2
(D) Lot Area Requirements: For single unit dwellings, an area of not less than seven thousand
(7,000) square feet shall be provided and maintained.
Amended by ordinance number 0125-12-1
(E) Lot Width Requirements: The minimum width of any lot for a dwelling shall be seventy
(70) linear feet.
Amended by ordinance number 0125-12-1
(F) Building Setback Requirements:
(1) Side Setbacks: The minimum side yard for any dwelling, or boarding and rooming
house, shall be six (6) feet and the total width of the two required side yards shall be not
less than sixteen (l6) feet. The minimum side yard for a private garage or other accessory
building shall not be located closer than twelve (l2) feet to a dwelling on an adjacent lot.
On corner lots, the side yard which faces on a street shall be not less than twenty (20) feet
for main buildings and not less than twenty (20) feet for accessory buildings. A carport
may be built within one (1) foot of the property line, except on the street side of corner
lots. However, all walls must comply with side yard regulations for buildings. A party
wall shall be permitted between accessory buildings on adjacent lots when both accessory
buildings are located at least twelve (l2) feet in the rear of both adjacent dwellings.
(2) Front Setbacks: Same as R-1 Residential Zone.
(3) Rear Setbacks: Same as R-1 Residential Zone except the minimum rear yard for any
main building shall be Twenty (20) feet.
(G) Building Height Requirements: Same as R-l Residential Zone.
(H) Building Size Requirements: The ground floor area of any main building shall not be less
than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet, exclusive of open porches and carports.
Amended by ordinance number 0125-12-1
(I) Special Provisions: Same as R-1 Residential Zone.
(J) Supplementary Regulations: See Article IV, Supplementary regulations to all Zones.
SECTION 26-III-5. R-2 Residential Zone. (Dwelling, Two Unit)
(A) Objectives and Characteristics: The objective in establishing the R-2 Residential zone
(Dwelling, Two Unit) is to provide a residential environment within the City which is
characterized by a more compact and somewhat denser residential development and a somewhat
higher volume of vehicular and pedestrian traffic than is characteristic of the R-2 Zone for Single
Dwelling Units. Attractive lawns, shrubs and trees, and other landscape plantings about the
houses and on the parking strip within the streets is also characteristic of this Zone.
Representative of the uses in this zone are one and two family dwellings, and boarding houses
and rooming houses, home occupations, parks, playgrounds, schools, churches, and certain other
compatible uses. On the other hand, apartment buildings, multiple dwellings, sorority and
fraternity houses and other uses normally associated with high density dwelling areas, as well as
commercial and industrial uses, are prohibited from this Zone. In order to accomplish the
objectives and purpose of this ordinance, and to promote the essential characteristics of this zone,
the following precise regulations shall apply to the R-2 Residential Zone (Dwelling, Two Unit):
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be permitted in the R-2 Residential Zone
(Dwelling, Two Unit):
(1) Any use permitted in the R-1 Residential Zone or R-2 Residential Zone
(Dwelling, Single Unit).
(2) Two Family dwelling units which units shall have a common separation, and
buildings customarily attached thereto.
(3) Twin Homes when approved through the subdivision process.
(4) Boarding and rooming houses having accommodations for not more than three (3)
boarders and roomers in addition to the residing family.
(5) Nursery Schools.
(6) Rest Homes, also dwelling groups having not more than six (6) dwelling units per
acre of land.
(7) Planned Unit Developments approved per this ordinance.
(8) Residential facility for persons with a disability, not to exceed eight (8) residents
(see Article XVI).
(9) Raising and keeping chickens and subject to Article IV - Supplementary
Regulations
(C) Conditional Uses: See Section 26-XI-5.
(D) Lot Area Requirements: For single-family detached unit dwellings, an area of not less than
seven thousand (7,000) square feet shall be provided and maintained. For twin homes, each
dwelling unit shall have a lot area of not less than four thousand five hundred (4,500) square feet
on each side of the common separation. For duplexes, an area of not less than nine thousand
(9,000) square feet shall be provided and maintained.
(E) Lot Width Requirements: The minimum width of any lot for a dwelling shall be seventy
(70) linear feet for a single-family dwelling lots as measured at the front setback line, and
seventy (70) linear feet for any twin home or duplex lot (each side of a twin home lot must be at
least 35 feet wide) as measured at the front property line, with no portion of the lot being less
than the minimum required width.
(F) Building Setback Requirements:
(1) Side Setbacks: The minimum side yard for any dwelling, or boarding and rooming
house, shall be six (6) feet and the total width of the two required side yards shall be not
less than sixteen (16) feet. The minimum side yard for a private garage or other accessory
building shall not be located closer than twelve (12) feet to a dwelling on an adjacent lot.
On corner lots, the side yard which faces on a street shall be not less than twenty (20) feet
for main buildings and not less than twenty (20) feet for accessory buildings. A carport
may be built within one (1) foot of the property line, except on the street side of corner
lots. However, all walls must comply with side yard regulations for buildings. A party
wall shall be permitted between accessory buildings on adjacent lots when both accessory
buildings are located at least twelve (12) feet in the rear of both adjacent dwellings.
(2) Front Setbacks: Same as R-1 Residential Zone.
(3) Rear Setbacks: Same as R-1 Residential Zone except the minimum rear yard for any
main building shall be Twenty (20) feet.
(G) Building Height Requirements: Same as R-l Residential Zone.
(H) Building Size Requirements: The ground floor area of any main building shall not be less
than seven hundred fifty (750) square feet, exclusive of open porches and carports. Duplexes
shall not have less than three hundred seventy-five (375) square feet on each side of the common
wall, exclusive of open porches and carports.
(I) Special Provisions: Same as R-1 Residential Zone.
(J) Supplementary Regulations: See Article IV, Supplementary regulations to all Zones.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0125-12-1.
SECTION 26-III-6. R-3 Residential Zone
Prior to the enactment of Cedar City Ordinance Number 0125-12-1 Cedar City had a single R-3
Residential Zone. After the adoption of Cedar City Ordinance 0125-12-1 there are two types of
R-3 Residential Zones named R-3 Residential Zone (Dwelling, Single Unit) and R-3 Residential
Zone (Dwelling, Multiple Unit). When R-3 was replaced and split into the single unit and
multiple unit designations the designation that most closely resembled the pre-existing R-3 zone
is the multiple unit designation. Therefore, in order to keep the vested rights of the existing
property owners under the new R-3 zoning system the same as these rights were under the old R-
3 system, property that was zoned R-3 Residential prior to the adoption of Cedar City Ordinance
Number 0125-12-1 and property hereafter designated R-3 on the Cedar City Zoning Map will be
allowed to develop according to the provisions of the R-3 Residential Zoning (Dwelling,
Multiple Unit).
SECTION 26-III-7. R-3 Residential Zone (Dwelling, Single Unit).
(A) Objectives and Characteristics: The objective in establishing the R-3 Residential Zone
(Dwelling, Single Unit) is to provide a residential environment within the City which is
characterized by a variety of dwelling types having widely varying forms, shapes and density.
Attractive lawns, shrubs, trees, and other landscape plantings about the houses are characteristic
of this zone. Typical also of the R-3 Zone with single-dwelling units is somewhat smaller lot
widths, a greater movement of vehicular traffic, and a somewhat denser residential environment
than is characteristic of the R-2 Zone for single-dwelling units. Representative of the uses in this
zone are single-family dwelling units, schools, parks, and playgrounds. Commercial and
industrial uses are not permitted uses in this zone.
Amended by ordinance number 0125-12-1.
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be permitted in the R-3 Residential Zone
(Dwelling, Single Unit):
(1) Any use permitted in the R-l and R-2 Residential Zones for single-family dwelling
units.
(2) Boarding and rooming houses.
(3) Private Schools.
(4) Non-profit Community Service Clubs, except those whose activity of which is
customarily carried on as a business.
(5) Planned Unit Developments approved per this ordinance.
(6) Residential facility for persons with a disability, not to exceed twelve (12) residents
(see Article XVI).
(7) Raising and keeping chickens for non-commercial purposes and subject to Article IV
- Supplementary Regulations.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance Nos. 1013-10-2 and 0125-12-1
(C) Conditional Uses: See Section 26-XI-5.
Amended by ordinance number 0827-08-2
(D) Lot Area Requirements: An area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet for a
single-family dwelling.
Amended by ordinance number 0125-12-1.
(E) Lot Width Requirements: The minimum lot widths shall be fifty-five (55) feet at the front
setback.
Amended by ordinance number 0125-12-1.
(F) Building Setback Requirements:
(1) Side Setback: The minimum side yard for any R-3 zone shall be six (6) feet and the
total width of the two required yards shall be not less than sixteen (16) feet. The
minimum side yard for a private garage shall be six (6) feet except that private garages
and other accessory buildings located at least six (6) feet in the rear of the main building
may have a minimum side yard of one (1) foot, provided that no private garage or other
accessory building shall be located closer than twelve (12) feet to a dwelling on an
adjacent lot. On corner lots, the side yard which faces on a street, shall be not less than
twenty (20) feet for main buildings, and not less than twenty (20) feet for accessory
buildings. A carport, may be built within one (1) foot of the property line except on the
street side of corner lots. However, all walls must comply with said yard regulations for
dwellings. A party wall shall be permitted where both accessory buildings are located at
least twelve (12) feet in the rear of both adjacent dwellings.
(2) Front Setback: Same as R-1 Residential Zone.
(3) Rear Setback: Same as R-2 Residential Zone.
(G) Building Height Requirements: Same as R-1 Residential Zone.
Amended by ordinance number 0125-12-1.
(H) Building Size Requirements: No requirements.
(I) Special Provisions: Same as in R-l Residential Zone.
(J) Supplementary Regulations: See Article IV, Supplementary regulations to all Zones.
SECTION 26-III-8. R-3 Residential Zone (Dwelling, Multiple Unit).
(A) Objectives and Characteristics: The objective in establishing the R-3 Residential Zone
(Dwelling, Multiple Unit) is to provide a residential environment within the City which is
characterized by a variety of dwelling types having widely varying forms, shapes and density.
Attractive lawns, shrubs, trees, and other landscape plantings about the houses are characteristic
of this zone. Typical also of the R-3 Zone with multiple units is, a greater movement of vehicular
traffic, and a denser residential environment than is characteristic of the R-2 Zones.
Representative of the uses in this zone are dwelling units, schools, parks, and playgrounds.
Commercial and industrial uses are not permitted uses in this zone.
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be permitted in the R-3 Residential Zone
(Dwelling, Multiple Unit):
(1) Any use permitted in the R-l and R-2 Residential Zones, and R-3 Residential Zones
with single dwelling units.
(2) Three and four-family dwellings, apartment houses, townhomes and other multiple
dwellings.
(3) Boarding and rooming houses.
(4) Private Schools.
(5) Non-profit Community Service Clubs, except those whose activity of which is
customarily carried on as a business.
(6) Planned Unit Developments approved per this ordinance.
(7) Residential facility for persons with a disability, not to exceed twelve (12) residents
(see Article XVI).
(8) Raising and keeping chickens for non-commercial purposes and subject to Article IV
- Supplementary Regulations.
(9) Assisted Living Facilities as defined in Section 26-I-4(B)(14).
(C) Conditional Uses: See Section 26-XI-5.
(D) Lot Area Requirements: An area of not less than six thousand (6,000) square feet for a
single-family dwelling, or nine thousand (9,000) square feet for a duplex or twin home, plus one
thousand five hundred (1,500) additional square feet of lot area for each additional dwelling unit
above 2 units, and not less than seven thousand (7,000) square feet for any main building other
than dwellings. In no case shall there be more than 24 units per acre. Twin homes shall have a
minimum lot area of four thousand five hundred (4500) square feet on each side of the common
separation.
(E) Lot Width Requirements: The minimum lot widths shall be:
(1) For single-family detached dwellings: fifty-five (55) feet at the front setback.
(2) For twin homes or duplexes: seventy (70) feet at front property line (35
feet each side of a twin home lot)
(3) For any multi-unit dwelling: fifty-five (55) feet at front property line.
(F) Building Setback Requirements:
(1) Side Setback: The minimum side yard for any R-3 zone shall be six (6) feet and the
total width of the two required yards shall be not less than sixteen (16) feet. The
minimum side yard for a private garage shall be six (6) feet except that private garages
and other accessory buildings located at least six (6) feet in the rear of the main building
may have a minimum side yard of one (1) foot, provided that no private garage or other
accessory building shall be located closer than twelve (12) feet to a dwelling on an
adjacent lot. On corner lots, the side yard which faces on a street, shall be not less than
twenty (20) feet for main buildings, and not less than twenty (20) feet for accessory
buildings. A carport, may be built within one (1) foot of the property line except on the
street side of corner lots. However, all walls must comply with said yard regulations for
dwellings. A party wall shall be permitted where both accessory buildings are located at
least twelve (12) feet in the rear of both adjacent dwellings.
(2) Front Setback: Same as R-1 Residential Zone.
(3) Rear Setback: Same as R-2 Residential Zone.
(G) Building Height Requirements: No building shall be erected to a height greater than
thirty-five (35) feet, except as provided by the Board of Adjustment.
(H) Building Size Requirements: No requirements.
(I) Special Provisions: Same as in R-l Residential Zone.
(J) Supplementary Regulations: See Article IV, Supplementary regulations to all Zones.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0125-12-1 and 1216-15-2
SECTION 26-III-9. R-E Residential Estate Zone.
(A) Objectives and Characteristics: The objective in establishing the R-E Residential Estate
Zone is to encourage the creation and maintenance of a residential environment within an area
which is characterized by large lots with minimal lot densities (maximum 2 lots per acre) on
which single family dwellings are situated, surrounded by settings in which the pre-development
natural character of the landscape is retained. Native plant species, wildlife habitats, low water
consumptive landscapes, minimum vehicular traffic, private lanes connected to public streets,
featured or gated entries, building products produced from natural materials, and quiet residential
conditions are also characteristic of this zone. While much of this zone is currently devoted to
open land uses, it is intended that the land shall be developed into residential uses as the needs
arise having characteristics as herein above set forth. The minimum area for a R-E Zone shall be
ten (10) acres. Representative of the uses within the R-E Zone are one family dwellings,
caretaker's cottages (not to exceed one per lot), parks and playgrounds. Boarding and lodging
houses, two family dwellings, triplexes, apartment houses and other multiple dwellings
representative of higher density residential areas are strictly prohibited in this zone. Commercial
and industrial uses are strictly prohibited unless otherwise designated or as listed below. In order
to accomplish the objectives and purpose of this ordinance, and to promote the characteristics of
this zone the following precise regulations shall apply to the R-E (Residential Estate) Zone:
Amended by ordinance number 0125-12-1 and 0919-12
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be permitted in the R-E Residential Zone:
(1) One-family dwellings and accessory buildings and structures; including guest houses
(not to exceed 1200 square feet) and subject to the setback requirements of one-family
dwellings, private garage and/or barn;
(2) Keeping of animals and fowl, as an accessory use to a single-family dwelling,
limited to the following:
a. Two large animals per lot and one additional large animal for each 10,000
square feet over 1 acre. Large animals may include horses, cattle, goats, sheep or
other animals judged by the Planning Commission to be compatible with this
zone; and
b. Not more than 20 poultry or rabbits shall be kept on any lot;
(3) Planned Unit Developments approved per this ordinance;
(4) Residential facility for persons with a disability, not to exceed four (4) residents (see
Article XVI);
(5) Public and private parks, playgrounds, green ways, trails, and open space;
(6) Public and private golf courses;
(7) Public and private recreation centers;
(8) Solar Power Generation, Central.
Amended by ordinance number 0827-08-2 and 0919-12
(C) Conditional Uses: See Section 26-XI-5.
Amended by ordinance number 0827-08-2
(D) Area Requirements: Same as R-1 Residential Zone.
Amended by ordinance number 0125-12-1
(E) Width Requirements: Same as R-1 Residential Zone.
Amended by ordinance number 0125-12-1
(F) Building Setback Requirements:
(1) Side Setback: Same as R-1 Residential Zone.
(2) Front Setbacks: Same as R-1 Residential Zone.
(3) Rear Setbacks: Same as R-1 Residential Zone.
(4) Solar Power Generation, Central: structures and panels shall be setback 20' minimum
from residential neighboring properties.
Amended by ordinance number 0125-12-1 and 0919-12
(G) Building Height Requirements: Same as R-1 Residential Zone.
Amended by ordinance number 0125-12-1
(H) Building Size Requirements: Same as R-1 Residential Zone.
Amended by ordinance number 0125-12-1
(I) Special Provisions:
(1) All Special Provisions in R-1 Residential Zone.
(2) Variations from development standards of other residential zones may be permitted
by the City Council as part of the approval of this zone. Variations shall not include
changes in the permitted uses allowed except to the extent set forth herein.
(3) The minimum area required for a R-E Residential Estate Zone is ten (10) acres.
(4) All streets within a Residential Estate zone shall meet with City Engineering
Standards. Streets adjacent to a Residential Estate zone and master planned arterial and
collectors shall be fully improved with curb, gutter and sidewalk in accordance with City
Engineer Standards.
(5) The Residential Estate zone is designed to be in areas where the generally uniform
slope is 5% or less and therefore, would not require curb, gutter and sidewalks along
public streets. Areas with slopes greater than 5% will be permitted with fully improved
streets (curb, gutter and sidewalk) or as a P.U.D. Public streets shall have a minimum of
one hard-surfaced sidewalk or footpath per street.
(6) Areas used for animals shall be maintained so as to conform with health, sanitation,
water and drainage requirements.
(7) Solar Power Generation, Central. Shall have a minimum of one hundred (100)
contiguous acres.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0919-12.
(J) Supplementary Regulations: See Article IV, Supplementary Regulations to All Zones.
THE FORMER SECTION 26-III-10, MPD- Master Planned Development Zone Repealed
Cedar City’s master planned development zone has been repealed and is no longer available as a
zone within Cedar City for future development. Cedar City will continue to use the provisions of
this zone for the developments that have completed and recorded a development agreement with
Cedar City prior to the date this ordinance is repealed. Those properties that are currently zoned
MPD, but that have not completed the development agreement process will be required to rezone
the property in order to utilize the City’s zoning tools that exist at the time of development.
The contents of the master planned development zone that was repealed is attached to the
repealing ordinance #0425-12-1 filed with the City Recorder.
SECTION 26-III-10, RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OVERLAYS (RDO).
Section 26-III-10-A. Purpose
Section 26-III-10-B. Permitted Land Use Locations
Section 26-III-10-C. Permitted Zones
Section 26-III-10-D. Permitted and Conditional Uses
Section 26-III-10-E. RDO Master Plan Area
Section 26-III-10-F. Allowed Residential Density
Section 26-III-10-G. Approval Procedures
Section 26-III-10-H. Amendments
Section 26-III-10-I. Recording and Vesting
Section 26-III-10-J. Expiration of Approvals
SECTION 26-III-10-A. Purpose
The underlying purpose and intent of this ordinance is to establish a method whereby land
owners and/or developers who develop property in designated Residential Land Use
Classifications of the Cedar City General Plan can develop to a higher density of residential units
than are normally allowed in such designated land use classifications. Developments within
Residential Development Overlays (RDO) can also include areas with commercial and office
type businesses and should be enhanced with community amenities. Residential Development
Overlays are developments that are allowed through the approval and recording of a
development master plan that designates a variety of the residential and commercial zones that
are currently included in the City’ Planning and Zoning Ordinance. After the approval and
recording of the development master plan the development can proceed according to the
requirements of the City’s Planning and Zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance and
engineering standards.
SECTION 26-III-10-B. Permitted Land Use Locations
Residential Development Overlays are permitted within the following land use classifications of
the Cedar City General Plan:
- Rural Estate Residential
- Low Density Residential
- Medium Density Residential
- Mixed Use Development
SECTION 26-III-10-C. Permitted Zones
The approved master plans for the Residential Development Overlays can include the following
zones:
-All Residential Zones
-General Commercial Zone
-Central Commercial Zone
-Highway Service Zone
- Neighborhood Commercial Zone
RDO master plans will show planned zone areas as pods that approximately show the boundaries
of the zone. The final approval of the zone and its recorded boundaries will be done at time of
property development or subdivision plat approval. The number of dwelling units within the final
zoning boundaries and in the overall RDO Master Plan shall not exceed the density that is shown
on the RDO master plan.
SECTION 26-III-10-D. Permitted and Conditional Uses
See Section 26-III for the permitted and conditional uses allowed in each specific zone in the
approved RDO master plan.
SECTION 26-III-10-E. RDO Master Plan Area
The minimum area for any RDO Master Plan shall be 10 Acres with the area of the master plan
that is zoned residential to be a minimum of 50% of the total RDO Master Plan area.
SECTION 26-III-10-F. Allowed Residential Density
The maximum residential density for each land use area where an RDO Master Plan is permitted
shall not exceed the following:
Land Use Area Maximum Allowed Residential Density
Rural Estate Residential 4 Dwelling Units Per Acre
Low Density Residential 6 Dwelling Units Per Acre
Medium Density Residential 12 Dwelling Units Per Acre
Mixed Use Development 24* Dwelling Units Per Acre
* Current General Plan shows 30 Units per Acre
The only areas that will be allowed to be used in the calculations for the maximum residential
density will be the master planned areas with residential zones, the half widths of the public
street dedicated right of ways and private streets fronting the residential zones and any public or
private amenities benefitting and adjoining the residential zones, i.e. parks, trails, schools,
churches and other such amenities as approved with the master plan. Proposed commercial and
office zones, the half widths of the streets fronting those commercial and office zones as well as
any public or private amenities contained within or only benefitting those commercial and office
zones cannot be used in the calculations for the maximum residential density. Residential
development will be allowed in commercial and office zones according the zoning ordinance.
The residential units in commercial and offices zones will not count toward the allowed density
in master planned residential zones or the overall RDO Master Plan.
SECTION 26-III-10-G. Approval Procedures
The following procedure is for RDO Master Plan approval:
(1) Discuss Proposed Master Plan with City Staff: Any person wishing to create a
RDO Master Plan within Cedar City shall secure the following from the City:
a. Details of Residential Development Overlay (RDO) process;
b. Planning information pertaining to the City's plan of streets, parks,
trails, drainage, zoning, subdivision of land, and other General Plan
requirements affecting the land;
c. Airport overlay, flood zone, soil classification and other maps and
information affecting the specific development including irrigation
ditches;
d. Cedar engineering standards detailing the standards for the construction
of Street, water, storm drain, sewer and other public improvements.
(2) Planning Commission Application and Fees: The application and filing fees
required for a RDO Master Plan are established by resolution as set forth in the
City’s consolidated fee schedule and shall be submitted with the Planning
Commission Application.
(3) RDO Master Plan Preparation: The developer shall prepare the master plan for
the development and present the same to the City Staff, Sketch Committee,
Planning Commission and City Council in the sequence shown for review and
approval. The required number of copies of the master plan and other information
requested shall be provided to each group or individual in the approval process.
The master plan shall be drawn to an appropriate scale not smaller than 100 feet
to the inch, and shall be on standard 24" X 36" paper or smaller. Each sheet of
the Plan shall contain the proposed name of the RDO Master Plan, scale of the
drawing, the sheet number, an arrow indicating north and the section, township
and range location of the RDO Master Plan. The RDO Master Plan shall also
contain the following information:
a. A vicinity map containing sufficient information to locate the RDO
Master Plan in the City;
b. The ownership lines for all separately owned parcels within the RDO
Master Plan including the property owner’s name, and the County serial
and tax identification numbers for each parcel;
c. The names and addresses of the owner(s), the developer, the engineer
and surveyor of the RDO Master Plan;
d. The boundary lines of the RDO Master Plan including a metes and
bounds legal description of the entire RDO Master Plan boundary;
e. Property ownership lines of all separately owned parcels within the
RDO Master Plan including the County serial and tax identification
numbers for each parcel;
f. Property ownership lines of adjacent tracts of land to the RDO Master
Plan, showing ownership and property monuments;
g. Existing curbs, gutters, sidewalks, street asphalt, sanitary sewers and
manholes, storm drains and manholes, water supply main valves, culverts,
and fire hydrants within the RDO Master Plan and within 500 feet of the
proposed RDO Master Plan (the width or diameter dimensions of all such
improvements shall also be indicated);
h. Location of all existing or recorded streets, alleys and easements, water
courses, irrigation ditches (with irrigation company names), public utilities
and other important features, and existing structures within the RDO
Master Plan and within 500 feet thereof, and the location and distance to
the nearest existing bench mark or monument and section line;
i. Land use area boundaries within the RDO Master Plan and within 500
feet thereof as shown on the most current Land Use map in the Cedar City
General Plan;
j. Current zoning boundaries within the RDO Master Plan and within 500
feet thereof as shown on the most current Zone map of Cedar City;
k. Approximate location of master planned improvements within the RDO
Master Plan including streets, water, sewer, storm drain, parks and trails as
shown on the City’s most current approved master plan for each
improvement;
l. Approximate location of the proposed zoning boundaries with the
development;
m. Approximate location, size and area of proposed parks, trails, school
properties and church lots and other open spaces within the RDO Master
Plan;
n. Each area within the RDO Master Plan that shows an individual zone
designation shall be called a Zone POD. Each Zone POD shall show a
unique number to identify that specific Zone POD;
o. A Density Development Table shall be included on the RDO Master
Plan that includes the following information for each Zone POD: The
Zone POD number, current land use designation; proposed zone; acreage;
maximum allowed units per acre for the current land use area; total
allowed units; acreage of proposed public parks, trails, schools, churches;
remaining residential area with roads; proposed number of dwelling units
and residential density. The table shall also include a row totaling all the
individual Zone POD amounts for area, allowed units, area of parks, trails,
schools and churches, the remaining residential area and the residential
area density for the entire RDO Master Plan;
p. The RDO Master Plan shall show within its boundaries the FEMA flood
zone designations and their boundaries, Cedar City Regional Airport
overlay zones and their boundaries, soils classifications and topographical
contours;
q. The RDO Master Plan shall include the required consent, approval,
acceptance and signature certificates for each property owner, the City
Engineer/ Community Development director, City Attorney, Planning
Commission Chairperson and Mayor. The Mayor’s certificate shall
include a reference to the number of the Approval Ordinance.
(4) RDO Master Plan Approval: Recommendations or approvals for the RDO
Master Plan shall be obtained for City Staff, Sketch Committee, Planning
Commission and City Council and Mayor in the sequence stated. The final
approval of the RDO Master Plan shall be done by a City ordinance. The approval
procedure and Public Hearing and Notice requirements shall be the same as
outlined in Article XII. of this ordinance titled Amendments.
SECTION 26-III-10-H. Amendments
RDO Master Plan Amendments: Upon application and payment of fees as outlined in Section 26-
III-10-G(2), all or part of a RDO Master Plan can be amended as follows.
(1) Any amended areas of the RDO Master Plan and remaining Areas of the
original or previously amended RDO Master Plan shall conform to all
requirements of Section 26-III-10 or the requirements of the underlying zone as
contained in this Planning and Zoning Ordinance.
(2) For an amended RDO Master Plan a revised RDO Master Plan same as
required in Section 26-III-10-G for a new RDO Master Plan shall be prepared for
all the amended areas and remaining areas within the original or previously
amended RDO Master Plan.
(3) The approval and public hearing and notice requirements for an amended
RDO Master Plan, including amended areas of the RDO Master Plan and
remaining Areas of the original or previously amended RDO Master Plan, shall
also be the same as the approval requirements for a new RDO Master Plan as
contained in Section 26-III-10-G.
(4) As part of the approval process for an amended RDO Master Plan the approval
of the underlying original or previously amended RDO Master Plan shall be
rescinded.
SECTION 26-III-10-I. Recording and Vesting
Upon final approval of the RDO Master Plan and ordinance by the Mayor and City Council the
City shall have the RDO Master Plan and ordinance respectively filed with the City Engineer and
City Recorder. The approved ordinance will state the specific vesting responsibilities and rights
between the City and property owners.
SECTION 26-III-10-J. Expiration of Approvals
An approval of an RDO Master Plan may be rescinded by the City Council after a period of
seven years of development inactivity within the RDO Master Plan following the approval.
When an RDO Master Plan is rescinded the zoning of the underlying property shall revert back
to the established zones before the RDO Master Plan was approved or to an Annexed Transition
(AT) zone if no zone existed. Such rescinding may only take place after notice to all current land
owners within the RDO Master Plan, and a public meeting with a vote of the City Council.
Notice shall be sufficient if mailed via first class mail to the land owner’s last known addresses.
During the public meeting the land owners shall have a reasonable opportunity to address the
City Council.
SECTION 26-III-10-K. City Fees
Before final approval of the RDO Master Plan and ordinance by the City Council the Developer
shall have paid to the City Treasurer all City Administration and Engineering checking fees as
established by resolution as set forth in the City’s consolidated fee schedule.
Enacted by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0425-12-1.
SECTION 26-III-11. Development Agreements.
Section 26-III-11-A Intent
It is the intent of this Section to authorize the City to use, consistent with Utah Law and its own
land use regulations, development agreements; to establish a method of approval for
development agreements; to establish the scope of subjects to be covered by development
agreements; and to allow for the amending and recording of development agreements.
Section 26-III-11-B General Requirements
At the full discretion of the Cedar City Council, the City may enter into a development
agreement with one (1) or more owners or developers of property. The development agreement
shall constitute a binding contract between Cedar City and all other parties containing all agreed
upon terms and conditions. City staff is authorized to negotiate the terms of the development
agreement with the applicant, but in no case shall a development agreement be binding on Cedar
City unless it is approved by the Cedar City Council.
Section 26-III-11-C Scope of Development Agreements
(A) Development Agreements may address the following issues:
(1) Project specific issues where the standards for development or the impact
of the development is not addressed by the City’s zoning ordinance,
Subdivision ordinance, Engineering standards, the City’s general land use
plan, or other land use regulations.
(2) Resolving issues regarding unique features or challenges confronting
individual developments.
(3) Clarifying the application of, and ensuring adherence to, the City’s zoning
ordinance, Subdivision ordinance, Engineering standards, the City’s
general land use plan, or other land use regulations.
(4) When mutually agreed upon with the developer.
(5) As a method of reimbursement for developers that extend infrastructure to
facilitate development where the following apply:
A. The source of the reimbursement is from neighboring land owners,
and no funds are pledged by the City;
B. The neighboring land owners are only to pay their proportionate
share of the infrastructure that will facilitate the development of
their lands; and
C. The agreements have a ten (10) year term;
(6) Facilitate a delay in the timing of the installation of various infrastructure
items because of wintertime weather conditions.
(7) Provide for the construction of public infrastructure above what is required
by the City’s zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance, engineering
standards, the general land use plan, and other land use regulations.
(8) Provide that adequate security is in place for proposed public
infrastructure and an adequate time line is established for completion.
(9) Provide alternative methods of bonding for construction of infrastructure
or amenities when the methods of bonding approved in the City’s
ordinance are inadequate or fail to guarantee successful completion of the
project.
(B) Under no circumstances shall development agreements be used to approve
development standards that fall below the minimum standards established by the
City’s zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance, engineering standards, the
general land use plan, and any other land use regulation.
Section 26-III-11-D Adoption and Amendment of Development Agreements
(A) All development agreements shall go before the Cedar City planning commission
for their review and recommendation. After receiving a recommendation from the Cedar
City Planning Commission, all development agreements shall go before the Cedar City
Council in a public meeting for adoption, amendment, or rejection.
(B) An approved development agreement may be amended with the mutual consent of
the parties. All proposed amendments shall be in writing and shall follow the same
procedure that is required to adopt a development agreement.
Section 26-III-11-E Monitoring and Enforcement
The City Engineer shall review the terms and conditions of all development agreements annually
to assure compliance. Prior to Cedar City taking any enforcement allowed by the agreement, and
state and federal law, the City shall send notice to all parties to the agreement giving notice of
the substance of the noncompliance, a reasonable method to cure the noncompliance, and a
reasonable time frame in which the noncompliance will need to be cured.
Section 26-III-11-F Recording
If deemed reasonably necessary, the agreement may be recorded on the title to the property
subject to the agreement. All recording fees shall be paid by the private land owner(s).
Section 26-III-11-G Third Party Rights
Except as expressly provided in the development agreement, a development agreement shall not
create rights enforceable by any individual or party not a party to the development agreement.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0425-12-1.
SECTION 26-III- 12. GC General Commercial Zone.
Cedar City’s general commercial (GC) zone has been repealed and is no longer available as a
zone within Cedar City for future development. Cedar City will continue to use the provisions of
this zone for the development of property that was zoned general commercial (GC) prior to the
date of the general commercial (GC) zone’s repeal. The contents of the general commercial
(GC) zone that existed immediately prior to its repeal is attached to the repealing ordinance
(Cedar City Ordinance Nom 0926-12-1) which is on file with the City Recorder.
SECTION 26-III-13. CC Central Commercial Zone.
(A) Objective and Characteristics: The CC Central Commercial Zone has been
established as a district in which the primary use of the land is for business purposes. The
area covered by this zone is now and is intended that it shall continue to be the dominant
shopping and financial center of the City and surrounding territory. For this reason, the
zone has been located where the street pattern makes the business buildings readily
accessible to all parts of the City and surrounding region where business and shopping
activities can be carried on with maximum convenience. The CC Zone is characterized
by wide, clean, well-lighted streets, ample pedestrian ways and vehicular parking lots for
the convenience and safety of the public. Attractive, inviting and well-maintained shops,
stores, offices and other buildings are also characteristic of this zone. Representative of
the uses in this zone are banks, hotels, office buildings, theaters, and a wide variety of
retail outlets. Conversely, uses which tend to create business dead spots, cause undue
scattering of business and generally tend to thwart the use of the land for its primary
purpose have been excluded from this zone. In order to accomplish the objectives and
purposes of this ordinance and to promote the characteristics of this zone, the following
regulation shall apply in the CC Zone, Central Commercial Zone:
(B) Use Regulations: See Section 26-III-21.
(C) Lot Area Requirements: There shall be no minimum lot area requirements for
commercial lots used for a commercial use permitted in the zone except for gas pumps
and off-street parking area requirements. For buildings arranged, intended, or designed
exclusively for residential use, the minimum lot area requirements shall be the same as
for dwellings in the R-3 zone, except that no lot area requirements shall apply when the
dwellings are located above the ground floor and said ground floor is devoted exclusively
to a commercial use permitted in the zone.
D) Lot Width Requirements: There shall be no minimum lot width requirements for
commercial lots used for a commercial use permitted in the zone except for gas pumps
and off-street parking area requirements. For buildings arranged, intended, or designed
exclusively for residential use, the minimum lot width requirements shall be the same as
for dwellings in the R-3 zone, except that no lot width requirements shall apply when the
dwellings are located above the ground floor and said ground floor is devoted exclusively
to a commercial use permitted in the zone
(E) Building Setback Requirements:
(1) Side Setback: Any commercial building adjacent to a street right-of-way
shall be set back 20 feet therefrom. No other side setback shall be required for
buildings having fire resistive walls in compliance with the Building Code except
that all buildings adjacent to a lot zoned residential shall be set back at least
twenty (20) feet from the lot line of the adjacent residential property.
(2) Front Setback: The front setback shall be twenty (20) feet from the front lot
line.
(3) Rear Setback: No rear setback shall be required for commercial buildings
having fire resistant walls in compliance with the building code, except that all
buildings adjacent to a lot zoned residential shall be set back at least twenty (20)
feet from the lot line of the adjacent residential property.
(4) Non Fire Resistant Building Setbacks: For non-fire resistant buildings,
regulations as contained in the Building Code shall apply, except all buildings and
structures, including but not limited to gasoline pumps, shall be set back at least
twenty (20) feet from the street right-of-way line.
(5) Residential Use Building Setbacks: For buildings arranged, intended, or
designed exclusively for residential use, the setback requirements shall be the
same as for dwellings in the R-3 zone.
(F) Building Height Requirements: The maximum height of any building with a
commercial use shall be fifty (50) feet except buildings arranged, intended, or designed
exclusively for residential use, the maximum height requirement shall be the same as for
dwellings in the R-3 zone.
(G) Building Size Requirements: No requirements.
(H) Special Provisions:
(1) All off-street parking space shall be hard surfaced.
(2) All merchandise, equipment, and other materials (except for vehicles in
running order) shall be stored within an enclosed building or within a sight
obscuring enclosure.
(3) No dust, odor, smoke, vibrations, or intermittent light, blare, or noise shall be
emitted which is discernible beyond the premises.
(4) Landscaping - See Article VII, Landscaping
(I) Supplementary Regulations: See Article IV, Supplementary Regulations to all
zones.
(J) Special Provisions:
(1) Residential type uses that are permitted within this zone (i.e. “Apartments,”
“Dwelling Units,” “Nursing Homes,” “Residential,” “Residential facility for
persons with a disability,” and “Rest Homes”) are only permitted in the following
situations:
A. In conjunction with a commercial development where the residential use is
located above the ground floor and, except for access to the residential
units, said ground floor is devoted exclusively to a commercial use
permitted in the zone, and/or;
B. In conjunction with a unified mixed use project where any exclusively
residential portion of the project (that part of the project that does not
contain a commercial use or associated parking) comprises no more than
fifty (50) percent of the overall development site.
SECTION 26-III-14. DC Downtown Commercial Zone.
(A) Objective and Characteristics: The DC Downtown Commercial Zone is
established as a district in which the primary use of the land is for retail/business
purposes. The area covered by this zone is intended to be the central retail, service and
professional center of the City. For this reason, the zone has been located in the center
part of the City where the street pattern makes the business buildings readily accessible to
all parts of the community and the surrounding region. The area is intended to provide
for a variety of community activities. The DC Zone is characterized by wide, clean, welllighted
streets, ample pedestrian ways and vehicular parking lots for the convenience and
safety of the public. Attractive, inviting and well-maintained shops, stores, offices,
theater and cultural buildings, as well as multifamily residential dwellings are also
characteristic of this zone. Representative of the uses in this zone are specialty retail,
lodging, condo/apartment housing (not at ground level), professional offices, theaters,
restaurants and a wide variety of retail outlets.
(B) Permitted Uses: See Section 26-III-21.
(C) Lot Area Requirements: There shall be no minimum lot area requirements for
commercial lots used for a commercial use permitted in the zone except for gas pumps
and off-street parking area requirements. For buildings arranged, intended, or designed
exclusively for residential use, the minimum lot area requirements shall be the same as
for dwellings in the R-3 zone, except that no lot area requirements shall apply when the
dwellings are located above the ground floor and said ground floor is devoted exclusively
to a commercial use permitted in the zone.
(D) Lot Width Requirements: There shall be no minimum lot width requirements for
commercial lots used for a commercial use permitted in the zone except for gas pumps
and off-street parking area requirements. For buildings arranged, intended, or designed
exclusively for residential use, the minimum lot width requirements shall be the same as
for dwellings in the R-3 zone, except that no lot width requirements shall apply when the
dwellings are located above the ground floor and said ground floor is devoted exclusively
to a commercial use permitted in the zone
(E) Building Setback Requirements: Shall be the same as the R-3 Residential Zone.
(1) Side Setback: No side setback shall be required for commercial buildings
having fire resistive walls in compliance with the Building Code except that all
buildings adjacent to a lot zoned residential shall be set back at least twenty (20)
feet from the lot line off the adjacent residential lot.
(2) Front Setback: No front setback shall be required for commercial buildings in
this zone.
(3) Rear Setback: No rear setback shall be required for commercial buildings
having fire resistant walls in compliance with the building code.
(4) Non Fire Resistant Building Setbacks: For non-fire resistant buildings,
regulations as contained in said Building Code shall apply.
(5) Residential Use Building Setbacks: For buildings arranged, intended, or
designed exclusively for residential use, the setback requirements shall be the
same as for dwellings in the R-3 zone.
(F) Building Height Requirements: The maximum height of any building with a
commercial use shall be fifty (50) feet except buildings arranged, intended, or
designed exclusively for residential use, the maximum height requirement shall be
the same as for dwellings in the R-3 zone.
(G) Building Size Requirements: No requirements.
(H) Special Provisions:
(1) All off-street parking space shall be hard surfaced.
(2) All merchandise, equipment, and other materials (except for vehicles
in running order) shall be stored within an enclosed building or within a
sight obscuring enclosure.
(3) No dust, odor, smoke, vibrations, or intermittent light, glare, or noise
shall be emitted which is discernible beyond the premises.
(4) Landscaping - See Article VII, Landscaping
(I) Supplementary Regulations: See Article IV, Supplementary Regulations to
all zones.
SECTION 26-III-15. HS Highway Service Zone.
(A) Objectives and Characteristics: The HS zone has been established as
districts in which the primary use of the land is for establishments which serve the
traveling public. The Highway Service Zone has been situated in appropriate
locations adjacent to major highways. The objectives in establishing the HS zone
is to:
(1) promote safety on the highways;
(2) protect the interest of the public in maintaining unobstructed use of the
highway right-of-way;
(3) promote the beauty and appearances of the landscape;
(4) promote the convenience of the traveling public;
(5) encourage establishments to locate in the zone which will provide
essential services to the traveling public; and
(6) discourage any use which, because of its character or nature, would
thwart the use of the land for its primary purpose. The highway service
zone is characterized by attractive highway commercial and service
buildings situated in restful landscaped settings surrounded by landscaping
of well-maintained trees, shrubs, and other plantings, and open off-street
parking areas. Representative of the uses in the highway service zone are
motels, cafes, and travel trailer courts. In order to accomplish the
objectives and purposes in the ordinance and to stabilize and protect the
central characteristics of the highway service zone, the following
regulations shall apply in the HS zone.
(B) Permitted Uses: See Section 26-III-21.
(C) Lot Area Requirements: No Requirements.
(D) Lot Width Requirements: No Requirements.
(E) Building Setback Requirements:
(1) Side Setback: Any building adjacent to a street right-of-way shall be set back
20 feet therefrom. No other side setback shall be required for buildings having fire
resistive walls in compliance with the Building Code, except that all buildings
adjacent to a lot zoned residential shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from
the lot line of the adjacent residential property.
(2) Front Setback: The front setback shall be twenty (20) feet from the front lot
line.
(3) Rear Setback: No rear setback shall be required for buildings having fire
resistant walls in compliance with the building code, except that all buildings
adjacent to a lot zoned residential shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from
the lot line of the adjacent residential property.
(4) Non Fire Resistant Building Setbacks: For non-fire resistant buildings,
regulations as contained in said Building Code shall apply, except all buildings
and structures, including but not limited to gasoline pumps, shall be set back at
least twenty (20) feet from the street right-of-way line.
(F) Building Height Requirements: The maximum height of any building shall be fifty
(50) feet.
(G) Building Size Requirements: No requirements except as specified in Section 26-
III-14.
(H) Special Provisions:
(1) Setback Space: Space resulting from setback requirements may be used for
exit and entrance driveways, and shall not be used for off-street parking,
automobile repair, or any other activities in which vehicles are left unattended for
more than twenty-four (24) hours. Ten (10) feet of said setbacks fronting on any
roadway shall be landscaped with lawn, shrubs, and other landscape features,
except for permitted exit and entrance driveways.
(2) Landscaping: See Article VII, Landscaping
(3) Storage: All storage (including debris and waste materials) except vehicles in
running order, shall be enclosed within a building or within a site obscuring fence
or masonry wall at least eight (8) feet in height.
(4) Maintenance of Premises: The entire lot shall be kept free from refuse, debris
and waste materials and all such refuse, debris and waste material shall be kept in
storage areas in approved containers.
(I) Supplementary Regulations: See Article IV, Supplementary Regulations to all
zones.
(J) Special Provisions:
(1) Residential type uses that are permitted within this zone (i.e. “Apartments,”
“Dwelling Units,” “Nursing Homes,” “Residential,” “Residential facility for
persons with a disability,” and “Rest Homes”) are only permitted in the following
situations:
A. In conjunction with a commercial development where the
residential use is located above the ground floor and, except for
access to the residential units, said ground floor is devoted
exclusively to a commercial use permitted in the zone, and/or
B. In conjunction with a unified mixed-use project where any
exclusively residential portion of the project (that part of the
project that does not contain a commercial use or associated
parking) comprises no more than fifty (50) percent of the overall
development site.
Amended by City Ordinance 1113-19-7
SECTION 26-III-16. The former NC Neighborhood Commercial Zone
Cedar City’s neighborhood commercial (NC) zone has been repealed and is no longer available
as a zone within Cedar City for future development. Cedar City will continue to use the
provisions of this zone for the development of property that was zoned neighborhood
commercial (NC) prior to the date of the neighborhood commercial (NC) zone’s repeal. The
contents of the neighborhood commercial (NC) zone that existed immediately prior to its repeal
is attached to the repealing ordinance (Cedar City Ordinance No. 0926-12-1) which is on file
with the City Recorder.
SECTION 26-III-17. MU- Mixed Use Zone
(A) Objectives and Characteristics: The objective in establishing the MU Mixed Use Zone is
to provide an environment within the City which is characterized by a variety of uses including
residential, commercial, and offices. Residential densities may vary from 2 to 24 units per acre.
The MU Zone is characterized by wide, clean, well-lighted streets, ample pedestrian ways and
vehicular parking lots for the convenience and safety of the public. Attractive, inviting and wellmaintained
shops, stores, offices, theaters and cultural buildings, as well as single and multifamily
residential dwellings are also characteristic of this zone. Representative of the uses in this
zone are specialty retail, lodging, all types of residential, professional offices, theaters,
restaurants, and a wide variety of retail outlets.
(B) Permitted Uses: See Section 26-III-21.
(C) Lot Area Requirements:
1. For apartment houses, bed and breakfast, dwelling units, residential- Same as R-3
Residential Zone (Dwelling, Multi-Unit).
2. For all other uses, Same as CC Central Commercial Zone.
(D) Lot Width Requirements:
1. For apartment houses, bed and breakfast, dwelling units, residential- Same as R-3
Residential Zone (Dwelling, Multi-Unit).
2. For all other uses, Same as CC Central Commercial Zone.
(E) Building Setback Requirements:
1. For apartment houses, bed and breakfast, dwelling units, residential- Same as R-3
Residential Zone (Dwelling, Multi-Unit).
2. For all other uses, Same as CC Central Commercial Zone.
(F) Building Height Requirements: No building shall be erected to a height greater than thirtyfive
(35) feet, except a provided by the board of Adjustment.
(G) Building Size Requirements:
1. For apartment houses, bed and breakfast, dwelling units, residential- Same as R-3
Residential Zone (Dwelling, Multi-Unit).
2. For all other uses, Same as CC Central Commercial Zone.
(H) Special Provisions:
1. For apartment houses, bed and breakfast, dwelling units, residential- Same as R-3
Residential Zone (Dwelling, Multi-Unit).
2. For all other uses, Same as CC Central Commercial Zone.
(I) Supplementary Regulations:
1. For apartment houses, bed and breakfast, dwelling units, residential- Same as R-3
Residential Zone (Dwelling, Multi-Unit).
2. For all other uses, Same as CC Central Commercial Zone.
3. In compliance with Utah’s Medical Cannabis Act, the Mixed Use Zone is designated
as primarily residential.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance 0129-20-1.
SECTION 26-III-18. I&M-1 Industrial and Manufacturing Zone.
(A) Objectives and Characteristics: The I&M-1 Zone has been established as a district
in which the primary use of the land is manufacturing, fabricating, processing and
warehousing establishments. This zone is characterized by flat, open land particularly
suited for industrial uses because of the proximity to railroad tracks and streets and the
availability of utilities necessary for successful industrial use. Representative of the uses
within this zone are manufacturing and fabrication and processing, storage warehousing,
and wholesale distribution and railroad trackage switch yards and terminal facilities. Uses
which give rise to excessive noise, vibration, smoke, odor, dust, fumes, or danger of
explosion have been excluded from this zone. Also subdivisions and dwellings on small
lots along with other uses which tend to thwart or prevent the use of the land for its
primary purposes have been excluded from this zone. In order to accomplish the
objectives and purposes of this ordinance and to encourage the most appropriate use of
the land within these zones, the following regulations shall apply in the I&M-1 Industrial
and Manufacturing Zone:
(B) Permitted Uses: See Section 26-III- 21.
(C) Lot Area Requirements: No requirements, except that an area sufficient to
accommodate setback, off-street parking, loading and unloading, and vehicular access
shall be provided and maintained.
(D) Lot Width Requirements: No requirements.
(E) Building Setback Requirements:
(1) Side Setback: Any building adjacent to a street right-of-way shall be set back
15 feet therefrom. No other side setback shall be required for buildings having fire
resistive walls in compliance with the Building Code, except that all buildings
adjacent to a lot zoned residential shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from
the lot line of the adjacent residential property.
(2) Front Setback: The front setback shall be fifteen (15) feet from the front lot
line.
(3) Rear Setback: No rear setback shall be required for buildings having fire
resistant walls in compliance with the building code, except that all buildings
adjacent to a lot zoned residential shall be set back at least twenty (20) feet from
the lot line of the adjacent residential property.
(4) Non Fire Resistant Building Setbacks: For non-fire resistant buildings,
regulations as contained in said Building Code shall apply, except all buildings
and structures, including but not limited to gasoline pumps, shall be set back at
least fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way line.
(F) Height Requirements: No requirements unless restricted by Section 26-126.
(G) Size of Buildings: No requirements.
(H) Special Provisions:
(1) All storage, except vehicles in running order, shall be enclosed within a
building or within a site obscuring fence at least eight (8) feet in height.
(2) Adequate sanitary facilities shall be provided subject to standards required by
the Board of Health.
(I) Supplementary Regulations: See Article IV, Supplementary Regulations to all
zones.
Amended by City Ordinance 1113-19-7
SECTION 26-III-19. I&M-2, Industrial and Manufacturing Zone.
(A) Objectives and Characteristics: The I&M-2 zone has been established to provide
areas in the community where heavy industrial, manufacturing, and extractive uses may
be located in an environment which protects them from the encroachment of commercial
and residential uses, and which reduces the effect of undesirable characteristics such as
odor, dust, and noise upon surrounding residential, commercial or light industrial areas.
The I&M-2 zone should be located in areas which are readily accessible to railroads and
major highway routes. Said zone shall also be located in areas which will insure the
purity of air and waters within Cedar City and will not create hazards to nearby
residential, commercial or light industrial areas as the result of noise, dust, fumes, or
other disturbances. The I&M-2 zone will be characterized by the location of open and
enclosed manufacturing, processing, extractive, and assembly uses which may potentially
create hazards, nuisances, or disturbances. These uses will be located in areas which
reduce the effects of these characteristics upon other areas of the community, and in an
environment which is attractive but which recognizes the characteristics of the permitted
uses. Some peripheral landscaping will be provided, where appropriate, to reduce the
effects of the detrimental characteristics of permitted uses, and to enhance the appearance
of the entire I&M-2 zone.
(B) Permitted Uses: See Section 22-III-21.
(C) Lot Area Requirements: Same as I&M-1 requirements.
(D) Lot Width Requirements: Same as I&M-1 requirements.
(E) Building Setback Requirements: Same as I&M-1 requirements.
(F) Building Height Requirements: No requirements.
(G) Building Size Requirements: No requirements.
(H) Special Provisions: Same as I&M-1 requirements.
(I) Supplementary Regulations: See Article IV, Supplementary Regulations to all
zones.
SECTION 26-III-20. AT - Annexed Transition Zone
(A) Objectives and Characteristics: The AT (Annexed Transition) zone is intended as
a holding zone for newly annexed areas where the future land use is not determined at the
time of annexation. It is further intended to retain and protect properties for future
development which are undeveloped or underdeveloped and do not have adequate
facilities developed, such as sanitary sewer, water, drainage, and streets. The zone allows
for the continuation of legally established (pre-existing non-conforming) uses and the
establishment of uses compatible with the General Plan designation and zone criteria.
The zone is appropriate in areas designated in the City General Plan for future residential
development (RPA-4, RPA-6), or to protect lands intended for future commercial,
industrial or public uses.
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses, when developed under the applicable
development standards in this zoning ordinance, are permitted in the AT zone:
1) Lawful uses existing on a property at the time of the effective date of this zone.
2) Housing and storage (including corrals, pens, coops, etc.) for animals and for crop
products produced on the premises, to the extent existing at the time of
annexation.
3) The management or harvesting of agricultural products, including field crops,
trees, vegetables, fruits, flowers and nursery stock.
4) Animal grazing, limited to horses, cattle, sheep, and goats and including their
supplementary feeding, providing such grazing is not a part of, nor conducted in
conjunction with any dairy, livestock feed yard, livestock sales yard or
commercial riding academy located on the premises.
5) Single-family dwellings on tracts of land which contain five acres or more. No
more than one such dwelling shall be permitted on one lot regardless of the size of
the lot.
6) Equestrian establishments, provided that in no case shall permanent maintenance
or stabling of horses, storage of feed, riding arenas, or storage or maintenance of
equipment be permitted within three hundred feet of the boundary of any
Residential zone.
Amended by ordinance number 0827-08-2 and 0708-20-6.
(C) Lot Area Requirements: Property in this zone shall remain the same size or lot area
as it existed at the time of annexation. There is no minimum or maximum lot size for this
zone. Pre-existing legally created lots of record that exist at the time of annexation will
be recognized by the City for purposes of sale. Subdivision of property is not permitted
in this zone. The property must first be re-zoned prior to further subdivision.
(D) Lot Width Requirements: Same as Lot Area Requirements above.
(E) Building Setback Requirements:
(1) Side Setbacks: Same as R-1 Residential Zone for dwellings and other main
buildings.
(2) Front Setbacks: Same as in R-1 Residential Zone.
(3) Rear Setbacks: Same as in R-l Residential Zone.
(F) Building Height Requirements: Same as in R-1 Residential Zone.
(G) Building Size Requirements: Same as in R-1 Residential Zone.
(H) Special Provisions: Same is in the R-1 Residential Zone.
(I) Supplemental Regulations: See Article IV, Supplementary Regulations to all Zones.
SECTION 26-III-21. Permitted and Conditional Uses.
The following list itemizes the various uses permitted in each type of commercial and industrial
zone. Uses designated as "P" are permitted in that zone and those designated "N" are not allowed
in the zone. Refer to the Special Provisions and Supplementary Regulations section of each zone
for use with an Asterisk (*). Zones included here are: Mixed Use (MU); Central Commercial
(CC); Downtown Commercial (DC); Highway Service (HS); Industrial & Manufacturing-1
(I&M-1); and Industrial & Manufacturing-2 (I&M-2).
MU CC DC HS I&M
-1
I&M-
2
Agricultural products or supplies
(except large machinery)
N P N P P P
Air conditioning sales & service N P N P P N
Airports N N N N P N
MU CC DC HS I&M
-1
I&M-
2
Amusement enterprises (outdoor) P P N P P N
Amusement enterprises (indoor) N P P P P N
Animal hospitals N P N N P N
Animals, under 20 head N N N N P1 P
1The provision allowing under 20 head of animals in the I&M-I zone also contains an additional
allowance for offspring. The offspring shall be allowed to remain on the property and not count
Antique, import or souvenir shops P P P P P N
Apartment houses P* P* P P* N N
Apparel altering & repairing P P P P N N
Appliance and/or electronic
instruments assembly
N N N N P P
Appliance stores P P P P P N
Arts and crafts shops P P P P N N
Asphalt mixing plants N N N N C P
Assembly of appliances (from
previously prepared parts)
N
P N P P N
Athletic & sporting goods store,
(excluding sales & service of motor
vehicles or motor boats)
P
P P P P N
Auction houses (except animals) P P N P P N
Auction houses (including animals) N N N N P N
Automobile parts sales (new parts
only)
P P N P P P
Automobile rental (<10,000 GVW)
(See “Truck rental’ for vehicles over
10,000 GVW)
N P N P P N
Automobile sales (used and new) P P P P P N
MU CC DC HS I&M
-1
I&M-
2
Automobile service station N P N P P P
Automobile wrecking yards N N N N N P
Bakeries, on-site retail only P P P P P N
Bakeries, wholesale N P N P P N
Banks and other financial institutions P P P P P N
Barber shops, beauty parlors P P P P P N
against the 20 head. This allowance shall last for a reasonable time until the offspring are
weaned, depending upon the breed of animal.
Barns, stables, corrals N N N N N P
Bed and breakfast P* P P P N N
Beer parlors (on site consumption) N P N P N N
Bicycle sales and repair shops P P P P N N
Boat sales and service (No
manufacturing)
N P N P P N
Boat storage N N N N P P
Book and stationary stores P P P P N N
Bowling alley P P P P N N
Breweries/Winery < 3000 S.F.
production area
P P N P P N
Breweries/Winery >3000 S.F.
production area
N N N N P P
Broadcasting studios P P N P P N
Building materials sales yards and
storage bldgs. (Materials are
customarily stored outside the main
building on a year-around basis)
N
N N N P P
Building supply stores (Materials are
stored primarily inside the main
building, including permanently
attached, covered and fenced
enclosures, with some seasonal sales
items temporarily kept outside)
N P N P P N
MU CC DC HS I&M
-1
I&M-
2
Bus terminal N P N P P N
Business Park/research Campus C C C C C C
Cabinet and woodwork shop N P N P P P
Camera store P P P P N N
Candy store, confectionery P P P P N N
Cannabis Pharmacy P P P P P N
Cannabis Pharmacy located on the
same parcel as a Cannabis
Production Establishment
N N N N N P2
Cannabis Production Establishment N N N N N P
Caretaker’s dwelling N N N N P P
Carwash P P P P P N
Catering service (food) P P P P P N
Church P P P P P P
Clinics, medical and dental P P P P N N
Clothing and accessory store P P P P N N
Clubs and fraternal societies P P P P P N
Coal yards N N N N N P
Cold storage plants N N N N P P
Concrete mixing and batching plants N N N N C P
____________________________________
2 This use is permitted in contemplation of mail-order pharmacies and pharmacies
built in close proximity to drug manufacturing and production facilities. The I&M-2
zone exists to protect businesses that are especially vulnerable to nuisance claims,
and any cannabis pharmacy or drug store operation in this zone is on notice that
business activities prone to order, dust, and noise are appropriately located in the
I&M-2 zone.
MU CC DC HS I&M
-1
I&M-
2
Construction equipment rental
(heavy equipment)
N N N N P P
Convenience store, <2,400 sq ft,
w/fuel islands
P P P P P P
Convenience store/travel center,
<5,000 sq ft, w/fuel islands
N P N P P P
Correctional /intensive treatment
facility
N N N N C N
Craft & hobby store P P P P N N
Dance hall/studio P P P N P N
Day care center P P N N P N
Department/variety store > 2400 S.F. N P P P P N
Department/variety store< 2400 S.F. P P P P P P
Drive-ins-fast food P P P P P N
Drug store P P P P P N
Dry cleaning and laundry P P P N P P
Dwelling units P* P* P N* N N
Electrical, heating, air conditioning
and plumbing sales & service
N P N P P P
Electrical sign shop N P N N P P
Electronic equip, sales & service
(<2400 sf)
P P N P P P
Electronic equip, sales & service
(>2400 sf)
N P N P P P
Employment agency P P P N P N
Engraving, printing P P P P P N
Farm buildings, fowl N N N N N P
Farm equipment sales, rental &
service
N
P N N P P
MU CC DC HS I&M
-1
I&M-
2
Feed processing N N N N P P
Feed processing, cereal and flour mill N N N N P P
Fertilizer and soil conditioner
manufacturing, processing and sales
N N N N N P
Fire/police/sheriff stations P P P P P P
Fix-it shops (small
appliance/equipment repair)
P P P P P N
Floral shop P P P P P N
Food processing wholesale (with no
noise or odor nuisance)
N N N N P P
Food processing wholesale (with
noise or odor nuisance)
N N N N N P
Fuel, gas and oil storage (when
approved by the fire chief)
N N N N P P
Fur farms N N N N N P
Furniture stores, retail P P P P P N
Garden supply & plant material sales P P P P P N
Gift shops P P P P P N
Grain storage elevators (over 5000
bu.)
N N N N N P
Grain storage elevators (under 5000
bu.)
N N N N P P
Gravel and sand pits N N N N C P
Grocery stores, less than 2400 sq. ft. P P P P P N
Grocery stores, more than 2400 sq.
ft.
N P P P P N
Hardware stores P P P P P N
Health clubs P P P P P N
Health food store P P P P P N
Heliport N C N C P C
MU CC DC HS I&M
-1
I&M-
2
Home furnishings P P P P P N
Hometel P P P P P N
Hospital N P N P N N
Hotel & motel P P P P P N
House wrecking yards N N N N N P
Ice manufacturing and storage
(wholesale)
N N N N P P
Ice cream parlor P P P P P N
Indoor Shooting range N P N N P P
Interior decorating & design (retail) P P P P P N
Janitor service & supply P P P P P N
Jewelry stores sales & service P P P P N N
Junk yards and scrap storage (when
property is fenced with at least six
foot (6') site obscuring fence
N N N N N P
Karate studio P P P P P N
Kennels N P N N P P
Knitting mills N N N N P P
Laboratory N P N P P P
Laboratory, dental/medical P P P P P N
Library P P P P P N
Liquor store P P P P P N
Locksmith P P P P P P
Lumber yards N P N P P P
Machine shop (general) N N N N P P
Manufacturing, heavy N N N N N P
Manufactured home sales N P N P P N
Manufacturing, light N N N N P P
MU CC DC HS I&M
-1
I&M-
2
Manufacturing, clean N N N N P N
Mill working N N N N P P
Mobile home park N N N N P N
Mortuary/funeral home P P N P P N
Moving & storage company N P N N P N
Museum P P P P P N
Music store P P P P P N
Nurseries & greenhouses (plants) N P N P P P
Nursing homes N* P* N N* N N
Office supply & machines, sales, &
services
P P P P P N
Oil and petroleum refining N N N N N P
Open-air Businesses P P P P P P
Outdoor trop shooting ranges N N N N C C
Paint & wallpaper store P P P P P N
Park & playgrounds P P P P P P
Parking lots P P P P P P
Pawn shops P P P P N N
Pest control & extermination N P N N P P
Pet & pet supply store P P P N P N
Photographic studios/film processing P P P N P N
Plumbing shops N P N N P N
Power plant N N N N N P
Professional, business, & admin.
Offices
P P P N P P
MU CC DC HS I&M
-1
I&M-
2
Professional, business, & admin.
offices (not to exceed a maximum of
2000 sq. ft.on the ground floor and
having no more than 2 stories above
grade.)
P P P P P P
Railroad spurs and dock facilities N N N N P P
Recreational vehicle sales, service &
rental (Small - Vehicles customarily
hauled to recreational sites such as
snowmobiles, ATV’s, etc.)
N
P P P P N
Recreational vehicle sales, service &
rental (Large - Vehicles customarily
towed or driven such as campers,
trailers, motor homes, etc.)
N N N N P N
Recycling N N N N N P
Recycling Center, Indoor N N N N P P
Residential P* P* P N* N N
Residential facility for persons with a
disability (see Article XVI)
P* P* P N* N N
Restaurant P P P P P N
Rest homes P* P* N N* N N
Salvage yards N N N N N P
Sawmills N N N N N P
Schools P P P P P N
Service stations N P N P P P
Sewage service N N N N N P
Sexually oriented businesses N N N N N P
Shoe sales and repair shops P P P P P N
Sign painting N P N P P P
Sporting goods stores P P P P P N
Storage rental (more than 1.5 acre) N N N N P P
MU CC DC HS I&M
-1
I&M
-2
Storage rental (not more than 1.5
acres including: buildings, outdoor
storage, and associated parking and
driveways-with seven-foot masonry
perimeter fence and no access or
frontage on Main Street)
N P N N P P
Swap meets N P N P P N
Tanning, curing, storage of hides N N N N N P
Tattoo parlor and body piercing P P P P P P
Theaters, indoor & outdoor P P P P P N
Tire retreading and/or vulcanizing
(associated with sales)
N N N N P P
Tire sales & service N P N P P P
Toy store P P P P P N
Trade and vocational schools N P N P P P
Travel trailer courts N P N P P N
Truck terminal N P N P P P
Upholstery shops P P N P P N
Warehouses (with a principal activity
of a storage warehouse, excluding
heating and chlorine gas and
explosives)
N N N N P P
Welding shop N N N N P P
Wholesale outlets N P N P P N
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance Number – 0708-09, 0826-09, 0811-10, 1110-10, 0926-
12-1, 0311-15, 0113-16-2, 0129-20-1 and 0902-20.
SECTION 26-III-22 SUU HOUSING DISTRICT ZONE (SHD)
(A) Objectives and Characteristics: The SHD Zone is established as a district in which the
primary use of the land is for housing for Southern Utah University (SUU) purposes. The area
covered by this zone is intended to be the primary housing area for SUU. For this reason, the
zone can be located around the SUU campus in the SUU Student Housing Area of the City’s
general land use plan. The area is intended to provide housing for SUU students. The SHD Zone
is characterized by wide, clean, well-lighted streets, with landscaped street frontages and ample
pedestrian and bicycle ways. Buildings on the lots shall be separated from structures on
neighboring lots as required by currently adopted Building and Fire Codes.
(B) Permitted Uses: The following uses shall be permitted in the SHD Zone: (1) Any use
permitted in the R-l, R-2-2 and R-3-M Zones. (2) Boarding and rooming houses. Chapter 26 -
Article III- Page 10 (3) Private Schools. (4) Non-profit Community Service Clubs, except those
whose activity of which is customarily carried on as a business. (5) Planned Unit Developments
approved per this ordinance. (6) Residential facility for persons with a disability, not to exceed
twelve (12) residents (see Article XVI). (7) Raising and keeping chickens for non- commercial
purposes and subject to Article IV - Supplementary Regulations.
(C) Lot Area Requirements: There shall be no minimum lot area requirements for this
Zone.
(D) Lot Width Requirements: there shall be no minimum lot width requirements for this
Zone.
(E) Building Setback Requirements:
(1) Side Setback: shall be in compliance with currently adopted building and fire code as
adopted at the time of the land use application.
(2) Front Setback: shall be a minimum of 15’ from the street right-of-way line and
in compliance with currently adopted building and fire code as adopted at the time
of the land use application.
(3) Rear Setback: shall be in compliance with currently adopted building and fire code as
adopted at the time of the land use application.
(F) Building Height Requirements: The maximum height of any building shall be fifty (50)
feet in compliance with currently adopted building and fire codes.
(G) Building Size Requirements: In compliance with currently adopted building and fire
codes.
(H) Dwelling Unit Density Requirement: No requirements.
(I) Parking Requirements: Required parking in the SHD Zone is 0.75 parking stalls per
occupant.
(J) Special Provisions:
1) All off-street parking space shall be hard surfaced.
2) Landscaping – see Article VII, Landscaping.
3) See Article IV, Supplementary Regulations to all zones.
4) Compliance with City Subdivision Ordinance and City adopted Building and Fire Codes.
5) In addition to the International Fire Code, these Fire Department provisions are required
for Group R occupancies:
a) Any required Fire Department Connection (FDC) will be located in the front or
side setback of the building as directed by the Fire Chief.
b) Full automatic sprinkler system designed and installed per the current
International Fire Code.
c) Full Commercial Fire Alarm System designed and installed per the current
International Fire Code shall be installed in Group R occupancies where any of
the following conditions apply:
i. any bedroom is located in a three or more story building,
ii. any bedroom is located in a basement, or
iii. the building contains 16 or more bedrooms.
d) Section 26-III-22(J)(5)(b) and (c) shall not be required for single family
dwellings, duplexes and legally subdivided townhomes.
Created by Cedar City Ordinance Number 0207-18-1.
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
ARTICLE IV. SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
Section 26-IV-1. General Regulations
Section 26-IV-2. Height of Buildings
Section 26-IV-3. Clear View of Intersecting Streets
Section 26-IV-4. Fences
Section 26-IV-5. Curb, Gutter & Sidewalk
Section 26-IV-6. Dwelling Sites to Have Frontage on Deeded Streets
Section 26-IV-7. Exceptions to Front & Side Set-back Requirements
Section 26-IV-8. Flood Channel & Water Courses
Section 26-IV-9. Swimming Pool
Section 26-IV-10. Concessions on Public Parks and Playgrounds
Section 26-IV-11. Land Previously Subdivided
Section 26-IV-12. Prohibition
Section 26-IV-13. Health Department Approval Required for Rest Homes, etc
Section 26-IV-14. Location of Gasoline Pumps
Section 26-IV-15. Commercial Communications Facilities
Section 26-IV-16. Commercial and Industrial Building Materials
Section 26-IV-17. Solar Energy Production
Section 26-IV-18. Regulations for the Keeping of Chickens in Residential
Zones
Section 26-IV-19. Indoor Shooting Ranges.
SECTION 26-IV-1. General Regulations
(A) Effect of Supplementary Regulations: The regulations set forth in this section
supplement the zone regulations appearing elsewhere in this ordinance.
(B) Yard Space for One Building Only: No required yard or other open space around
an existing building, or which is hereafter provided around any building, for the purpose
of complying with the provision of this ordinance shall be considered as providing a yard
or open space for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open space on
an adjoining lot be considered as providing the yard or open space on the lot whereon a
building is to be erected or established.
(C) Every dwelling to be on a "Lot": Every dwelling shall be located and maintained
on a legal lot of record as provided in this ordinance.
(D) Sale or Lease of Required Space: No space needed to meet the width, yard, area,
coverage, parking, or other requirements of this ordinance for a lot or building may be
sold or leased apart from such lot or building unless other space so complying is
provided.
(E) Creation of Lots Below Minimum Space Requirements Prohibited: No parcel of
land which has less than the minimum width and area requirements for the zone in which
it is located may be subdivided from a larger parcel of land.
(F) Yards to be Unobstructed; Exceptions: Every part of a required yard shall be open
to the sky and unobstructed except for permitted accessory buildings and for projection of
sills, eves, belt courses, cornices, and other ornamental features and unenclosed steps and
un-walled stoops, porches, and carports provided that all buildings or parts thereof shall
be at least twenty (20) feet from the front property line.
(G) Storage of Commercial Vehicles in Residential Zone Prohibited: The
commercial storage of automobiles and the storage of construction equipment such as
bulldozers, graders, cement mixers, compressors, dump trucks, etc. shall not be permitted
on any lot in any Residential Zone, provided that construction equipment may be stored
on a lot during construction of a building thereon, but not to exceed one year.
(H) Conservation of Values; Beautification: Any lot in any zone shall be improved and
maintained as follows:
(1) All front or side yards adjacent to a street exists, such yard shall be planted
and maintained according to the definition of landscaping contained in this
chapter.
(2) No trash or rubbish shall be allowed to accumulate on any lot in any zone.
SECTION 26-IV-2 Height of Buildings
(A) Minimum Height of Main Buildings: No dwelling shall be erected which has a
ceiling height of less than eight (8) feet above grade.
(B) Maximum Height of Accessory Buildings: The height of buildings which are
accessory to a one-family, two-family, three-family, or four-family dwelling shall not
exceed sixteen (l6) feet.
SECTION 26-IV-3. Clear View of Intersecting Streets
In all zones which require a front yard, no obstruction which will obscure the view of automobile
drivers shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area formed by the street property
lines and a line connecting them at points thirty (30) feet from the intersection of the street lines.
SECTION 26-IV-4. Fences
(A) Setback area defined: The term "Front Setback Area" shall refer to the setback area
(as required by this ordinance) along any street frontage.
(B) Interior Lot Requirements:
(l) On all interior lots in Commercial and Residential zones, a fence, not to
exceed six (6) feet in height may be erected along all side and rear property lines
but not in the front yard setback area. On interior lots that border a City street on
the front and rear lot lines and the property owner has a drive approach or curbcut
entering the rear property line through a fence, the opening in the fence shall
be gated. Said rear lot driveway shall be for limited use, i.e. not every day use.
(2) In any front setback area in Commercial and Residential zones, no wall fence
or hedge shall exceed thirty (30) inches.
(3) Where a fence, wall or hedge is located along an interior property line
separating two (2) lots and there is a difference in grade of the two properties, the
fence wall or hedge may be erected or allowed to the maximum height permitted
on either side of the property line.
(4) In Industrial zones a 6-foot non-site obscuring fence is permitted in the front
set back area of interior and corner lots.
Amended by ordinance number 0125-12.
(C) Corner Lot Requirements:
(l) On all corner lots in Commercial and Residential zones, a fence, not to exceed
six (6) feet in height may be erected along all side and rear property lines, but not
in the front yard setback area. Along the rear lot line, if the adjoining property
owner has a drive approach or curb-cut within ten (10) feet of the property line,
no
obstruction to view shall be placed within a triangular area formed by said
property line and street right-of-way and a line connecting them at points ten (10)
feet from the intersection of the lines.
(2) In all Residential and Commercial zones requiring a front yard setback, no
obstruction to view in excess of thirty (30) inches in height shall be placed on any
corner lot within a triangular area formed by the street property lines and a line
connecting them at points thirty (30) feet from the intersection of the property
line.
(3) Notwithstanding any other provisions herein, a fence which does not obstruct
view (i.e. chain link fence) may be erected to a height of thirty (30) inches in any
yard abutting a street within the setback area of Commercial and Residential lots.
The fence shall in no way be closed in with adjacent plant materials or strips of
material inserted into the fence so as to obstruct vision.
(4) In Industrial zones a 6-foot non-site obscuring fence is permitted in the front
set back area of interior and corner lots.
(D) Fences on the Public Right-of-Way: No fence approved under this Chapter shall be
erected beyond the property line, on the public right-of-way, without the issuance of a
permit by the Cedar City Building Inspector. Approval of a fence on the public
right-of-way shall be subject to the following conditions:
(1) No fence shall be erected within one (l) foot of an existing or future sidewalk
or within three (3) foot radius of a fire hydrant.
(2) The City shall retain the right to remove any fence on the public right-of-way
for any purpose it deems necessary. Removal shall be at the sole expense of the
property owner.
(3) Maintenance of the area between the sidewalk and the property line shall be
the responsibility of the property owner.
(E) Fences for Recreation Use: A chain link fence may be erected to a height of twelve
(l2) feet for the purpose of enclosing a tennis court, swimming pool, or other court game
area. Said fence may not be located within the setback area of yards abutting a front,
side, or street side yard.
(F) Fences Required Around Solar Power Generation, Central. A 100% site
obscuring fence Eight (8) feet high is required around the perimeter of the property inside
the landscape strip. All other fence restrictions shall be met.
(G) Fences to be Required in Certain Areas: Site-obscuring fences shall be required
along the boundary line in the following cases:
(1) Commercial and Industrial Developments:
a. On all Commercial and Industrial developments, in areas zoned
accordingly, having a common lot line with property used for residential
purposes shall require the construction of a 6-foot high sight-obscuring
masonry fence; or
b. On residential developments having a common lot line with property
used for Commercial or Industrial purposes shall require the construction
of a 6-foot high sight-obscuring masonry fence.
(2) Apartments: Any lot with four (4) or more dwelling units and having a
common lot line with:
a. property used for less-dense residential purposes; or
b. vacant property that is presently zoned for less-dense use, shall require
the construction of a 6-foot high site obscuring fence.
c. Said fence shall be reduced to thirty (30) inches in height inside the
front yard setback area of the residential property.
(3) Conditional Uses: In the case of a commercial development permitted by
conditional use in a residential neighborhood, fencing may be addressed by
written agreement between adjoining property owners. Said agreement shall be
submitted to the Planning Commission and City Council for approval and be part
of the Conditional Use Permit.
Amended by City Ordinance 1113-19-7
SECTION 26-IV-5. Frontage Improvements
(A) Improvements Required.
No certificate of occupancy on any new house or other building, and no building permit
to make alterations on any existing house or other building within the City limits of
Cedar City, Utah shall be issued unless the frontage improvements of concrete, curb,
gutter, sidewalk, street lights, and asphalt pavement have been installed along the
dedicated street frontage of the property. The asphalt pavement shall extend from the lip
of the gutter to the existing asphalt or a minimum of 12 feet beyond the street centerline
when the developer owns/controls one side of the street frontage. In the event that an
owner/developer is developing on one side only of a public street frontage, but
owns/controls both sides of the street frontage, full width asphalt paving and curb &
gutter on both sides of the street shall be required, while sidewalk shall be required on
the development side only. All curb, gutter, sidewalk, street lights and asphalt pavement
shall be installed according to City Engineering Standards.
(B) Sidewalks Not Required in Industrial Zones.
In areas designated for industrial uses in the City General Plan - Land Use Plan,
sidewalks are required on both sides of the following listed streets. Streets not listed
below and designated to be zoned industrial (I&M-1 or I&M-II) are not required to have
installed sidewalks on either side of the street frontage. Otherwise, curb, gutter and
asphalt improvements shall be required in all zones, on all public streets.
North-South Streets East-West Streets
5300 West Industrial Road
5700 West Kitty Hawk Drive
Lund Highway Cemetery Road
Aviation Way 3000 North
Airport Road 2400 North
2300 West 2400 North Parkway
West View Drive 1600 North
Bulldog Road 400 North
800 West SR 56
400 West
300 West
200 West
100 West
Main Street
Any others designated by the City Council.
(C) Bonding Deferment
If proper weather conditions do not exist or permanent grades for the improvements
cannot be established, the permittee can deposit a cash bond for 150% of the City
Engineer’s estimated cost of the improvements with the City and occupy until proper
weather conditions exist or grades can be established. At that time the permittee will
install the improvements and be refunded the cash bond. If the improvements are not
installed within a reasonable time, the City will execute the cash bond and contract for
the installation of the improvements.
SECTION 26-IV-6. Dwelling Sites to Have Frontage on a Deeded Street
Unless a dwelling is located in a Planned Unit Development with private streets, at least one side
of each lot used as a dwelling site shall abut upon a street which has been deeded or dedicated to
the public for street purposes. The length of such abutting side measured at the setback line shall
be at last as great as the width required for dwelling sites in the zone in which such building site
is located except as may be approved by the Board of Adjustments. Whenever a front or side
yard is required for a building abutting on a proposed street which has not been constructed by
which has been designated by the Planning Commission as a future street, the depth of such front
or side yard shall be measured from the planned street line.
SECTION 26-IV-7. Exceptions to Front and Side Setback Requirements
The setback from the street for any dwelling located between two existing dwellings in any
Residential Zone may be the same as the average for said two existing dwellings provided the
existing dwellings are on one side of the street, and are located within one hundred twenty (l20)
feet of each other.
SECTION 26-IV-8. Flood Channels and Water Courses
No building, structure, fence, earth fill or other obstruction shall be constructed within any active
flood channels or water courses of the City. Applications for permits to construct buildings or
structures within 50 feet of such flood channels or water courses shall require certified
engineering plans, showing improvements that will protect the buildings or structures from flood
damage. The plans shall be approved by the City Engineer.
SECTION 26-IV-9. Swimming Pools
Swimming pools not completely enclosed within a building having solid walls shall be set back
at least five (5) feet from property lines and shall be completely surrounded by a fence or wall
having a height of at least four (4) feet. There shall be no openings larger than thirty-six (36)
square inches except for gates which shall be equipped with self-closing and self-latching
devices.
SECTION 26-IV-10. Concessions in Public Parks and Playgrounds
Concessions, including but not limited to amusement devices, recreational buildings, and
refreshment stands, shall be permitted on a public park or playground when approved by the City
Manager or his designee, with an appeal option by the applicant to the City Council.
SECTION 26-IV-11. Non-Conforming Lots
The requirements of this ordinance as to area and width shall not be construed to prevent the use
for a one-family dwelling of any lot or parcel of land in any district in which dwellings are
permitted, in the event that such a lot or parcel of land was of record at the time this ordinance
became effective. Any lot that was illegal at the time of the passage of this ordinance shall
continue to be illegal and unauthorized unless expressly permitted by the terms of this ordinance.
26-IV-6
SECTION 26-IV-12. Prohibitions
Uses of land which are not expressly permitted within a zone are prohibited therein, except that
properties and land owned by the State of Utah shall be subject only to the provisions of Utah
Code Annotated, l953, and except that the provisions of this ordinance shall not apply to
properties owned by the United States Government. Any person, firm, or corporation who may
obtain State or Federal properties by purchase, lease, or other arrangements shall utilize such
properties in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
SECTION 26-IV-13. Health Department Approval Required for Rest Homes, etc.
Rest homes, nurseries, foster care homes, and similar uses shall be approved by the State
Department of Health, as evidenced by a letter of approval from said State Department of Health,
before a permit therefore shall be issued by the Building Inspector.
SECTION 26-IV-14. Location of Gasoline Pumps
Gasoline pump islands shall be set back not less than twenty (20) feet from any property line.
SECTION 26-IV-15. Commercial Communications Facilities
(A) Findings: The Cedar City Council finds that: (1) it is in the best interests of the
residents, businesses, industry, government operations, visitors, and the general economic
development of Cedar City to have quality cellular wireless telephone and internet
access; (2) private industry is best suited to provide the necessary infrastructure and
service reasonably necessary so that Cedar City may enjoy quality cellular wireless
telephone and internet access; (3) in permitting commercial electronic communication
facilities it is important to balance the need for additional facilities and the aesthetic
impacts on Cedar City; (4) the Federal Communications Commission regulates industry
relative to possible environmental effects of radio frequency emissions, and; (5) the
interests of Cedar City can be accomplished by developing as few facilities as is
reasonably possible, encouraging co-location by carriers, and by encouraging all facilities
that are built to be as un-obtrusive as possible.
(B) Purpose: Consistent with the City’s findings, it is the purpose of this ordinance to: (1)
establish minimum standards for the construction of commercial electronic
communication facilities; (2) establish minimum separation requirements; (3) establish
zones within the City where such facilities are permitted and under what circumstances;
(4) establish maximum height limitations where necessary; and (5) establish such other
setback, aesthetic, height, and zoning regulations as are reasonably necessary to balance
the need for commercial electronic communication facilities and preserve the aesthetics
of Cedar City.
(C) Definitions:
The following definitions are specific to this chapter:
(1) ANTENNA: A transmitting or receiving device used in telecommunications
that radiates or captures radio signals.
(2) CO-LOCATION: is a condition that shall exist when more than one (1)
wireless communication provider mounts equipment (antennas, dishes, or
similar devices) on a single communication tower or antenna support
structure.
(3) COMMERCIAL COMMUNICATION FACILITIES: A device used to
transmit and/or receive radio or electromagnetic waves by a licensed
commercial wireless telecommunication services including cellular, personal
communication services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced
specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services that are
marketed to the general public. This excludes non-commercial antennas, radio
and television signals, and non-commercial satellite dishes.
(4) LATTICE TOWER: A self-supporting multiple sided, open steel frame
structure used to support telecommunications equipment.
(5) NON-COMMERCIAL ANTENNA: Privately owned and operated, noncommercial
communication facilities attendant to a residential or commercial
use including but not limited to television antenna, satellite dishes, and/or ham
radio facilities.
(6) ROOF MOUNTED ANTENNA: An antenna or series of individual antennas
mounted on a roof of a building.
(7) SMALL WIRELESS FACILITIES, DAS AND OTHER SIMILAR
NETWORKS: low powered wireless base stations containing three to four
foot antennas that can be co-located on other structures to provide capacity to
wireless customers.
(8) STEALTH DESIGN: camouflage, concealed or otherwise not identifiable as
a wireless communication facility be a casual observer and is aesthetically
compatible and blends with the site and immediate surroundings.
(9) WALL MOUNTED ANTENNA: An antenna or series of individual
antennas mounted against the vertical wall of a building.
(10)WIRELESS COMMUNICATION PROVIDER: is a provider of wireless
communication services that owns or controls the elements necessary to sell
and deliver services to an end user.
(11)WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITY: An unmanned structure
which consists of equipment used primarily for the transmission, reception or
transfer of voice or data through radio wave or (wireless) transmissions. Such
sites typically require the construction of transmission support structures to
which antenna equipment is attached.
(D) Other Types of Antennas or Equipment: Antennas, communications facilities, or
communications equipment not defined by this chapter shall be governed under the most
restrictive provisions.
(E) General Provisions Applicable to Electronic Communications Facilities:
(1) Building Permit Required: No communication tower or other wireless facility,
shall be constructed unless a building permit is obtained from the City.
(2) Prior to receiving a permit to construct a new commercial communication
facility the provider will have to provide the City’s building department a map
showing the locations of all of its commercial communication facilities serving
Cedar City. This shall include facilities located outside of the City limits that
serve property within the City limits. In addition to the map the company
requesting the permit will have to remove all facilities that are not in use, or will
no longer be used due to the expansion of its facilities.
(3) Prior to receiving a permit to construct a new commercial communication
facility that requires the installation of power lines, the wireless communication
provider must obtain the necessary easements to lawfully install the power line
from the property owner(s).
(4) In conformity with the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) “Shot
Clock” guidelines, Cedar City will approve or deny an application from a
Wireless Communication Company for the co-location of additional antennas to
existing infrastructure within ninety (90) days, and approve or deny an application
for the construction of new infrastructure within one-hundred and fifty (150) days
of the filing date of the application.
(5) Engineering Review: Each application for a permit to construct a
communication tower or other facility shall be certified by a licensed professional
engineer that the design of the facility meets all applicable standards for the
facility, including, but not limited to: electrical safety, material and design
integrity, seismic safety, etc. For communication towers, the professional
engineer shall also certify that the tower meets acceptable design criteria or
standards to withstand wind and other weather damage. In all cases, the
certification shall indicate whether or not the facility will interfere with any other
communications service, including, but not limited to, low power radio
communication service.
(6) Interference with Other Communications: No permit to construct a
communication facility shall be approved if the operation of the facility will
interfere with emergency or airport communications.
(7) Aircraft and Airport Safety: All communication facilities shall comply with
applicable laws, regulations, and approvals regarding aircraft and airport
operations.
(8) Project Review Board: All communication facilities shall be approved by
Project Review Board.
(9) Height Restrictions:
a. The maximum allowable height for facilities with a single wireless
communication provider is sixty (60) feet. The maximum allowable
height for a facility designed for co-location with two (2) or more
wireless communication providers is one hundred (100) feet.
“Maximum allowable height” shall be measured to the highest point of
the antenna or tower, whichever is greater.
b. The maximum allowable height for non-commercial roof and wallmounted
antennas shall be fifteen (15) feet above the maximum
building height requirement for the zone, or fifteen (15) feet above the
actual height of the roof of an existing building whichever is less.
Measurement from the roof of an existing building shall be from the
highest point on the roof and exclude any parapet wall or architectural
feature of a similar nature.
(10) Lattice Towers: Lattice towers for non-commercial uses shall be located only
in the rear yard of a lot. No lattice tower shall be located in any required
landscaped area or parking area. Lattice towers shall comply with the setbacks
required for the zoning district in which they are located.
(11) Wall and roof mounted commercial facilities: The following setbacks and
limitations shall apply to all wall mounted and roof mounted commercial
communication facilities:
a. Commercial communication facilities mounted on the roof of a
building in a commercial zone shall be set back at least five (5) feet
from the front and sides of the building. For commercial
communication facilities mounted between five (5) and ten (10) feet
from the exterior wall, the maximum height of a roof mounted antenna
is directly proportional to the distance the antenna is set back from the
exterior wall up to a maximum height of ten (10) feet above the
roofline of the building to which the commercial communication
facilities are attached. The roof mounted commercial communication
facility shall not extend more than ten (10) feet above the roof or a
parapet wall or similar architectural feature.
b. The total surface of the wall mounted commercial communication
facility shall not extend more than three (3) feet from the face of the
wall to which it is mounted. A wall mounted commercial
communication facility shall not extend more than ten (10) feet above
the top of the roof or a parapet wall or similar architectural feature. A
wall mounted commercial communication facility shall not have its
lowest point more than ten feet from the roof of the building or parapet
wall or similar architectural feature.
(12) Co-Location:
a. In order to serve current and reasonably foreseeable needs, any site
approved by the City, regardless of location, shall be subject to all
of the following requirements for all 100-foot-tall towers:
i) The 100-foot-tall tower shall be constructed in such a
manner as to accommodate three (3) different services,
meaning the original company’s equipment and two (2) colocations
on the same tower for two (2) other wireless
carriers.
b. When later applications for towers are received, the applicants
shall be required to:
i) Co-locate on an existing tower or light pole, unless it can
be shown by a preponderance of the evidence that all
existing sites are inadequate to serve that company’s
reasonable needs due to location, height, or other reasons;
and
ii) Pay reasonable compensation to the original tower
company.
c. Co-location may also occur on any existing light poles when
stealth designing is utilized as specified in section E (12).
(13) Stealth Design: Antennas, equipment, and supporting structures shall be
selected to achieve the architectural compatibility with the host structure to which
they are attached.
a. Stealth-facilities shall be designed to substantially conceal and
camouflage the antennas and associated equipment.
b. Non-stealth facilities shall only be considered in locations in which
adverse visual impacts are not a substantial concern due to the
location of the facility and the nature of the surrounding land uses.
(14) All commercial communication facilities shall be constructed and
maintained in a manner so as to, as much as reasonably possible, camouflage its
Chapter 26- Article IV - Page
existence. Prior to issuance of a permit the company requesting the permit shall
provide the City’s building department a detailed description of the methods it
will use to camouflage its commercial communication facilities.
(15) Self-Supporting ground based commercial communication facilities
including the antenna base and all supporting equipment installed at grad shall be
screened with a six-foot block wall finished to match surrounding developments.
All gates providing ingress and egress to the facility shall be constructed of steel,
iron or equivalent materials, with solid or opaque metal mesh providing screening
of the facility and finished to match the block wall.
(F) Permitted Locations:
(1) Commercial Communication Facilities: Commercial Communication
Facilities not located on a building and exceeding fifteen (15) feet in height shall
be allowed in Industrial and Manufacturing and Commercial zones, as well as on
school property and city parks regardless of zone. Commercial facilities that are
roof mounted or wall mounted on an existing building are allowed in Industrial
and Manufacturing and Commercial zones.
(2) Commercial facilities, regardless of height, are allowed on property owned by
the United States Forest Service, the United States Bureau of Land Management,
or the State of Utah Institutional Trust Lands Administration regardless of the
City’s zoning designation as long as the proposed facility located on the above
mentioned property is a minimum of one hundred and fifty (150) feet from all
property zoned residential.
(3) Non-Commercial Antennas: Non-Commercial antennas shall be allowed in all
zones.
(4) Location Restriction:
a. A ground-based communication facility shall have a required setback of
1:1 from a residential zone or property used for a residential purpose – i.e.
the distance as measured from the center point of the antenna that the
commercial communication facility is set back from the property line must
be equal to or greater than the height of the commercial communication
facility.
b. Notice by the applicant shall be given to all owners of record of property
zoned residential or used for a residential purpose within a 300-foot radius
Chapter 26- Article IV - Page
from the boundary of the proposed commercial communication facility.
Said notice shall be sent certified mail or hand-delivered to the property
owners in accordance with the most current Iron County Assessment Roll.
Proof of the certified mail and/or a certificate documenting hand delivery
to property owners as required herein shall be delivered to the City
Building Official. Notice shall contain language directing property owners
who wish to challenge the location of the commercial communication
facility to contact the City Building Official within 10 days of receipt of
notice. The Building Official’s name, address and contact number shall be
listed in the notice. If no complaint is received within 10 days a building
permit will be issued. If a complaint is received the permit will go before
the next available Planning Commission and Cedar City Council for final
approval.
c. Commercial communication facilities will be permitted on City-owned
property within 250 feet of the center point of a Cedar City water tank, but
in no event shall they be located within 100 feet of the outside wall of
such water tank. A permit would be subject to obtaining a lease agreement
with Cedar City subject to all terms and conditions set by the Cedar City
Planning Commission and Cedar City Council.
(G) Small Wireless Facilities, DAS and Other Similar Networks
Small wireless Facilities, DAS and other similar networks shall be allowed in any
zoning district when stealth design is utilized as stated in section E (12).
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0125-17 and 1114-18.
SECTION 26-IV-16. Commercial and Industrial Building Materials
(A) The inclusion and exclusion of the following materials should be considered in
the design of commercial building:
(1) Preferred Building Materials
a. Quarried stone,
b. Cultured stone,
c. Full brick veneer
d. Composite lap siding (i.e. Hardiplank),
e. Architectural concrete (with recessed panels and reveal lines),
Chapter 26- Article IV - Page
f. Colored CMU block and architectural CMU block (i.e. split face, fluted,
scored, honed, etc)
(2) Preferred Accent Materials
a. Precast concrete accents,
b. Stucco (EIFS) as an accent material (not a major building component).
Limited amounts of stucco used for vertical surfaces only if the quality of
the design merits such consideration,
c. Glass accents.
(3) Discouraged Materials
a. Plain, grey, flat faced CMU block except when used as an accent, not a
total wall treatment,
b. Brick Tiles
c. Metal Walls
d. wood or glass when used as more than for a functional purpose or as on
accent material.
(B) Along particular street frontages, building materials as listed above are mandatory for
the front face and the first 30 feet of the side of any building (i.e. the materials listed as
“Preferred” are required, and those listed as “Discouraged” are prohibited). This
requirement shall apply to buildings located within 150 feet of the following streets:
a. Main Street - Entire Length
b. 200 North Street extending through U-56 Highway
SECTION 26-IV-17 Solar Energy Production
(A) Applicability: This section shall apply to the installation and use of solar energy
production systems, including both active and passive systems, arrays, and facilities for all
zoning districts and for both commercial and noncommercial uses.
(B) Definition of Related Terms: Besides the definition of terms contained in Section 26-
I-4, the following definitions shall apply to this chapter:
Chapter 26- Article IV - Page
1) Solar Easement: Solar easement has the same meaning as current state law, or
as state law may hereinafter be amended.
2) Solar Energy Collector: A device or combination of devices, structure, or part
of a device or structure that transforms direct solar energy into thermal,
chemical, or electrical energy as an alternative for or supplement to a
conventional energy system.
3) Solar Energy System: A system of apparatus and equipment capable of
collecting and converting solar radiation into heat, mechanical or electrical
energy, and transferring those forms of energy by a separate apparatus to
storage or to point of use, including, but not limited to, water heating, space
heating or cooling, electric energy generation or mechanical energy generation.
4) Solar Energy System, Active: A solar energy system which uses a solar panel
such as a photovoltaic panel to generate electrical and/or thermal energy.
5) Solar Energy System, Passive: A solar energy system which uses structural
elements of a building to provide for collection, storage, and distribution of
solar energy for heating or cooling, in order to reduce the need for outside
energy resources. Passive system components may include architectural means
such as building orientation, interior illumination, the use of materials with
favorable thermal mass.
6) Solar Feature: Features on a building or structure that serve as solar
collectors. Besides active energy systems, solar features may also include such
passive system features as windows, walls and roofs.
7) Solar Panel: A structure containing solar cells that collects sunlight and
converts it to electrical energy. This term also includes the supporting
structures that secure solar panels excepting the independent features or
structures of a building or structure to which the solar panel may be attached.
8) Solar Power: Electrical power generation through the utilization of such
means as nonmechanical semiconductor devices that convert sunlight into
direct current electricity.
9) Solar Power Generation, Distributed: Generation of solar power close to the
point of use with production considered non-commercial in nature in that it is
either a single-user system, or else provides supplemental power for a specific
Chapter 26- Article IV - Page
group of associated commercial or industrial buildings, or residences within a
planned unit development type project.
10) Solar Power Generation, Central: Generation of solar power on a
commercial basis, using photovoltaic collection sources generally located at a
distance from where the energy is consumed.
11) Solar Power Systems: A solar energy system used to produce electrical power
as either a supplemental or primary energy source.
12) Solar Power Systems, Single-User: A distributed solar power system
designed for a single property or building.
13) Solar Power Systems, Group Use: A distributed solar power system designed
to provide supplemental power to two or more commercial or industrial
buildings associated through ownership or through joint development such as
in an office or industrial park, or a group of residences within a planned unit
development type project.
(C) Passive Solar Energy Systems. Passive Solar Energy Systems which meet the height
and setback requirements of the zone in which they are located, and all building code
requirements, are permitted and encouraged for all residential and commercial uses.
(D) Distributed Solar Power Generation Facilities.
(1) Private Solar Power Systems which meet the following criteria are permitted
within any zone:
a. Solar features must meet the minimum setback requirements for the
applicable zone.
b. Solar features must comply with the height restrictions for the applicable
zone, except that on non-pitched roofs, solar features may extend up to 30
inches above the roof line, or up to five feet above the top roof line if
screened by a parapet wall or other similar structural feature.
c. A building permit is obtained, insuring compliance with the National
Electrical Code (NEC) and the siting of the system on the property.
(2) Group Use Solar Power Systems which meet the following criteria are
permitted within any zone:
a. The location of the solar energy collectors is approved as a component to
a residential planned unit development type project, or located within a
jointly developed commercial project, a business park or an industrial park.
Chapter 26- Article IV - Page
The area for the solar energy collectors need not be contiguous and may
include both rooftop and surface locations.
b. Have a minimum production capacity of at least 50 kilowatts for
residential groups, and at least 500 kilowatts for commercial and industrial
groups.
c. Meet minimum setback requirements of 100 feet from any residential
dwelling or 50 feet from a property boundary, whichever is greater, for any
portion of the solar energy collector.
d. Meet all Federal and State regulations that may regulate power
distribution.
e. Meet all Building Code requirements relating to construction and
electrical installation.
(3) Solar Power Generation Central which meets the following criteria is
permitted in the permitted zone:
a. The solar panels have to be ground mounted not to exceed 8' high.
b. Shall have a minimum of one hundred (100) contiguous acres.
c. All structure and panels shall be setback twenty (20) feet from residential
uses.
d. Shall be fenced with eight (8) foot high site obscuring fence around the
perimeter of the property.
e. Meet all Federal and State regulations that may regulate power
distribution.
f. Meet all Building Code requirements relating to construction and
electrical installation.
(E) Solar Easements: Any solar easement is the owner’s or developer’s responsibility
and will be recorded in a form complying with the State Code for such easements.
AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 0526-10 and 0919-12.
SECTION 26-IV-18 Regulations for the Keeping of Chickens in Residential Zones.
Chapter 26- Article IV - Page
(A) Residential Zones – Zones: Chickens may be kept for non-commercial purposes on
residential lots. The keeping of chickens is an accessory use as defined in Section 26-I-
4(B)(1).
(B) Number: The number of chickens that may be kept per lot is limited to six (6).
(C) Roosters: The keeping of roosters is prohibited.
(D) Slaughtering: The slaughtering of chickens is prohibited.
(E) Enclosures: Chickens shall be confined within a secure, outdoor, enclosed area. The
enclosure area shall include a covered chicken coop. Chicken coops with a permanent
electric connection must comply with the electric code and require a building inspection.
(F) Setback: the Chicken coop shall: (1) meet all required setbacks; and (2) be a minimum
distance of 35 feet from any neighboring dwelling.
AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 1013-10-2
SECTION 26-IV-19 Indoor Shooting Ranges.
The following provisions shall apply to all Indoor Shooting Ranges:
(A) Hours of operation shall be limited to 8:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. (without a special event
permit).
(B) All indoor ranges shall be designed so their walls, ceilings, and floors are
impenetrable to the ammunition being discharged. It shall have an internal baffle system
that will capture the ammunition.
(C) When constructing or renovating an indoor shooting range a design guideline such
current design guidelines published by as the National Rifle Association or other similar
design guideline approved by the City's Chief Building Official shall be followed.
(D) Each indoor shooting range shall have a ventilation system to remove led
contaminates, dust, and vapor.
(E) Each indoor shooting range shall be constructed and insulated in such a manner that
prevents the sound from the discharged firearms within the facility from exceeding a
maximum of sixty-five (65) dba at the measured outside the facility and at the property
line of the property where the facility is constructed.
Chapter 26- Article IV - Page
(F) Any magazine (ammunition) storage shall be fully enclosed by construction materials
as approved by the Building Department and Fire Department as per applicable codes.
THIS SECTION ENACTED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 0311-15.
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
ARTICLE V REQUIRED PARKING
Section 26-V-1. Parking Space Required.
Section 26-V-2. Required Parking; Residential Uses.
Section 26-V-3. Required Parking; Commercial Uses.
Section 26-V-4. Required Parking; Industrial Uses.
Section 26-V-5. Required Parking; Other Uses.
Section 26-V-6. Required Parking; Uses Not Mentioned.
Section 26-V-7. Joint Use Daytime and Nighttime Parking
Section 26-V-8. Parking Facilities Required for New Uses.
Section 26-V-9. Parking Facilities Required for Change of Use or Change of
Occupancy.
Section 26-V-10. Parking Facilities Required for More Intensive Use.
Section 26-V-11. Parking Facilities; Non-Conforming
Section 26-V-12. Permissive Parking and Loading Facilities.
Section 26-V-13. Location and Control of Parking Facilities.
Section 26-V-14. Computation of Required Parking Spaces.
Section 26-V-15. Combined Parking Areas.
Section 26-V-16. Mixed Uses.
Section 26-V-17. Size of Parking Spaces.
Section 26-V-18. Access to Parking Facilities.
Section 26-V-19. Other Access Requirements.
Section 26-V-20. Circulation within a Parking Area.
Section 26-V-21. Location of Parking Facilities Restricted.
Section 26-V-22. Development and Maintenance of Parking Areas.
Section 26-V-23. Lighting of Parking Areas.
Section 26-V-24. Limitation on Use of Required Parking Area.
Section 26-V-25. Continuing Obligation.
Section 26-V-26. Plot Plan Approval Required.
Section 26-V-27. Required Off-Street Loading Space.
Section 26-V-28. Handicapped Parking Required.
Section 26-V-29. Marking of Parking.
Section 26-V-30. Parking Surface.
Section 26-V-31. Landscaping.
SECTION 26-V-1. Parking Space Required
The number of off-street parking spaces required for each use shall be no less than the number
set forth herein.
SECTION 26-V-2. Required Parking; Residential Uses
(A) One unit dwelling per lot: Two (2) parking spaces for each dwelling unit. Tandem
parking shall be allowed.
(B) Two unit dwelling per lot: Two (2) parking spaces for each unit that contains one or
two bedrooms. Units that contain three bedrooms and above: one and one third (1.30)
parking stalls for each bedroom. Tandem parking shall be allowed.
(C) Three unit dwellings: Two (2) parking spaces for each unit that contains one or two
bedrooms. Units that contain three bedrooms and above: one and one third (1.30) parking
stalls for each bedroom.
(D) Four unit dwellings, or more: One and one third (1.30) parking stalls per bedroom.
(E ) When determining the number of bedrooms for parking calculations only, a bedroom
shall be defined as follows: any separate habitable room providing separation for sleeping
purposes regardless of proposed use or designation that is a minimum of 70 square feet and
a minimum of 7 feet in any horizontal dimension that is not common space, a bathroom,
closet, hall, storage, utility space, kitchen, living room, or dining room. Bedrooms as
defined herein include habitable rooms so designated as a den, study, office, exercise room,
sewing room, loft, playroom and other similar designations. In addition, an unfinished
basement shall be counted as at least one additional bedroom.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance 0113-16-1, 0207-18-1 and 0226-20-1.
SECTION 26-V-3. Required Parking; Commercial Uses
(A) Automotive Repair/Service: Three (3) spaces for each service bay (service bays
shall not be considered a parking space). Plus, one (1) space for every 250 square feet of
office and show room area.
(B) Automobile and machinery sales: One (1) space for each 750 square feet of floor
area, or five (5) parking spaces, whichever is greater.
(C) Banks: One (1) space for each 300 square feet of floor area.
(D) Beauty Salons: One and one half (1.5) spaces for each operator chair plus one (1) for
each employee.
(E) Bowling Alleys: Five (5) spaces for each lane. (Additional parking spaces for balance
of building calculate according to use.)
(F) Cafes, cafeterias, restaurants, bars, night clubs and other similar places
dispersing food or refreshments: One (1) space for each four (4) fixed seats, plus one
(1) for every 35 square feet of seating area where there are not fixed seats, plus one (1)
parking space for each employee on the largest shift.
(G) Clinics: Five (5) parking spaces for each doctor or dental office.
(H) Dance halls and skating rinks: One (1) space for every four persons based on
maximum allowable occupancy.
(I) Dance/karate studios: One (1) space for every 350 square feet of floor area.
(J) Furniture sales and repair, major household appliance sales and repair: One (1)
space for each 600 square feet of floor area.
(K) Hometel: One and one half (1.5) parking spaces for each bedroom.
(L) Hotels and motels: One (1) space for each living or sleeping unit, plus one (1) space
for each 250 square feet of office area.
(M) Mortuaries and Funeral Homes: One (1) parking space for each 35 square feet of
assembly area floor space.
(N) Professional, business, or administrative office (excluding medical and dental):
One (1) space for each 250 square feet of floor area in office space.
(O) Open air commercial uses: One (1) space for each 2,000 square feet of lot area
devoted to sales and display, or five (5) parking spaces, whichever is greater.
(P) Plumbing, heating and electrical shops: One (1) for each 500 square feet of floor
area.
(Q) Retail establishments otherwise not enumerated in this section, such as drug
stores, departments stores, repair shops, animal hospitals, business schools: One (1)
space for each 600 square feet of building floor area, except area devoted exclusively to
warehousing or storage, or three (3) parking spaces, whichever is greater.
(R) Theaters, auditoriums, stadiums, sports arenas, gymnasiums: One (1) space for
each five (5) fixed seats or one (1) space for every 35 square feet of seating area where
there are not fixed seats; also one (1) space for each 600 square feet of floor area not used
for seating. (See Section 26-V-14)
(S) Telemarketing Office: One (1) parking space for each 150 square feet of gross floor
area, or one (1) parking space for each work station, whichever is greater.
SECTION 26-V-4. Required Parking; Industrial Uses
Industrial uses shall require one (l) for each 250 square feet of office space, plus one (1) space
for each 2000 square feet of manufacturing, plus one (1) space for each 4000 square feet of
storage/warehousing.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0222-17-1.
SECTION 26-V-5. Required Parking; Other Uses
(A) Bed & Breakfast: One (1) space for each rental bedroom plus two (2) spaces for full
time residents.
(B) Clubs, lodges, fraternal organizations, social halls, assembly halls: One (l) for
each 25 square feet of floor space.
(C) Government buildings designed for a public use not otherwise enumerated
herein, such as public libraries: One (l) for each 35 square feet of seating, office or
assembly area.
(D) Governmental buildings not frequently visited by the public, such as fire
stations: One (l) space for each 600 square feet of floor space.
(E) Hospitals and Sanitariums: One and one half (1.5) spaces for each patient bed, plus
one (1) space for each 250 square feet of office area.
(F) Indoor shooting ranges: two (2) spaces for each shooting lane, plus one space for
each two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of sales, storage, training, or other uses.
(G) Jail/Sheriff/Highway Patrol: One (1) parking space for each 250 square feet of
floor space plus one (1) space for each employee.
(H) Churches: One (1) space for each five (5) fixed seats and in all areas used
simultaneously for assembly purposes one (1) for each 35 square feet of non-fixed
seating, and one (1) for each 250 square feet of office space. (See Section 26-V-14)
(I) Public utility facilities, including electrical sub-stations, telephone exchanges,
maintenance and storage facilities: One (l) for each 250 square feet of office space and
one (1) space for each 600 square feet of work area within a structure. Also one (l) for
each vehicle used in connection with the use. (No requirements for facilities which are
normally unattended by employees, except for maintenance.)
(J) Public/Private Schools:
(1) Elementary/Middle School: Three (3) parking spaces for every room used for
administration or classroom.
(2) High School: One (1) Parking space for every room used for administration or
classroom plus one space for each four students.
(3) Child In-home Daycare/School, 16 Children or less: Including the children of
any owner or employee, one (1) parking space for eight (8) children or less, or
two (2) parking spaces for nine (9) to sixteen (16) children.
(K) Rest Homes: One 1) space for each four patient beds.
(L) Assisted Living Facility: An Assisted Living Facility that has multiple patients
located in one building shall use the parking requirements for (K) Rest Homes. For residential
dwelling units that are part of an Assisted Living Facility, use the parking requirements for
Residential Uses located in Section 26-V-2.
(M) Residential Short-term Rentals: parking as required by residential use.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0311-15, 12-16-15-2,1114-18-3 and 0123-19-6.
SECTION 26-V-6. Required Parking; Uses Not Mentioned
The required off-street parking for any building, structure or use of land of a type which is not
listed herein shall be determined by the City Building Official. The City Building Official shall
be guided as much as possible by comparison with similar uses which are listed. Appeals may
be taken to the Board of Adjustments.
SECTION 26-V-7. Joint use of Daytime and Nighttime Parking
Fifty percent of parking facilities used primarily for daytime use shall be available for nighttime
use provided the parking area is contiguous with the owner’s properties and there are recorded
covenants between the owners allowing such use of the parking facilities.
SECTION 26-V-8. Parking Facilities Required for New Uses
Any building or structure erected or located after the effective date of this Ordinance or any
subsequent amendments thereto shall be required to provide off-street parking and loading
facilities in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 26-V-9. Parking Facilities Required for Change of Use or Change of Occupancy
Whenever the existing use of a structure or the existing use of land is changed to another use or
another occupancy, parking and loading facilities shall be provided as required by this
Ordinance.
SECTION 26-V-10. Parking Facilities Required for More Intensive Use
When the intensity of use of any building, structure or premises shall be increased through the
addition of dwelling units, floor area, seating capacity or other units of measurement specified
herein, the additional required parking and loading facilities for such increase shall be provided.
SECTION 26-V-11. Parking Facilities; Non-Conforming
Any use of property which on the effective date of this Ordinance, or of any subsequent
amendment thereto, is non-conforming only as to the regulations relating to off-street parking
and loading facilities, may be continued in the same manner as if the parking and loading
facilities were conforming. However, such parking facilities as they exist shall not be further
reduced.
SECTION 26-V-12. Permissive Parking and Loading Facilities
Nothing in this Ordinance shall be deemed to prevent the voluntary establishment of off-street
parking or loading facilities in excess of those required by this Ordinance, provided that all
regulations herein governing the location, design and operation of such facilities are adhered to.
SECTION 26-V-13. Location and Control of Parking Facilities
The off-street parking facilities required by this Ordinance shall be located on the same lot or
parcel of land as the use they are intended to serve, except that in cases of practical difficulty, the
City Building Official may approve a substitute location which meets the following conditions:
(A) That all or part of the substitute location is within 400 feet from the principal use for
which the parking is being provided. Said distance shall be measured as walking distance
along a public street or sidewalk; and
(B) That the substitute lot is in the same possession as the use it is intended to serve.
Such possession may be by deed or long term lease, the terms of which meet the approval
of the City Building Official. The present and future owners of the substitute lot shall be
bound by covenants filed in the office of the County Recorder requiring such owner to
maintain the required number of parking spaces for the duration of the use served.
SECTION 26-V-14. Computation of Required Parking Spaces
For the purpose of computing off-street parking spaces which are required by this Ordinance, the
following rules shall apply:
(A) Floor area shall mean gross floor area, unless otherwise specified for a particular
use.
(B) In stadiums, sports arenas, churches and other places of assembly in which benches
or pews are used in place of seats, each eighteen (18) inches of length of such benches or
pews shall be counted as one (1) seat.
(C) When determination of the number of off-street parking spaces results in a
requirement of a fractional space, any fraction of less than one half (½) may be
disregarded while a fraction of one half (½) or more shall be counted as one (1) required
parking space.
(D) On-street parking shall not be counted towards meeting the parking requirements.
SECTION 26-V-15. Combined Parking Areas
The required off-street parking spaces may be provided collectively for two (2) or more
buildings or uses, provided that the total number of parking spaces shall be not less than the sum
of the requirements for each of the individual uses, and provided that all other requirements of
this Ordinance are met.
SECTION 26-V-16. Mixed Uses
In the event that two (2) or more uses occupy the same building, lot or parcel of land, the total
requirements for off-street parking and off-street loading spaces shall be the sum of the
requirements of the various uses computed separately.
SECTION 26-V-17. Size of Parking Spaces
Each off-street parking space shall have dimensions not less than nine (9) feet in width and
eighteen (18) feet in length, except that industrial employee parking may be eight and one half (8
l/2) feet in width and eighteen (18) feet in length. No part of the area of a required parking space
shall be used for driveways, aisles or other required improvements.
SECTION 26-V-18. Access to Parking Facilities
(A) Driveways: Access driveways shall be provided for ingress to and egress from all
parking and loading facilities. Each parking and loading space shall be easily accessible
to the intended user. The width of driveway entrances and exits from a public street shall
be measured from the bottom of curb taper to bottom of curb taper and shall comply with
the following standards unless specific exemptions are made by the Board of Adjustment
for exceptional circumstances:
(1) Residential Uses:
a. Minimum driveway width: l0 feet.
b. Maximum driveway width: 34 feet.
(2) All other Uses:
a. Minimum driveway width for one way entrances, exits and driveways to
public utility facilities not requiring a parking space: l2 feet.
b. Minimum driveway width for two-way entrance and exits: 24 feet.
c. Maximum driveway width: 50 feet.
(3) Water meters shall not be located within the driveway or taper access of the
driveway.
(B) Access Control: Access to the station or the structure or the parking facility shall be
controlled as follows:
(l) Access shall be by not more than two driveways from any one street upon
which there is One Hundred Feet (100') of frontage or less. Any structure with
more than One Hundred Feet (100') of frontage shall be allowed one (1)
additional driveway for every additional One Hundred Feet (100').
(2) Driveways shall not be closer to each other than twelve (l2) feet measured four
(4) feet on each curb taper and four (4) feet between the curb tapers and no
driveway shall be closer to a side lot line than three (3) feet. Twin home lots are
not required to have driveway separation when garages are connected. When a
commercial or industrial lot abuts any residential zone, a driveway shall be at
least twenty feet (20') from the side lot line.
(3) On corner lots no driveway shall be closer than fifteen (l5) feet to the point of
intersection of the front property line with the side property line which abuts upon
a street. No driveway shall be located across any curved section of frontage lying
between said point of intersection and point of tangent.
(4) In all cases where there is an existing curb and gutter and sidewalk on the
street, all curb cuts and driveways shall hereafter be made in accordance with
these regulations.
(5) Where there is no existing curb and gutter or sidewalk, a curb or fence shall
be installed in accordance with these regulations.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0213-13
SECTION 26-V-19. Other Access Requirements.
The following additional requirements shall govern access to off-street parking facilities:
(A) Forward travel to and from parking facilities from a dedicated street or alley is
required for all uses except residential. The parking area shall be adequate to facilitate the
turning of vehicles to permit forward travel upon entering a street.
(B) All uses which adjoin a major collector street or larger shall conform with the
Engineering Design Standards.
(C) The access to all off-street parking facilities shall be designed in a manner which will
not interfere with the movement of traffic
.
(D) Access driveways across sidewalks or pedestrian ways shall be designed in such a
manner as to promote pedestrian safety.
SECTION 26-V-20. Circulation Within a Parking Area
The circulation within a parking area shall comply with the following requirements:
(A) Aisle Width: Minimum aisle widths shall be provided in accordance with the angle
of the parking spaces they serve.
(1) 30-degree Parking - l2 feet.
(2) 45-degree Parking - l2 feet.
(3) 60-degree Parking - l8 feet.
(4) 90-degree Parking - 24 feet. Other aisle widths shall be determined by
interpolation from the above minimum requirements.
(B) Circulation: Circulation within a parking area with more than one (l) aisle must be
such that a car need not enter the street to reach another aisle within the same parking lot.
(C) Signs: Directional signs shall be required to differentiate between entrance and exit
access points to the street on single lane drives.
SECTION 26-V-21. Location of Parking Facilities Restricted
The location of parking and loading facilities shall comply with the following:
(A) In all zones, parking shall not be permitted in the required landscape area. The
development of parking facilities in said prohibited areas and the parking thereon shall
not be permitted and the installation of such parking facilities, including but not limited
to, asphalt, concrete, gravel or any other material commonly used with parking, shall
constitute a nuisance. The term parking facilities shall not include driveways, including
circular driveways 12 ½ feet wide or less. Parking may be permitted in other required
side and rear yards in the residential zones, providing all other requirements of this
ordinance are met. Parking located in the R-1, R-2-1 and R-2-2 zones shall be permitted
if the parking serves only the lot on which the parking facility is located.
(B) In the Commercial and Industrial Zones parking between a building and a street may
be permitted, providing all other requirements of this ordinance are met.
(C) No part of any parking area for more than five (5) vehicles shall be closer than ten
(l0) feet to any residence, school, hospital, or other institution for human care located on
an adjoining lot, unless screened by site obscuring fence not less than six (6) feet in
height.
(D) In locations where parking areas abut public walkways, protective barriers shall be
installed upon the parking area to prevent vehicles from being driven over said walkway
and to protect pedestrians walking upon the sidewalk from cars parked in the parking lot.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0725-18 and 1113-19-7
SECTION 26-V-22. Development and Maintenance of Parking Areas
Every parcel of land hereafter used as a public or private parking area, including a commercial
parking lot or a vehicle sales area, shall be developed and maintained in good condition and in
accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 26-V-23. Lighting of Parking Areas
Any lighting used to illuminate off-street parking facilities or vehicle sales areas shall be so
arranged as to reflect the light down and away from the adjoining premises in any residential
zone.
SECTION 26-V-24. Limitation on Use of Required Parking Area
Required parking areas shall be used exclusively for vehicle parking in conjunction with a
permitted use and shall not be reduced or encroached upon in any manner, except that they may
be used for special events. The parking limitations imposed by the special event shall be
designed to maximize safety and traffic flow.
SECTION 26-V-25. Continuing Obligation
The required off-street parking and loading facilities shall be a continuing obligation of the
property owner so long as the use requiring vehicle parking or vehicle loading facilities
continues. It shall be unlawful for an owner of any building or use to discontinue or dispense
with the required vehicle parking or loading facilities without providing other vehicle parking or
loading areas which meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
SECTION 26-V-26. Plot Plan Approval Required
At the time a Building Permit is requested for any building or structure, or at the time a new use
of land which would require off-street parking is established, a plot plan shall be submitted
showing the proposed development of the property including the layout and development of the
parking and loading facilities. All parking and loading spaces shall be designated, as well as the
access aisles and other improvements. The Building Official may disapprove such plans if he
finds they are inconsistent with the requirements of this Ordinance.
SECTION 26-V-27. Required Off-Street Loading Space
(A) Spaces Required: One (l) off-street loading space shall be provided and maintained
for every building or separate occupancy thereof having a gross floor area of ten thousand
(l0,000) square feet or more which requires the receipt or distribution of goods, materials,
merchandise or supplies by vehicle. One (l) additional loading space shall be provided for
each additional twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of gross floor area of such building
or for each vehicle which must be loaded or unloaded at the same time, whichever
requirement is greater.
(B) Space Size: Each required off-street loading space shall be not less than ten (l0) feet
in width, twenty-five (25) feet in length, and fourteen (l4) feet in height.
(C) School Buses: Off-street loading and unloading space for busses shall be provided at
all school sites. On-street loading and unloading of busses shall not be permitted at
school sites.
SECTION 26-V-28. Disabled Parking Required
Disabled parking shall be provided and designed as specified in the current International
Building Code, Chapter 11.
SECTION 26-V-29. Marking of Parking
All units that have 10 or more parking spaces shall designate parking by painted lines or other
approved methods. All parking lots that have 60 or more parking spaces and have combined
access driveways for ingress and egress to and from a public street shall have a painted centerline
on the driveway that is 30-feet long and extends from the street into the parking lot.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0109-13-1
SECTION 26-V-30. Parking Surface
All required parking facilities shall be hard surfaced.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0213-13.
SECTION 26-V-31. Landscaping
All areas not covered by hard surface parking in the parking facility shall be landscaped. See
Article VI, Landscaping.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0213-13.
Chapter 26 - Article VI - Page 1
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
ARTICLE VI LANDSCAPING.
Section 26-VI-1. Purpose
Section 26-VI-2. Scope of Requirements
Section 26-VI-3. Installation of Landscaping
Section 26-VI-4. Maintenance
Section 26-VI-5. Plot Plan Required
Section 26-VI-6. Non-Conforming Status
SECTION 26-VI-1. Purpose
The purpose of the landscaping requirements in this Ordinance shall be to enhance, conserve and
stabilize property values by encouraging pleasant and attractive surroundings in all zones of the
City and thus create the necessary atmosphere for the orderly development of a uniformly
pleasant community. Landscaping also contributes to the relief of heat, noise and glare through
the proper placement of green plants and trees.
SECTION 26-VI-2. Scope of Requirements
(A) Landscaping Standards for All Zones:
1. General Standards
a. Corner Lots. Where a parcel is on a corner lot, the landscaping shall not
exceed thirty inches (30") in height within a triangular area formed by the street
property lines and a line connecting them at points thirty feet (30') from the
intersection.
b. Trees and Plantings. Trees and plantings shall comply with the Cedar
City Shade Tree Ordinance. Trees shall be spaced no more than thirty feet (30')
on center.
c. Street Trees. Trees planted in the landscape strip adjacent to the right-ofway
line in all commercial and industrial zones shall comply with the Cedar City
Shade Tree Ordinance.
d. Tree Size. All required trees shall be at least one and one half inches (1
½") in caliper, measured four feet (4') above the ground, and shall be at least eight
feet (8') in height when planted.
Chapter 26 - Article VI - Page 2
2. Park Strips Along Public Trails.
a. Requirement For a Landscaping Plan. A detailed landscaping plan
shall be submitted to the Community Development Director or his designee for
review and approval in conjunction with the preliminary plat for the subdivision
where the trail will be located.
b. Contents of the Landscaping Plan. The plan will contain:
1. the proposed location, number, size, and type of plants;
2. the type or irrigation systems;
3. Xeriscape features presenting a finished look and
minimizing irrigation and maintenance costs should be employed
and shown in the plan; and
4. All use of concrete shall be shown on the landscape plan. Use of
concrete other than in the drive approaches or an access to the
sidewalk is not allowed.
(B) Commercial and Industrial Zones: In all commercial and industrial zones except the
Downtown Commercial Zone where the building is not set back from the street, there shall be
landscaping provided and maintained along the right-of-way line of dedicated streets in
accordance with a detailed landscaping plan approved by the City Building Official. The
minimum amount of landscaping shall be equivalent to the street frontage multiplied by ten feet
(10'). There shall be at least five feet (5') along the right-of-way line of dedicated streets.
Landscaping shall be visible to vehicular traffic except in the Downtown Commercial Zone
where the building is not set back from the street. In review, the Building Official will consider
the proposed location, number, size, and type of plants, the type of irrigation system, and other
similar factors, such as provided below:
(1) Driveway Areas: No landscaping shall be required where vehicular accesses are
permitted. However, the area of landscaping which is eliminated due to vehicular
accesses shall be included in another location of the lot.
(2) End Islands: Landscaped end islands at the end of each row of parking shall be
installed to delineate all on-site driveways. Each island shall have one (1) deciduous tree,
unless the end island is within fifty feet (50') of a dedicated right-of-way or within fifty
feet (50') of a store front.
(3) Concrete Curbs. Concrete curbs shall be provided between landscaped areas and
off-street parking areas.
(4) Other: Where a commercial or industrial development abuts any residential zone,
there shall be provided along the adjoining property line a fence as required by this
ordinance (Section 26-IV-4) and a ten foot (10') wide landscaped strip.
Chapter 26 - Article VI - Page 3
( C) Residential Estate Zone. Residential Estates Zones that are used for Solar Power
Generation, Central shall have a ten (10) foot landscape strip along any City street right of
ways.
(D) Residential Zones. In residential zones where park strips within the public right-of-way
exist or have otherwise been approved with street cross sections providing for public trails,
landscaping shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the following:
1. Responsibility and Maintenance. Where there is no Home Owner’s Association
to provide maintenance, landscaped park strips in residential developments shall be
maintained by the property owner directly adjacent to the right-of-way containing the
park strip area. Maintenance includes not only the ground cover, but any trees located
within the park strip. The City may also trim trees or other planting material within the
park strip when deemed necessary.
2. Planting Materials. Planting materials should be compatible with the
landscaping on the adjoining property.
Amended by ordinance number 0827-08-3
SECTION 26-VI-3. Installation of Landscaping
No Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued for any building on any portion of a development
until the landscaping is in place or a bond, cash deposit, or equivalent, is deposited with the City
conditioned on the guaranteeing the installation of all landscaping shown on the approved
landscape plan.
SECTION 26-VI-4. Maintenance
Required landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean, orderly, and beautiful
condition, this is meant to include proper pruning, mowing of lawns, weeding, removal of litter,
fertilizing, replacement of plants when necessary and the regular watering of all
plantings. Required landscaped areas shall be provided with suitable permanent method for water
or sprinkling of plant. Failure to maintain the landscaping as provided herein shall be a violation
of this chapter and enforceable as provided by law.
SECTION 26-VI-5. Plot Plan Required
Where landscaping is required in this Ordinance, a plot plan showing the proposed landscaping
development, watering system and use of the property shall be submitted to the Building
Official. The same plot plan used to show parking layout or other requirements for the issuance
of a Building Permit may be used providing all proposed landscaping is adequately detailed on
Chapter 26 - Article VI - Page 4
said plot plan. The Building Official may disapprove such plans if he determines that they are not
consistent with the purpose of this Ordinance.
SECTION 26-VI-6. Non-Conforming Status
Any use of property which on the effective date of this Ordinance or any subsequent amendment
thereto is non-conforming only as to the regulations relating to landscaping may be continued in
the same manner as if the landscaping was conforming. However, such use may not be increased
in intensity except in accordance with the requirements of the Ordinance, and any landscaping
which may exist in the locations specified by this Ordinance shall not be reduced unless suitable
substitutions are made which would meet the requirements of this Ordinance.
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
ARTICLE VII. MOBILE HOMES AND RECREATIONAL VEHICLE (RV) PARKS.
Section 26-VII-1. Purpose
Section 26-VII-2. Permitted Uses
Section 26-VII-3. Procedure
Section 26-VII-4. Mobile Home Park Development Standards
Section 26-VII-5. Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park Development Standards
SECTION 26-VII-1. Purpose
To establish guidelines dealing with the development of Mobile Home Parks and RV Parks; to
promote objectives of the Zoning Ordinance; to enhance aesthetics of the area through
landscaping and recreational features; to protect the integrity of developments contiguous to
mobile home parks and RV parks; and to provide for a quality environment for those who dwell
in and visit the developments.
SECTION 26-VII-2. Permitted Uses
Occupied mobile homes and RV’s shall not be permitted in Cedar City, Utah, except under the
following conditions:
(l) When located in an approved mobile home park or RV park, or
(2) When temporarily located on a lot while a main building is being constructed thereon,
but not for more than one (l) year.
Section 26-VII-3. Procedures
(A) Mobile Home / RV Parks: The following procedure is for mobile home park
approval:
(1) Discuss Proposed Park with City Staff: Any person wishing to develop a
mobile home / RV park within Cedar City shall secure from the City planning
information pertaining to the City's plan of streets, parks, drainage, zoning,
subdivision of land, and other General Plan requirements affecting the land.
(2) Sketch Committee Review: Before the Planning Commission meeting, the
developer shall also present the Vicinity Plan of the mobile home / RV park to the
Sketch Review Board for their comments and approval.
(3) Vicinity Plan: The developer shall prepare a Vicinity Plan of the mobile home
/ RV park and present the same to the City Engineer at least seven (7) days before
the Planning Commission work meeting. The Vicinity Plan shall be drawn to an
appropriate scale not smaller than 100 feet to the inch, and shall be on standard
24" X 36" paper or smaller. Each sheet of the Plan shall contain the scale of the
drawing, the sheet number and an arrow indicating north. The Vicinity Plan shall
also contain the following information:
a. The proposed name of the development;
b. Where the submitted plan covers only a part of the development's tract,
or is part of a larger vacant area, the plan shall show the location of the
development as it forms part of a larger tract. In such case, a sketch of the
prospective street system of the remaining area shall be submitted;
c. A location map containing sufficient information to accurately locate
the property shown on the plat map;
d. The names and addresses of the owner(s), the developer, the engineer
and surveyor of the development;
e. The boundary lines of the tract to be developed;
f. The lot dimensions and square footage of each mobile home / RV and
cabin space;
g. Existing curbs, gutters, sidewalks, sanitary sewers and manholes, storm
drains and manholes, water supply main valves, culverts, and fire hydrants
within the tract or within 200 feet of the proposed mobile home park (the
dimensions of all such improvements shall also be indicated);
h. The location, width and other dimensions of proposed curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, streets, easements, parks, and other open spaces, and
designation of any land to be dedicated to the City;
i. The location of all existing or recorded streets, alleys and easements,
water courses, ditches, public utilities and other important features, and
existing structures within the development or within 200 feet thereof, and
the location and distance to the nearest existing survey monument;
j. Boundary lines of adjacent tracts of land, showing ownership and
property monuments;
k. A tabulation of each proposed use by acreage and its percentage of the
total acreage;
l. Show and label all parks, playgrounds, common areas and facilities,
limited common areas and facilities, and other appurtenances within the
mobile home park;
m. A site plan of typical single-wide and double-wide spaces showing
home space, parking, setbacks and other features;
(4) File Planning Commission Application and Fees: The filing fee required for a
mobile home / RV park is according to the City’s Fee Schedule and shall be
submitted with the Planning Commission Application for the review of the
Vicinity plan of the mobile home / RV park.
(5) Vicinity Plan Planning Commission Approval: After approval by City staff,
the Planning Commission shall review the proposal based on development
standards and give a positive or negative recommendation to the City Council of
the mobile home / RV park vicinity plan.
(6) Vicinity Plan City Council Approval: After recommendation of the Vicinity
plan by the Planning Commission, the vicinity plan shall be submitted to the City
Council. The City Council may approve or disapprove the Vicinity Plan or
approve it subject to changes or alterations. Failure to submit a Final Plat within
two (2) years of the date of approval of the Vicinity Plan shall terminate all
proceedings and render all approval of the Vicinity Plan null and void.
(7) Engineering Drawings and Final Plan: Upon approval of the Vicinity Plan by
the Planning Commission and the City Council, the developer shall then prepare
Engineering drawings and a Final Plan of the Mobile Home / RV Park and shall
submit the same to the City Engineer at least seven (7) days before Planning
Commission work meeting for approval.
a. Engineering Drawings shall include the following data:
(i) A contour map drawn at two-foot intervals;
(ii) Proposed water facilities, sanitary sewer, storm drainage
facilities, and fire hydrants located either within or without the
development;
(iii) A plan by which the developer proposes to handle storm water
drainage within the development as determined by the City
Drainage Ordinance (Ch. 38);
(iv) Typical section and details for streets, utility trenches, water,
sewer and electrical connections, fire hydrants and others as
required;
(v) Typical planting plan for each common landscaped area of the
development.
(vi) The names, widths, lengths, bearings and curve data of said
streets, public utility and irrigation easements, within the
development.
(vii) A site plan of typical single wide and double wide spaces
showing home space, parking, setbacks, and other features.
b. The Final Plan shall be drawn on a sheet of approved Mylar having
outside or trim-line dimensions of 24" X 36". The Final Plan shall be
made to a scale large enough to clearly show all details, and in any case
not smaller than 60 feet to the inch. The final plan shall contain the
following information:
(i) The name of the development;
(ii) A north arrow, the scale of the drawing and the date of
preparation of the plat;
(iii) All lot sizes, which shall be indicated by square feet;
(iv) Accurately drawn boundaries showing the proper bearings and
dimensions of all boundary lines of the Park, (properly tied by
reference to two public survey monuments - these lines shall be
heavier than street and lot lines);
(v) The names, widths, lengths, bearings and curve data of private
and public streets, public utility and irrigation easements, and the
lines, dimensions, bearings and numbers of all lots within the Park
(all lots and streets shall be numbered in accordance with the street
numbering system adopted by the City);
(vi) A licensed land surveyor’s “Certificate of Survey”;
(vii) The description of the boundaries of the Park together with a
certification by the Developer’s Engineer or land surveyor stating
that the lots described fully comply with the requirements of the
City’s zoning ordinance;
(viii) The signature of every person who owns property within the
development and a notary public’s acknowledgment of all
signatures;
(ix) A signature line for the City Engineer and City Attorney;
(x) A signature line for the Mayor;
(xi) A signature line for the Planning Commission Chair;
(xii) A signature line for all utility companies and the postal
service;
(xiii) A notice of all covenants, conditions and other restrictions
which may be relevant and applicable to the property contained in
the plat;
(xiv) Designation of landscaped areas, common parking areas,
driveways and other features required by this section;
(8) Final Plan - City Council Approval: The City Council shall review and
approve or disapprove the final plan of the mobile home / RV park or approve it
subject to changes or alterations.
(9) Post Bond: A bond shall be posted prior to final plat approval sufficient in
amount to cover the cost of all off-site and on-site improvements, and shall
guarantee proper installation of all required improvements, including amenities, to
be completed within one year of City Council approval of the Final Plan, and
shall not be released until the improvements are installed to the satisfaction of the
City Engineer. The amount of said bond shall be determined by the developer's
engineer and approved by the City Engineer and shall be in a form acceptable to
the City Attorney (see Ch. 32 12-1). Cedar City does not guarantee or maintain
the improvements within the mobile home / RV park.
SECTION 26-VII-4, Mobile Home Park Development Standards
(A) Park Size Requirements: 5 acres minimum
(B) Lot Area Requirements: 4,000 square feet minimum
(C) Lot Width Requirements: 40 feet minimum
(D) Density Requirements: 7 units per acre maximum
(E) Park Setback Requirements: From the boundaries of the park each mobile home
shall have the following clearances:
(1) Side Setback: 10 feet minimum from adjacent property, unless adjacent to
public street then 20'.
(2) Front Setback: 20 feet minimum from public street;
(3) Rear Setback: 10 feet minimum from adjacent property, unless adjacent to
public street then 20'.
(F) Interior Setback Requirements: Each mobile home shall have the following
clearances from other mobile homes and streets within the park:
(1) Side Setback: 6 feet minimum, 16 feet total for both sides, minimum 15'
separation between each mobile home.
(2) Front Setback: 10 feet minimum from back of curb
(3) Rear Setback: 10 feet minimum separation between each mobile home.
(G) Accessory Building Setback Requirements: Accessory buildings shall have the
following clearances from other mobile homes and streets within the park:
(1) Side Setback: 3 feet minimum except on corner lots where the minimum side
setback shall be 20 feet.
(2) Front Setback: Same as interior setback requirements
(3) Rear Setback: 3 feet minimum except on corner lots where the minimum rear
set back shall be 8 feet.
(H) Home Skirting Requirements: All mobile homes shall be skirted with a decorative
masonry, block or brick skirting, or a continuation of the facing material of the home.
(I) Landscaping & Fence Requirements: In all mobile home parks, a strip of land at
least ten (10) feet wide along public streets shall be left unoccupied by any structures and
shall be landscaped in accordance with Landscaping Section of City zoning ordinance. A
site obscuring, six (6) foot high fence shall be erected behind the landscape strip and shall
continue along the perimeter of the development. Corners of public streets shall not have
the fence extend beyond a triangle area formed by street property lines and a line
connecting them at points thirty (30) feet from the intersection of the property line
.
(J) Access Requirements: Mobile home parks shall have a minimum of two (2)
accesses from dedicated public streets. Each access shall be a minimum of 100 feet apart.
No mobile home space shall have direct access from a public street. Any access road
connecting two or more public streets shall be arranged to discourage through traffic.
(K) Street Width Requirements: Each mobile home park shall have access roads as
follows: For two-way roadways with no parking--24 feet in width for entrance roadways-
-36 feet in width. All interior roads shall be bordered by a two-(2) foot rolled curb.
(L) Parking Requirements: Two off-street, hard surfaced parking spaces shall be
provided for the parking of motor vehicles at each mobile home site. An additional
parking space (may be hard surfaced) shall be provided at each site and shall be indicated
on the site plan.
(M) Storage & Garbage Requirements: All storage and solid waste receptacles
maintained outside of the confines of mobile homes must be within a sight obscuring
structure which is compatible in design and construction with the mobile homes. Solid
waste disposal shall be frequent enough to avoid nuisance.
(N) Recreation Area Requirements: Mobile home parks shall provide not less than five
(5) percent of the gross land area for recreational use. The land used for roads, sidewalks,
setbacks for mobile homes and off-street parking shall not be included in computing the
recreational space.
(O) Launderette Requirements: A launderette for convenience of park occupants but
not for the general public may be included in mobile home parks.
(P) Sewer Service Requirements: All mobile home developments shall be served by
the public sewer system. Each space shall be provided with a four-inch waist line which
shall be set in concrete.
(Q) Water Service Requirements: Each space shall be provided with adequate water
supply lines in accordance with City ordinances. Each space shall have an approved shutoff
valve of sufficient depth and approved by the Water Superintendent to allow and
provide for water control. Installation of back-flow valves shall be in accordance with the
applicable code.
(R) Electrical Service Requirements: Each space shall have an electrical outlet of 110
volts; said outlet shall be an underground connection in accordance with the National
Electrical Code.
(S) Utility Location Requirements: All utilities shall be placed underground. City
utilities shall be metered as determined by Project Review Board.
(T) Fire Hydrant Requirements: Fire hydrants shall be located within the park so as to
service all mobile homes according to International Fire Code and the City Fire Chief.
(U) State Health Requirements: All mobile home parks shall conform to the
requirements set forth in the code for camp, trailer court, hotel, motel and resort
sanitation regulations, adopted by the Utah State Board of Health, and to all applicable
codes as required by Federal, State or local law.
(V) Rental Period Requirements: No mobile home space shall be rented for a period of
less than thirty (30) days.
SECTION 26-VII-5. Recreational Vehicle (RV) Park Development Standards
(A) Park Area Requirements: 1 acre minimum, or at least sixteen (16) spaces.
(B) Space Area Requirements: 1,000 sq ft. Minimum (No RV park shall have a density
greater than 16 units per acre.)
(C) Space Width Requirements: 20 feet minimum.
(D) Park Setback Requirements: Each recreational vehicle shall have the following
clearances:
(1) Side Setback: 10 feet minimum from adjacent property, unless adjacent to
public street then 20 feet;
(2) Front Setback: 20 feet minimum from a public street.
(3) Rear Setback: 10 feet minimum from adjacent property, unless adjacent to
public street then 20 feet;
(E) Allowed Vehicle Requirements: Only recreational vehicles, as defined in this
Ordinance, may be located in an RV park.
(F) Parking Requirements: Parking shall be provided for each RV in the park in
addition to one automobile for each RV space. RV parking spaces need not be hard
surfaced but should be of a gravel type material and be kept weed free. Each recreational
vehicle (RV) shall be able to park in designated spaces, and no portion of a driveway or
roadway may be used for recreational vehicle parking. All RV’s shall maintain at least
ten (10) feet spacing between units.
(G) Access & Road Requirements: Each RV park shall have access roads as follows:
For one-way
roadways with no parking--l4 feet in width; for two-way roadways with no parking--24
feet in width; for entrance roadways--30 feet in width. All interior roads shall be bordered
by a two-(2) foot rolled curb. Access through residential zones is prohibited.
(H) Outdoor Living Space Requirements: Each RV space shall provide an “outdoor
living” space adjacent to the vehicle parking space. The outdoor living space shall be a
minimum of three hundred (300) square feet and shall be maintained in a clean and weedfree
manner.
(I) Landscaping Requirements: Each RV park shall provide ten (10) feet of
landscaping along public streets according to the Landscaping section of this Ordinance.
(J) Utility Requirements: All RV parks shall be served by the public water supply and
public sewer system (including dump stations). All utilities shall be placed underground.
City utilities shall be metered as determined by City Building Inspector. Installation of
back-flow valves and dump stations shall be in accordance with the applicable code.
(K) Sanitary Facility Requirements: All RV parks shall contain a service building
containing all sanitary facilities required by the Utah State Dept. of Health Code for RV’s
and shall provide a dump station for dependent recreational vehicles. Parking around the
service building shall be hard surfaced.
(L) Recreational Area Requirements: Recreational space of not less than five (5)
percent of the total area of the RV park shall be provided. Recreational space does not
include park streets, parking areas, driveways, or the outdoor living space on each RV
space.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance 0919-18-2
Chapter 26 - Article VIII- Page 1
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
ARTICLE VIII. PLANNING COMMISSION
Section 26-VIII-1. Creation of Planning Commission
Section 26-VIII-2. Term of Office
Section 26-VIII-3. Organization-Meetings
Section 26-VIII-4. Employees-Expenditures
Section 26-VIII-5. General Plan
Section 26-VIII-6. Zoning
Section 26-VIII-7. Subdivisions
Section 26-VIII-8. City Streets
Section 26-VIII-9. City Land
SECTION 26-VIII-1. Creation of Planning Commission
There is hereby created a Planning Commission within and for Cedar City to be known as Cedar
City Planning Commission. Said Commission shall consist of seven members, one to be
designated from among its own members by the City Council and six to be appointed by the
Mayor with the consent of the City Council from among qualified voters of the City. Members
shall be selected without respect to political affiliations and shall serve with compensation as
determined by the City Council.
SECTION 26-VIII-2. Terms of Office
The term of office for the designated City Councilman shall correspond to their tenure of office.
The terms of office for the appointive members of such commission shall be four (4) years.
Vacancies occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms shall be filled by
appointment by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council. All terms shall be adjusted so
that they terminate on June 30th in the year they are currently scheduled to terminate. The Mayor
may remove members of the Planning Commission for the following reasons, to whit: (1)
Misconduct including, but not limited to, commission of a criminal act other than minor traffic
violations, and; (2) Excessive absenteeism including, but not limited to, missing three (3)
consecutive meetings. The members of the Planning Commission are appointed officials of the
City and shall comply with the terms of the Utah Municipal Officers and Employees Ethics Act,
UCA §§10-3-1301 through 10-3-1312, as currently enacted or as it may be amended. When new
members of the Planning Commission are appointed City Staff shall provide all training that is
reasonably necessary.
Chapter 26 - Article VIII- Page 2
SECTION 26-VIII-3. Organization -- Meetings
The Planning Commission shall elect from its membership a Chairman. The Chairman shall be
responsible to conduct the meetings and shall be a voting member of the board. If the elected
Chairman is absent the remaining members shall select, by majority vote, one of the members to
serve as Chair Pro Tempore.
All meetings of the Planning Commission shall be conducted pursuant to Robert’s Rules of
Order as administered by the Chairman. In applying Robert’s Rules of Order the Chairman is
encouraged to reject overly formal applications, and adopt the application that favors the
following goals: (1) allow the Chair the ability to facilitate or direct the discussion and keep
order; (2) protect the ability of all board members to bring up their ideas, discuss them, receive
input from the public and staff, and come to their individual opinions and conclusions on each
issue; (3) allow all members the opportunity to express their individual opinions and conclusions
on each issue through their vote; and (4) assure the majority vote of the board is the opinion of
the board while at the same time protecting the minority of board members ability to speak,
express ideas, and vote.
The Planning Commission shall meet as necessary on the first and third Tuesday of each month.
The Chair may call other meetings as deemed necessary. In order to call for a meeting the Chair
must notify all members of the board at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the meeting. The
notice from the Chair must contain the time, location, and date of the meeting. The Chair shall
inform the members of the general subject matter of the meeting. The notice may be sent by
mail, email, text, personal contact, or by phone.
All meetings of the Planning Commission shall be conducted pursuant to the Utah Open and
Public Meetings Act.
SECTION 26-VIII-4. Employees -- Expenditures
The Planning Commission may appoint employees and any contract with City Planners, and
other consultants providing its expenditures, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts
appropriated for the purpose by the City Council.
SECTION 26-VIII-5. General Plan
It shall be the function and duty of the Planning Commission to make, adopt, and certify to the
City Council a General Plan for the physical development of the City, including other areas
outside of its boundaries which in the Planning Commission's judgment bear relation to the
planning of Cedar City. Where the plan involves territory outside of the boundaries of the City,
action shall be taken with the concurrence of the county or other legislative body concerned. The
General Plan shall show the Planning Commission's recommendations and may include, among
other things, the general location, character and extent of streets, parkways, playgrounds, airports,
Chapter 26 - Article VIII- Page 3
and other public buildings and spaces and, the general location and extent of public utilities and
terminals, whether publicly or privately owned; the acceptance, widening, removal, extension,
relocations, narrowing, vacation, abandonment, or change of use of any of the foregoing; the
general location, character, layout, and extent of community centers and neighborhood units; the
extent and layout of the re-planning of blighted areas. The Planning Commission may from time
to time amend, extend, or add to the General Plan or carry any part of subject matter into greater
detail. In preparing the General Plan, the Planning Commission shall make careful and
comprehensive surveys and studies of the existing conditions and probable future growth of
Cedar City and its surrounding areas. The Plan shall be made with the general purpose of
guiding and accomplishing a coordinated, adjusted, and harmonious development of the City in
accordance with existing and future needs. The Planning Commission may make reports and
recommendations relating to the Plan and development of the City to public officials and
agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations, and
citizens. In general, the Planning Commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to
enable it to perform its functions and promote municipal planning.
SECTION 26-VIII-6. Zoning
The Planning Commission, through its own initiative may, or by order of the City Council, shall
make recommendations for changes in the Zone Map, or text of the Zoning Ordinance and shall
have all powers granted by law or by these ordinances in the preparation of zoning maps and the
recommendations for zoning in Cedar City. After receiving the recommendations of the Planning
Commission, the City Council may amend the Zoning Ordinance or map. Any substantial change
made by the City Council in the Planning Commission’s recommendation shall be returned to the
Planning Commission for review and returned to the City Council within Sixty (60) days.
SECTION 26-VIII-7. Subdivisions
The subdivision of any land whether by metes and bounds or by recorded plat or the vacating or
changing of a subdivision plat shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission and City Council
according to the provisions of the City’s Subdivision Ordinance, Chapter 32.
SECTION 26-VIII-8. City Streets
The dedication, widening, removal, extension, relocation, narrowing, vacation, abandonment,
naming, change of use, acquisition of land for, or sale or release of any City Street, other public
way, City easement or City property shall be referred to the Planning Commission for a
recommendation to the City Council within thirty (30) days of the Planning Commission’s
action.
Chapter 26 - Article VIII- Page 4
SECTION 26-VIII-9. City Land
No City owned, improved or unimproved real property shall be sold until the City Council shall
have referred the proposition to sell such land to the Planning Commission for its review and
recommendations, which shall be returned to the City Council within thirty (30) days. A public
hearing shall then be held thereon after notice of such hearing has been published in a newspaper
of general circulation in the City at least five (5) days prior to the date set for the hearing.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0612-13-3.
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
ARTICLE IX. BOARD OF ADJUSTMENTS
Section 26-IX-1. Creation
Section 26-IX-2. Powers of the Board of Adjustments
Section 26-IX-3. Variances
Section 26-IX-4. Special Exceptions
Section 26-IX-5. Other Powers & Duties
Section 26-IX-6. Vote
Section 26-IX-7. Procedure
Section 26-IX-8. Recourse and Decision of the Board
SECTION 26-IX-1 Creation.
(A) The City hereby creates the Board of Adjustments of seven (7) members to be appointed
by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the Cedar City Council. Each member shall
serve for a period of four (4) years. For members serving when this ordinance was
passed their terms shall be adjusted to expire on the 30th day of June in the same calendar
year in which they are currently set to expire. This shall not apply to the member of the
Board of Adjustments that is serving as a member of the Planning Commission, whose
term on the Board of Adjustments shall expire at the same time his term on the Planning
Commission expires. One member of the Planning Commission shall be a member of the
Board of Adjustments. Any vacancy occurring on said board shall be promptly filled by
the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, for the unexpired portion of
such term.
(B) The Mayor may remove members of the Board of Adjustments for the following reasons,
to whit:
(1) Misconduct including, but not limited to, commission of a criminal
act other than minor traffic violations, and;
(2) Excessive absenteeism including, but not limited to, missing three
(3) consecutive meetings.
(C) The Board of Adjustments shall organize and elect a Chairman. The chairman shall
conduct the meetings and be a voting member. The Board shall conduct meetings on the
first Monday of each month or as otherwise called by the Chairman. All meetings shall
be conducted in accordance with the provisions of the State of Utah Open and Public
Meetings Act. All members of the board shall follow the State of Utah Public Employees
Ethics Act.
(D) A simple majority of the voting members shall constitute a quorum to conduct business.
The Chairman shall conduct the meetings pursuant to Robert’s Rules of Order. In
applying Robert’s Rules of Order the Chairman is encouraged to reject overly formal
applications, and adopt the application that favors the following goals: (1) allow the
Chairman the ability to facilitate or direct the discussion and keep order; (2) protect the
ability of all board members to bring up their ideas, discuss them, receive input from the
public and staff, and come to their individual opinions and conclusions on each issue; (3)
allow all members the opportunity to express their individual opinions and conclusions
on each issue through their vote; and (4) assure the majority vote of the board is the
opinion of the board while at the same time protecting the minority of board members
ability to speak, express ideas, and vote. In addition, the Chair shall conduct the
meetings so as to allow the party requesting relief from the Board of Adjustments a
reasonable opportunity to present evidence and elicit testimony from witnesses.
(E) Cedar City shall assign such staff to the board of adjustments that is necessary and
proper. City Staff shall provide training for new members upon their appointment.
SECTION 26-IX-2 Powers of the Board of Adjustments.
(A) The Board of Adjustments shall hear and decide:
(1) Appeal from administrative decisions applying a zoning or subdivision
ordinance, including appeals from:
(a) building permit denials based upon a failure to comply with zoning or
subdivision ordinance; and
(b) administrative decision relating to subdivision plats;
(2) Special exceptions to the terms of the Zoning Ordinance;
(3) Variances from terms of zoning ordinances; and
(4) Appeals from decisions approving or denying a conditional use permit.
(B) The Board of Adjustments may make determinations regarding the existence,
expansion, or modification of non-conforming uses.
(C) The Board of Adjustments may interpret the zoning maps and pass upon disputed
questions of lot lines, district boundary lines, or similar questions as they arise in
the administration of the zoning regulations.
SECTION 26-IX-3 Variances.
(A) In accordance with State law, the Board of Adjustments shall hear any person or
entity desiring a waiver or modification of the requirements of zoning ordinance
as applied to a parcel of property that he owns, leases, or in which he holds some
beneficial interest, the Board of Adjustments may grant a variance from the terms
of the zoning ordinance if:
(1) Literal enforcement of the zoning ordinance would cause an un reasonable
hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general
purpose of the zoning ordinance;
(2) There are special circumstances attached to the property that do not
generally apply to other properties in the same district;
(3) Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial
property right possessed by other property in the same district;
(4) The variance will not substantially effect the general plan and will not be
contrary to the public interest; and
(5) The spirit of the zoning ordinance is observed and substantial justice is
done.
(B) In determining whether or not enforcement of the zoning ordinance would cause
unreasonable hardship, the Board of Adjustments may not find an unreasonable
hardship unless the alleged hardship (a) is located on or associated on the property
for which the variance is sought; and (b) comes from circumstances peculiar to
the property, not from conditions that are general, to the neighborhood.
(C) In determining whether or not enforcement of the zoning ordinance would cause
unreasonable hardship, the Board of Adjustments may not find an unreasonable
hardship if the hardship is self-imposed or economic.
(D) In determining whether or not there are special circumstances attached to the
property, the Board of Adjustments may find that special circumstances exist only
if the special circumstances:
(1) Relate to the hardship complained of; and
(2) Deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in the same
district.
(E) The applicant shall bear the burden of approving that all conditions justifying a
variance have been met.
(F) All variances run with the land.
(G) The Board of Adjustments, and any other body, may not grant use variances.
(H) In granting a variance, the Board of Adjustments may impose additional
requirements on the applicant that will:
(1) Mitigate the harmful effects of the variance; or
(2) Serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived or
modified.
SECTION 26-IX-4 Special Exceptions.
To hear and decide requests for special exceptions or other special requests upon which such
board is authorized to pass as herein set forth; provided, however, that the board shall not act
upon matters which have not been specifically delegated to it by the terms of this chapter. Every
decision of the Board of Adjustments shall be based upon findings of fact, and every fact and
every finding of fact shall be supported in the record of the proceedings of the Board.
The special exceptions or other special requests on which the Board of Adjustments shall be
authorized to pass are:
(A) To permit the building of a dwelling upon a lot which does not have frontage on a
street, if an adequate easement is provided,
(B) To interpret the zone map,
(C) To reduce the amount of off-street parking required where sufficient off-street
parking is not readily available within the vicinity, and/or where acquisition of
land for such use would cause exceptional hardships. Also to decide the number
of off-street parking spaces which shall be required when the number is not
specifically set forth in this ordnance.
(D) The board of Adjustments may permit buildings to be constructed within seventyfive
(75) feet from a natural flood channel, provided measures are taken which
will adequately protect the buildings or structures from damage due to floods, will
not increase the hazard of flood damage to surrounding lands and buildings, and
will be located in accordance with the plan of flood drainage as approved by the
City Council.
(1) Such use is similar in character and nature to the uses permitted in the
zone.
(2) Such use conforms to the basic characteristics of the zone in which it is
added and is in harmony with the objectives and purposes of the zone.
(3) Such use is not likely to create any more traffic, or be more offensive due
to noise, heat, dust, smoke, odor, glare, vibration or other objectionable
influence than the minimum amount normally resulting from the other
uses listed in the zone in which it is added. When any use has been added
to any zone in accordance with this procedure, such use shall thereafter be
deemed to be a permitted use within that zone.
(E) Grant Home Occupations. The Board of Adjustments may grant home
occupations in the R1, R-2 (Dwelling, Single Unit), R-2 (Dwelling, Two Unit), R-
3 (Dwelling, Single Unit), R-3 (Dwelling, Multiple Unit), and RE zones provided:
(1) The home occupation is conducted entirely within a dwelling and is
carried on by members of the family residing in the dwelling. Employees
other than family members residing in the dwelling are permitted as long
as the following conditions are complied with: (a) the total number of full
time and part time employees, including those residing in the home, shall
not exceed 1 employee for every one hundred and fifty (150) square feet
of area devoted to the home occupation, as per 26-IX-4(E)(6) and in no
event exceed a maximum of five (5) outside employees; and (b) provide
off street parking as required by 26-IX-4(E)(9).
(2) The home occupation does not involve the use of any accessory buildings
or yard space for storage or activities outside of the dwelling not normally
associated with residential use, except for Nursery Schools, in which case
it is presumed that rear yard space is utilized and the rear yard space must
be completely fenced with at least a six-foot (6') high fence.
(3) No commercial vehicles are used except one delivery truck which does not
exceed one (1) ton capacity.
(4) The home occupation does not include a drive through.
(5) The home occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use
of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character of
the building from that of a dwelling.
(6) Signs shall be limited to one non-flashing non-illuminated sign not larger
in area than six (6) square feet. Said sign must be located at least ten feet
(10') behind the sidewalk, and comply with the provisions of 26-IV-3,
clear view of intersecting streets. The top of a freestanding sign not
attached to the residence shall not be more than four (4) feet from ground
level.
(7) Not more than the equivalent of twenty-five percent (25%) of the ground
floor area of the dwelling is devoted to the home occupation. Nursery
schools and day care centers need not designate a particular twenty-five
percent (25%) of the ground floor area; however, the actual 25% of the
ground floor area shall be utilized to calculate the maximum number of
children allowed in the dwelling pursuant to Section 26-IX(E)(11)(b).
Ground floor area is defined as the square footage computed in the outside
measurements of the dwelling portion of the home on the ground floor
level. Basement or basement level floor space shall not be used in
computing ground floor area.
(8) The home occupation shall apply for and receive and maintain a Cedar
City business license.
(9) In the opinion of the Board of Adjustments, the activities in connection
with the home occupation are not contrary to the objectives and
characteristics of the zone in which the home occupation is located.
(10) Off-street parking will be provided. Except as provided under Section 26-
IX(E)(14), the amount of off street parking shall depend on the type of
home occupation being requested and shall meet the requirements of
Chapter 26, Section V, required parking. When applying the parking
requirements from Chapter 26, Section V, the required parking for the
home occupation shall be in addition to the required parking for the entire
residential use of the property. The applicant shall submit to the City’s
building and zoning official a site plan showing how the parking will be
accommodated on the lot at least five (5) days prior to the board of
adjustment meeting.
(11) In addition to the above requirements, home occupations for Nursery
Schools may be granted by the Board of Adjustments provided that the
proposed Nursery School has:
a. A maximum of sixteen children at any one time, including the
occupant’s own children;
b. That the portion of the dwelling used for the Nursery School contains
floor space of at least twenty-five square foot per child and alternate door
exits.
(12) Before conducting a hearing on a home occupation request the Building
Inspector shall have conducted an on-site inspection and shall make a
report of his findings to the Board of Adjustments.
(13) Notice by the applicant shall be given to all property owners of record
within a 300-foot radius from the boundary of the proposed home
occupation. Said notice shall be sent certified mail or hand-delivered to
the property owners in accordance with the most current Iron County
Assessment Roll no later than five (5) days before the board of
adjustments meeting. Proof of the certified mail and/or a certificate
documenting hand delivery to property owners as required herein shall be
delivered to the City Building Official prior to the board of adjustments
meeting.
(14) For temporary home occupations obtaining a transitional license under
Section 23-14(D)(3), the Board of Adjustments may exempt, in full or in
part, the applicant from the business portion of the parking requirements
under Section 26-IX-4(E)(10) if, in the opinion of the Board of
Adjustments, the exemption will not create a safety hazard.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0416-14 and 1114-18-4.
SECTION 26-IX-5 Other Powers and Duties.
(A) Conditions. The Board of Adjustments may attach reasonable conditions or
requirements to the granting of a variance or exception which the petitioner must
comply with as a condition of the granting or approval and may attached a time
limit on the exercise or non-exercise of any grant.
(B) In performing the duties and powers as set forth herein, the Board of Adjustments
is hereby empowered to reverse or affirm wholly or partly or modify the order,
requirement, decision, or determination of the enforcing officer and may make
such order or requirement as ought to be made; provided, however, that in
interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance, the requirements
contained herein shall be deemed to be the minimum requirements for the
purposes set forth.
(C) Authority Limited. The powers and duties of the Board of Adjustments are
limited to administrative matters as herein set forth in this chapter. It shall not be
the function of the Board of Adjustments to amend this ordinance or to correct
what it may consider to be an unwise requirement. Nevertheless, the Board of
Adjustments shall have administrative duties as set forth in this ordinance and
within the limitations and intent of the provisions of this ordinance shall perform
its duties and shall have the power to perform those acts as herein set forth and
such administrative actions shall not be interpreted as unauthorized amendments
to this ordinance.
SECTION 26-IX-6 Vote.
A simple majority of the voting members shall constitute a quorum to conduct business. The
concurring vote of a simple majority of the members present will be necessary to decide any
matter upon which is required to pass.
SECTION 26-IX-7 Procedure.
Upon receipt of the APPLICATION TO APPEAR BEFORE THE BOARD OF
ADJUSTMENTS, the Building Inspector shall forthwith transmit to the Board of Adjustments
all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. The Board of
Adjustments shall review the application and shall return the same to the Building Inspector with
its recommendations pertaining thereto within thirty (30) days. Failure to return said application
within thirty (30) days shall constitute approval. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance
of the action appealed from unless the Building Inspector certifies to the Board of Adjustments
after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with him that by reason of facts stated in the
certificate a stay would in his opinion cause imminent peril to life or property. In such case,
proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by restraining order which may be granted by the
Board of Adjustments or by the District Court on application and notice to the Building Inspector
and on due cause shown.
The Board of Adjustments shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal, give public
notice thereof by publication of notice at least five (5) days prior to the date of the hearing, as
well as due notice to the parties in interest and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon
the hearing any party may appear in person or by agent or by attorney.
SECTION 26-IX-8 Recourse from Decisions of Board.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the Board of Adjustments may have and maintain a
plenary action for relief therefrom in any court of competent jurisdiction provided that petition
for such relief is presented to the court within thirty (30) days after the filing of such decision in
the Office of the Board of Adjustments.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0612-13-2
Chapter 26 - Article X - Page 1
Chapter 26, Article 10
Of the Ordinances of
Cedar City, Utah,
Repealed by Ord. #0422-15-1
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
ARTICLE XI. CONDITIONAL USES.
Section 26-XI-1. Purpose
Section 26-XI-2. Conditional use Permit
Section 26-XI-3. Special Requirements
Section 26-XI-4. Restrictions
Section 26-XI-5. Conditional Uses
SECTION 26-XI-1. Purpose.
To allow the proper integration into Cedar City of uses which may be suitable only in certain
locations in the City or Zoning District, or only if such uses are designed or laid out on the site in
a particular manner.
SECTION 26-XI-2. Conditional Use Permit.
A Conditional Use Permit shall be required for all uses listed as conditional uses in the Cedar
City Ordinances or elsewhere in this Chapter. A conditional use permit may be revoked upon
failure in compliance with conditions precedent to the original approval of the permit.
(l) Application. Application for a Conditional Use Permit shall be made by the property
owner or certified agent to the Cedar City Planning Commission.
(2) Accompanying Documents. The applicant shall provide detailed site plans drawn to
scale and other drawings necessary to assist the Planning Commission and City Council
in arriving at an appropriate decision.
(3) Fee. The fee for any Conditional Use Permit application shall be Twenty-Five Dollars
($25.00) unless otherwise specified in this Ordinance, no part of which shall be refunded.
(4) Planning Commission Review. The Planning Commission shall review the proposed
Conditional Use Application pursuant to the requirements and criteria set forth hereafter
and shall approve or disapprove the permit application, or approve it subject to change or
alteration.
(5) City Council Approval. The Planning Commission shall forward the permit
application together with its recommendations to the City Council for its review pursuant
to the requirements and criteria set forth hereafter. The City Council may affirm, reverse,
alter, or remand for further review and consideration the recommendation given by the
Planning Commission.
(6) Public Hearing. A public hearing shall be held by the City Council in its consideration
of a Conditional Use Permit Application which hearing shall be held not more than 30
days from the date the application is referred to the City Council by the Planning
Commission. A Notice of Hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general
circulation in the City not less than seven (7) days prior to the date of said hearing.
(7) Determination. The City Council may permit a conditional use to be located within
any zone district which the particular conditional use is permitted by Section 26-104 of
this Chapter. In authorizing any conditional use the City Council shall impose such
additional conditions as may be necessary for the protection of adjacent properties and
the public welfare.
The City Council shall establish policies regarding landscaping, fencing, lighting, ingress/egress,
height of buildings, etc. to insure consistency in the issuance of a conditional use permit.
A conditional use permit shall not be authorized unless the evidence presented is such as to
establish:
(a) That the proposed use of the particular location is necessary or desirable to
provide a Service or facility which will contribute to the general well-being of the
neighborhood and the community; and
(b) That the proposed use will comply with regulations and conditions specified
in this Section for such use; and
(c) That the proposed use will conform to the intent of the Cedar City General
Plan.
(d) That such use will not under the circumstances of the particular case and the
conditions imposed, be detrimental to the health, safety and welfare of persons
nor injurious to property and improvements in the community, but will be
compatible with and complimentary to the existing surrounding uses, buildings
and structures when considering the following zones:
Residential Zones
l. Will the proposed use generate enough traffic to be detrimental to the immediate
neighborhood?
2. Will the proposed development overload the carrying capacity for which local streets are
designed?
3. Will internal traffic circulation adversely affect adjacent residential properties?
4. Will parking facilities location adversely affect adjacent residential properties?
5. Will parking facilities be effectively screened from adjacent residential properties?
6. Will the relationship of structures and parking be complimentary to the aesthetics of the
general area?
7. Will the proposed sign(s) adversely affect the development itself or the overall aesthetics
of the general area?
8. Will the proposed landscaping be sufficient to enhance the aesthetic acceptability of the
development?
Commercial Zones
1. Will traffic ingress and egress adversely affect the general traffic patterns in the area?
2. Will parking facilities location adversely affect internal circulation or access to public
street circulation?
3. Will building location create a pedestrian traffic hazard by causing blind approaches to
sidewalks?
4. Will building design be compatible with or complimentary to already established
adjacent structures?
5. If the development is adjacent to a residential zone or use, will the building location,
lighting, parking, or traffic circulation adversely affect the adjacent residential use or
zone?
6. Will proposed signing be complimentary to the development and overall aesthetic nature
of the immediate area?
7. Will the proposed business be attached to the city sewer, and if so, will it adversely affect
the system?
8. Will the parking facility be adequate for employees, clientele, loading and unloading, and
other business functions?
9. Will landscaping and parking facilities be satisfactory aesthetically, and as per site plan?
10. Will there be any outside storage? (Outside storage shall not be permitted.)
11 Will there be any hazardous material or chemicals of concern utilized in the proposed
business? If so, the City reserves the right to carefully evaluate the potential impact of
such materials or chemicals, and deny the conditional use permit based upon any adverse
findings.
Industrial Zones
l. Will heavy vehicle traffic adversely affect adjacent residential or commercial properties?
2. If the proposed use emits tolerable pollution of any type, will the prevailing breezes and
winds direct the pollutant toward residential or commercial properties in the immediate
area?
3. Will landscaping add aesthetic acceptance to the proposed development?
4. Will proposed signs be inoffensive and unimposing and not create adverse effects on
adjacent residential or commercial properties?
SECTION 26-XI-3. Special Requirements.
Conditions in addition to those outlined in this section may be established to meet the concerns
of safety for persons and property, health and sanitation, environment, master plan proposals,
and neighborhood needs, performance and administration, may include more specifically:
1. Conditions Relating to Safety for Persons and Property:
(A). Building elevations and grading plans which will prevent or minimize flood water
damage, where property may be subject to flooding.
(B). The relocation, covering or fencing of irrigation ditches, drainage channels, and
other potential attractive nuisances existing on or adjacent to the property.
(C). Increased setback distances from lot lines where the Cedar City Council determines
it to be necessary to insure the public safety and to insure compatibility with the intended
characteristics of the district as outlined in this ordinance.
(D). Appropriate design, construction, and location of structures, buildings, and facilities
in relation to property, and limitations and/or restrictions on the use and/or location of
uses due to special site conditions, including but not limited to geologically hazardous
areas; flood plains; fault zones; subsidence areas; and landslide areas.
(E). Limitations and control of the number, location, color, size, height, lighting, and
landscaping of outdoor advertising signs and structures in relation to the creation of
traffic hazards and appearance and harmony with adjacent development.
(F). Plans for the location, arrangement, and dimensions of truck loading and unloading
facilities.
(G). Construction of curbs, gutters, drainage culverts, sidewalks, streets, fire hydrants,
and street lighting.
2. Conditions Relating to Environmental Concerns.
(A). Processes for the control, elimination, or prevention of land, water, or air pollution;
the prevention of soil erosion; and the control of objectionable odors and noise.
(B). The planting of ground cover or other surfacing to prevent dust and erosion.
(C). Restructuring of the land and planting of the same as directed by the City Council
when the conditional use involves cutting and/or filling the land and where such land
would be adversely affected if not restructured.
3. Conditions Relating to Compliance with Intent of Comprehensive Plan and
Characteristics of Vicinity (or Neighborhood).
(A). The removal of structures, debris, or plant materials, incompatible with the intended
characteristics of the district outlined in this ordinance.
(B). The screening of yards or other areas as protection from obnoxious land uses and
activities.
(C). Landscaping to insure compatibility with the intended characteristics of the district
as outlined in this ordinance.
(D). Limitations or controls on the location, height, and materials of walls, fences,
hedges, and screen plantings to insure harmony with adjacent development, or to conceal
storage areas, utility installations, or other unsightly development.
(E). The relocation of proposed or existing structures as necessary to provide for future
streets on the master street plan of Cedar City, adequate sight distances for general safety,
groundwater control or similar problems.
(F). Population density and intensity of land use limitations where land capability and/or
vicinity relationships make it appropriate to do so to protect health, safety, and welfare.
(G). Other improvements which serve the property in questions and which may
compensate in part or in whole for possible adverse impacts to the district from the
proposed conditional use.
2 Conditions Relating to Performance. (A). A bond or other valuable assurance in favor of
Cedar City in an amount of said bond or other valuable assurance shall not exceed the
amount calculated by the developer's engineer and approved by the Cedar City Engineer
as necessary to assure compliance with all conditions.
SECTION 26-XI-4. Restrictions
1. Inspection. Following the issuance of a conditional use permit by the City Council, the
Building Inspector shall approve an application for a Building Permit pursuant to this
Ordinance and shall insure that development is undertaken and completed in compliance
with said permits.
2. Time Limit. The City Council may grant the conditional use permit on a trial basis for a
specified amount of time, which period of time shall be specifically set forth in the permit
and reviewed as established.
SECTION 26-XI-5. Conditional Uses.
Conditional uses are as indicated in the Permitted and Conditional Use section for Commercial
and Industrial zones (Section 26-III-14). Conditional uses in Residential zones are as follow:
1. Residential Zones
R-1 R-2 R-3 RE AT
Administrative, professional, and business offices with
no on-site retail sales;
N
N
C
N
N
Financial Institutions of smaller than 2000 square feet N N C N N
Hospitals N N C N N
Clinics N C C N N
Mortuary N N C N N
Bed and Breakfast N N C N N
Mobile Home Parks N N C N N
Fire Stations C C C C C
Utility Towers not exceeding 100 feet in height (See
Section 26-IV-15, Supplementary Regulations for
Electronic Communication Facilities).
N N N N C
Single Family dwellings (see Section 26-III-15 (C))
Two Family dwelling units and Twin Homes N N N
Multiple dwelling units and apartments N N N N
Equestrian establishments N N N N
Churches and/or Schools C
Residential facility for persons with a disability (See
article XV)
C
Business Parks/Research Campus C C C C C
Uses indicated with a “C” are conditional uses; uses indicated with an “N” are not permitted as
either permitted or conditional uses; uses not indicated with a letter are permitted uses.
Amended by ordinance number 0827-08-2, 0926-12-1 and 0708-20-6.
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
ARTICLE XII. AMENDMENTS
Section 26-XII-1. Procedure
Section 26-XII-2. Public Hearing Required Before Amending Notice
SECTION 26-XII-1. Procedure
This Zoning Ordinance, including the map, may be amended, but all proposed amendments shall
be submitted first to the Planning commission for its recommendations, which recommendations
shall be submitted to the City Council for its consideration within thirty (30) days. For the
purpose of establishing and maintaining sound, stable, and desirable development within the
City, it is declared to be a public policy that amendments shall not be made to the Zoning
Ordinance and map, except to promote more fully the objectives and purposes of this ordinance
or to correct manifest errors. Any person seeking an amendment of the Zoning Ordinance shall
submit to the Cedar City Community Development Director a written petition designating the
change desired, the reasons therefor, and wherein the proposed amendment would further
promote the objectives and purposes of the Zoning Ordinance, together with a fee of $25.00.
The Community Development Director shall in turn transmit the petition to the Planning
Commission. Upon the receipt of the petition, the Planning Commission shall consider the
request.
Any application for a zone change must comply with the following notice requirements prior to
Planning Commission consideration:
(1) five (5) business days’ notice by the Petitioner shall be given to all
property owners of record within a 300-foot radius from the boundary of
the proposed zone change. Said notice shall be sent certified mail by the
Petitioner to said property owners, or hand-delivered to the property
owners (certificate of hand-delivery to be filed with City Community
Development Director) in accordance with the most current Iron County
Assessment Roll;
(2) The posting of a sign(s) by the City on the property proposed to be rezoned.
The sign(s) shall be posted in a conspicuous place on the property
proposed to be re-zoned. Said sign(s) shall be visible from all abutting
streets and must face every street surrounding the property. The sign(s)
shall be at least 24 inches square and be labeled with 2-inch high letters
reading “PROPOSED ZONE CHANGE NOTICE” with the zone change
notice stapled below, and;
(3) the applicant shall pay an additional administration fee in the amount of
$25.00.
The Planning Commission may call a public hearing before submitting recommendations to the
City Council.
Before recommending an amendment to the ordinance, it must be shown that such amendment is
reasonably necessary, is in the best interest of the public, and is in harmony with the objectives
and purposes of this ordinance. Failure on the part of the Planning Commission to make
recommendations within thirty (30) days shall be deemed to constitute approval of such
proposed amendment unless a longer period is granted by the City Council. The fee provided
herein shall not be remitted.
Amended by City Ordinance 03-11-20-1.
SECTION 26-XII-2. Public Hearing Required Before Amending. Notice
Amendments to this ordinance may be adopted by the City Council only after submitting mailing
certifications or affidavit of mailing of notification to all property owners within 300-feet of a
proposed zone map amendment, a public hearing has been held in relation thereto before said
Council in which parties in interest and citizens shall have an opportunity to be heard. A notice
of the time and place of such hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation
within the City, on the City’s website, and on the City’s official social media accounts at least
fourteen (l4) days before the date of the hearing.
Chapter 26 - Article XIII- Page 1
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
ARTICLE XIII. MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 26-XIII-1. Interpretation
Section 26-XIII-2. Applicability
Section 26-XIII-3. Inspector
Section 26-XIII-4. Powers and Duties of Enforcing Officer
Section 26-XIII-5. Site Plans of Buildings Required
Section 26-XIII-6. No Conflicting License or Permits Shall be Issued
Section 26-XIII-7. Utility Connections
Section 26-XIII-8. Severability
Section 26-XIII-9. Violations of Public Nuisance
Section 26-XIII-10. Responsibility for Violations
Section 26-XIII-11. Penalties
Section 26-XIII-12. Each Day Separate Violation
Section 26-XIII-13. Conflicting Provisions Repealed
SECTION 26-XIII-1. Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this Ordinance they shall be held to be the
minimum requirements for promoting the public health, safety, convenience, comfort, and
general welfare of the community. When the requirements of this Ordinance impose higher
requirements than are imposed or required by existing provisions of Law or Ordinance, the
provisions of this Ordinance shall govern. When, however, the provisions of other laws or
ordinance impose greater restrictions than required by this Ordinance the provisions of the other
laws or ordinances shall govern. It is not the intent of this Ordinance to interfere with or nullify
any easement, covenants or agreements which are not in conflict with the provisions of this
Ordinance.
SECTION 26-XIII-2. Applicability.
The provisions of this Ordinance are applicable not only to private persons, agencies and
organizations, but also to all public agencies and organizations to the full extent that they may be
enforceable in connection with the activities or any such public agencies or organizations.
SECTION 26-XIII-3. Inspector.
The Office of Inspector is hereby created for the purpose of administering the provisions of this
Ordinance and powers delegated to this municipality by said statutes subject to such control and
review as the City Council and the Planning Commission may from time to time direct. Until
such time as the Mayor may otherwise appoint an inspector by resolution, the Building Inspector
shall perform the functions of the Inspector.
Chapter 26 - Article XIII- Page 2
The Mayor may appoint such assistant inspectors and delegate to them such powers and duties as
it may from time to time determine by resolution. The powers and duties of the assistants shall be
the same as those of the Inspector, unless otherwise so specified by resolution.
SECTION 26-XIII-4. Powers and Duties of Enforcing Officer.
A. It shall be the duty of the Building Inspector to inspect or cause to be inspected all
buildings in the course of construction or repair. He shall enforce all the provisions of this
ordinance, entering actions in the courts when necessary, and his failure to do so shall not
legalize any violation of such provisions.
B. Upon appeal to the Board of Adjustment of any matters on which said Board is required
to pass, the Building Inspector shall forthwith transmit all papers, records, and other
pertinent data pertaining to the appeal to the Board of Adjustment. The Board of
Adjustment may request a recommendation from the Planning Commission before
rendering its decision.
C. Building Inspector shall also transmit all other matters to the Planning Commission and
Board of Adjustment, as required by and under the provisions of this Ordinance.
SECTION 26-XIII-5. Site Plans of Buildings Required.
All applications for building permits shall be accompanied by a plat drawn to scale showing the
actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon, the size and location of existing buildings, building
to be erected, and existing buildings on adjacent property and such other information as may be
deemed necessary to provide for the enforcement of this ordinance.
SECTION 26-XIII-6. No Conflicting License or Permits Shall Be Issued.
No license or permit for a use, buildings, or purpose where the same would be in conflict with
this Ordinance shall be issued. All departments, officials and public employees vested with the
duty and authority to issue licenses or permits shall not issue said licenses or permits which
would not be in conformance with the provisions of this Ordinance. Any license or permit so
issued shall be null and void.
SECTION 26-XIII-7. Utility Connections.
The Building Inspector shall not authorize water and sewer connections until all of the provisions
of this Ordinance have been met.
SECTION 26-XIII-8. Severability.
This ordinance and the various parts, sections and clauses are hereby declared to be severable. If
Chapter 26 - Article XIII- Page 3
any part, section, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase is adjudged unconstitutional or invalid it
is hereby declared that the remainder of the Ordinance shall not be affected thereby. The City
Council of Cedar City hereby declares that it would have passed this Ordinance and each part,
section, paragraph, sentence, clause and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or
more portions thereof be declared invalid.
SECTION 26-XIII-9. Violations. A Public Nuisance.
Any building or structure which has been set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged,
converted, moved, remodeled, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this Ordinance, and
any use of land or building or premises established, conducted, maintained or operated contrary
to the provisions of this Ordinance are hereby declared to be unlawful and opposed to the orderly
development of the community and shall therefore be considered a public nuisance.
SECTION 26-XIII-10. Responsibility for Violations.
It shall be the duty of all architects, contractors, subcontractors, builders and other persons
having to do with the establishment of any use of land or the erection, altering, changing or
remodeling of any building or structure to see that a proper permit has been granted before such
work is begun. Any such architect, builder, contractor or other person doing or performing any
such work without a permit having been issued is in conflict with the requirements of this
Ordinance and shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Ordinance in the same manner and to
the same extent that the owner of the premises or the persons for whom the use is established, or
for whom such buildings are erected, or altered, and shall be subject to the penalties herein
prescribed for violators.
SECTION 26-XIII-11. Penalties.
Any firm, corporation, person or persons, or any action in behalf of said person, persons, firms or
corporation, violating any part of the provisions of this Ordinance shall be guilty of a
Misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punishable by a fine of not to exceed One
Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such
fine and imprisonment at the discretion of the Court.
SECTION 26-XIII-12. Each Day A Separate Violation.
Each person, persons, firm or corporation found guilty of violation shall be deemed guilty of a
separate offense for every day during which any violation of any provision of this Ordinance is
committed, continued, or permitted by such person, persons, firm or corporation, and shall be
punishable as provided in this Ordinance.
Chapter 26 - Article XIII- Page 4
SECTION 26-XIII-13. Conflicting Provisions Repealed.
Any ordinance, or resolutions, or parts thereof in conflict with the provisions of this
ordinance are hereby repealed insofar as they conflict with the provisions set forth in this
ordinance.
Chapter 26 - Article XIV - Page 1
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
ARTICLE XIV. AIRPORT OVERLAY ZONING
Section 26-XIV-1. Purpose and Findings
Section 26-XIV-2. Definitions
Section 26-XIV-3. Maps & Boundaries
Section 26-XIV-4. Airport Height Limitations
Section 26-XIV-5. Airport Compatible Land Use Regulations
Section 26-XIV-6. Nonconforming Structures & Uses
Section 26-XIV-1. Purpose and Findings.
(A) Purpose.
It is the purpose of this Article to regulate and restrict the height of structures and objects of
natural growth, and otherwise regulating the use of property, in the vicinity of the Cedar City
Regional Airport by creating the appropriate zones and establishing the boundaries thereof;
providing for changes in the restrictions and boundaries of such zones; defining certain terms
used herein, referring to the Cedar City Regional Airport Height Restriction and Compatible
Land Use Overlay Zoning Maps which are incorporated in and made a part of this ordinance;
and, providing for enforcement.
(B) Findings.
To assist communities in the appropriate land use and height restriction designations, the Federal
Aviation Administration (FAA) has published two documents, FAR Part 77, Objects Affecting
Navigable Airspace, and Advisory Circular (AC) 150/5300-13, Airport Design. This Article
incorporates the guidelines set forth in these FAA documents. Based on this information the City
finds:
(1) That the creation or establishment of an obstruction has the potential of being a
public nuisance and may injure the region served by the Cedar City Regional Airport;
and,
(2) That the encroachment of noise sensitive or otherwise incompatible land uses within
certain areas as set forth herein below may endanger the health, safety, and welfare of the
owners, occupants, or users of the land; and
(3) That it is necessary in the interest of the public health, public safety, and general
welfare that the creation or establishment of obstructions that are a hazard to air
navigation be prevented; and
(4) That the Cedar City Regional Airport fulfills an essential community purpose.
Chapter 26 - Article XIV - Page 2
SECTION 26-XIV-2. Definitions.
AIRPORT - Cedar City Regional Airport.
AIRPORT ELEVATION - The highest point of an airport's usable landing area measured in feet
from mean sea level. This elevation is 5622 feet MSL (NAD 83) as of the date of this ordinance.
APPROACH SURFACE - A surface longitudinally centered on the extended runway centerline,
extending outward and upward from the end of the primary surface and at the same slope as the
approach area height limitation slope set forth in Section 26-126 of this Ordinance.
HAZARD TO AIR NAVIGATION - An obstruction determined to have a substantial adverse
effect on the safe and efficient utilization of the navigable airspace.
HEIGHT - For the purpose of determining the height limits in all areas set forth in this Ordinance
and shown on the area map, the datum shall be mean sea level elevation unless otherwise
specified.
HELIPORT PRIMARY SURFACE - The primary surface coincides in size and shape with the
designated takeoff and landing area of a heliport. This surface is a horizontal plane at the
elevation of the established heliport elevation.
LARGER THAN UTILITY RUNWAY - A runway that is constructed for and intended to be
used by propeller driven aircraft of greater than 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and jet
powered aircraft.
NAD 83 - North American Datum 1983. All elevations in this ordinance are referenced to the
1983 North American Datum. To convert elevations referenced to the 1927 North American
Datum (NAD 27) to the NAD 83 datum, add 3.5 feet to the NAD 27 elevation.
NON-PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runway having an existing instrument
approach procedure utilizing air navigation facilities with only horizontal guidance, or area type
navigation equipment, for which a straight-in non-precision instrument approach procedure has
been approved or planned. It also means a runway for which a non-precision approach system is
planned and is so indicated on an approved Airport Layout Plan or any other planning document.
OBSTRUCTION - Any structure, growth, or other object, including a mobile object, which
exceeds a limiting height set forth in Section 26-126 of this Ordinance.
PERSON - An individual, firm, partnership, corporation, company, association, joint stock
association, or governmental entity; includes a trustee, a receiver, an assignee, or a similar
representative of any of them.
Chapter 26 - Article XIV - Page 3
PRECISION INSTRUMENT RUNWAY - A runway having an existing instrument approach
procedure utilizing an Instrument Landing System (ILS), a Precision Approach Radar (PAR) or a
Global Positioning System (G.P.S.). It also means a runway for which a precision approach
system is planned and is so indicated on an approved airport layout plan or any other planning
document.
PRIMARY SURFACE - A surface longitudinally centered on a runway. When the runway has a
specially prepared hard surface, the primary surface extends 200 feet beyond each end of that
runway; for military runways or when the runway has no specially prepared hard surface, or
planned hard surface, the primary surface ends at each end of that runway. The width of the
primary surface is set forth in Section 26-126 of this Ordinance. The elevation of any point on
the primary surface is the same as the elevation of the nearest point on the runway centerline.
RUNWAY - A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft along its
length.
STRUCTURE - An object, including mobile object, constructed or installed by man, including
but without limitation, buildings, towers, cranes, smokestacks, earth formation, and overhead
transmission lines.
TRANSITIONAL SURFACES - These surfaces extend outward at 90 degree angles to the
runway centerline and the runway centerline extended at a slope of seven (7) feet horizontally for
each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect
the horizontal and conical surfaces. Transitional surfaces for those portions of the precision
approach surfaces, which project through and beyond the limits of the conical surface, extend a
distance of 5,000 feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach surface and at 90
degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
TREE - Any object of natural growth.
UTILITY RUNWAY - A runway that is constructed for and intended to be used by propeller
driven aircraft of 12,500 pounds maximum gross weight and less.
VISUAL RUNWAY - A runway intended solely for the operation of aircraft using visual
approach procedures.
Section 26-XIV-3. Maps & Boundaries
The boundaries of the Airport Compatible Land Use Overlay Zones are delineated upon the
Airport Compatible Land Use Overlay Zoning Map. The boundaries of the Airport Height
Restriction Areas are delineated upon the Cedar City Regional Airport Height Restriction
Overlay Map. Said Maps are adopted by reference and made a part of this Chapter as fully as if
the same were set forth herein in detail. Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of the
Chapter 26 - Article XIV - Page 4
Airport Compatible Land Use Overlay Zones and/or the Airport Height Restriction Areas as
shown on the official Maps, the following rules shall apply:
Boundaries shall be scaled from the nearest physical feature shown on the maps.
Boundaries may be scaled from the nearest platted lot line as shown on the maps.
Distances not specifically indicated on either of the original maps shall be determined by a scaled
measurement.
Where physical features on the ground differ from the information shown on either of the
Official Maps or when there arises a question as to how or where a parcel of property is located
in relation to a Airport Compatible Land Use Zone or a Airport Height Restriction Area and such
questions cannot be resolved by the application of the appropriate section of this Chapter, the
property shall be considered to be classified as the most restrictive Airport Compatible Land Use
Overlay Zone or Airport Height Restriction Area. Where a parcel of land lies within more than
one (1) Airport Compatible Land Use Overlay Zone or Airport Height Restriction Area, the zone
or area within which each portion of the property is located shall apply individually to each
portion of the development.
SECTION 26-XIV-4. Airport Height Limitations
(A) Airport Height Restriction Areas.
In order to carry out the provisions of this Article, there are hereby created and established
certain areas which include all of the land lying beneath the Approach Surfaces, Transitional
Surfaces, Horizontal Surfaces, and Conical Surfaces as they apply to the Cedar City Regional
Airport. Such areas are shown on the Cedar City Regional Airport Height Restriction Overlay
Map. Height restrictions shall be implemented according to FAR Part 77, Objects Affecting
Navigable Airspace.
Precision Instrument Runway Approach Area - This area applies to Runway 20. The inner edge
of this approach area coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 1,000 feet wide. The
approach surface expands outward uniformly to a width of 16,000 feet at a horizontal distance of
50,000 feet from the primary surface. The centerline of the approach area is the continuation of
the centerline of the runway.
Visual Runway Approach Area (Larger Than Utility Aircraft) - This area applies to Runway
2. The inner edge of this approach area coincides with the width of the primary surface and is
1,000 feet wide. The approach surface expands uniformly to a width of 1,500 feet at a horizontal
distance of 5,000 feet from the primary surface. The centerline of the approach area is a
continuation of the centerline of the runway.
Chapter 26 - Article XIV - Page 5
Visual Runway Approach Area (Utility Aircraft) - This area applies to Runways 8 and 26. The
inner edge of this approach area coincides with the width of the primary surface and is 250 feet
wide. The approach surface expands uniformly to a width of 1,250 feet at a horizontal distance of
5,000 feet from the primary surface. The centerline of the approach area is a continuation of the
centerline of the runway.
Transitional Areas - The transitional areas are beneath the transitional surfaces.
Horizontal Areas - The horizontal area is established by swinging arcs of 10,000 feet radii from
the center of each end of the primary surface of the primary runway and connecting the adjacent
arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. The horizontal area does not include the approach
and transitional areas.
Conical Area - The conical area is commences at the periphery of the horizontal area and extends
outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet.
(B) Airport Height Limitations
Except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance, no structure shall be erected, altered, or
maintained, and no tree shall be allowed to grow in any area created by this Ordinance to a height
in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such area. Such applicable height
limitations are hereby established for each of the areas in question as shown on the Cedar City
Regional Airport Height Restriction Overlay Zoning Map. When determined appropriate by the
City, a person may be required to submit a Notice of Proposed Construction or Alteration to the
FAA to address any height concerns.
Precision Instrument Runway Approach Surface - Slopes fifty (50) feet outward for each foot
upward beginning at the end of, and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to
a horizontal distance of 10,000 feet. It continues on for a distance of 40,000 feet at a slope of
forty (40) feet outward for each foot upward along the extended runway centerline.
Visual Runway Approach Surface - Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward
beginning at the end of, and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a
horizontal distance of 5,000 feet along the extended runway centerline.
Transitional Surface - Slope seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides
of, and at the same elevation as the primary surface and the approach surface, and extending to a
height of 150 feet above the airport elevation. In addition to the foregoing, there are established
height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the sides of and at
the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending to where they intersect the conical
surface. Where the precision instrument runway approach area projects beyond the conical area,
there are established height limits sloping seven (7) feet outward for each foot upward beginning
Chapter 26 - Article XIV - Page 6
at the sides of and at the same elevation as the approach surface, and extending a horizontal
distance of 5,000 feet measured at 90 degree angles to the extended runway centerline.
Horizontal Surface - Established at 150 feet above the airport elevation or at a height of 5772 feet
above mean sea level (MSL).
Conical Surface - Slopes twenty (20) feet outward for each foot upward beginning at the
periphery of the horizontal area and at 150 feet above the airport elevation (5772 feet MSL) and
extending to a height of 350 feet (5972 feet MSL) above the airport elevation.
SECTION 26-XIV-5. Compatible Land Use Regulations
(A) Airport Compatible Land Use Overlay Zones Established
For the purpose of regulating the development of noise sensitive land uses to promote
compatibility between the Airport and the surrounding land uses, to protect the Airport from
incompatible development and to promote the health, safety, and general welfare of property
users, the Controlled Area of Cedar City Regional Airport is divided into five (5) Airport
Compatible Land Use Overlay Zones, and shall be known as:
Runway Protection Zone (RPZ) - This zone begins at the end of the primary surface of each
runway. For Runways 20 and 2 the zone begins at a width of 1,000 feet and expands outward
uniformly to a width of 1,725 feet at a horizontal distance of 2,450 feet from the primary surface.
For Runways 26 and 8 the zone begins at a width of 500 feet and expands outward uniformly to a
width of 700 feet at a horizontal distance of 1,000 feet from the primary surface.
Instrument Approach Zone (IAZ) - This zone applies to Runway 20 and begins at the end of the
Runway Protection Zone. It is 1,000 feet wide and extends a horizontal distance of 7,350 feet.
The centerline of the IAZ is a continuation of the centerline of the runway.
Approach Zone (AZ) - This zone applies to Runways 02/20 and 08/26. The Approach Zone for
Runway 02/20 has a width of 3,750 and shares the Runway centerline. It begins 10,000 feet from
primary surface of Runway 20 and extends toward Runway 02 to a distance of 4,900 feet beyond
the primary surface of Runway 02. The Approach Zone for Runway 08/26 has a width of 2,000
feet and shares the Runway centerline. It begins at Interstate-15 and extends toward Runway 08
to a distance of 4,900 feet beyond the primary surface of Runway 08.
Traffic Pattern Zone (TPZ) - The Traffic Pattern Zone is established by swinging arcs of 10,000
feet radii from the center of each end of the primary surface of the Runway 02/20 and connecting
the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. Excluded from this Zone is an area
created by the following intersecting lines: parallel to Runway 02 centerline, a line east at a
horizontal distance of 2,950 feet from the centerline; and, parallel to Runway 26 centerline, a
line south at a horizontal distance of 2,950 feet from the centerline.
Chapter 26 - Article XIV - Page 7
Airport Influence Zone (AIZ) - The Airport Influence Zone commences at the periphery of the
Traffic Pattern Zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of 4,000 feet. It also
includes the area excluded from the Traffic Pattern Zone described above.
(B) Use of Land and Buildings.
(1) Within the Airport Compatible Land Use Overlay Zones as defined herein, no land
shall hereafter be used and no structure or other object shall hereafter be erected, altered,
converted, or modified other than for those compatible land uses permitted by underlying
comprehensive zoning districts, as specified in this Chapter. Additionally, land uses not
compatible with the Airport Compatible Land Use Overlay Zones, as set forth in the
following land use table, regardless of the underlying zoning, are prohibited. Uses
designated as “P” are permitted, those designated as “N” are not permitted.
AIZ TPZ AZ IAZ RPZ
Residential - those uses identified in R-3-36 uses
(sec. 26-15 (B)), mobile homes, hotels, motels
P P N* N* N
Churches, schools, hospitals, places of public
assembly
P P N N N
Transportation, parking, cemeteries P P P P N
General Commercial Uses P P P P N
Industrial & Manufacturing Uses P P P P N
Agricultural - Cropland, open space, livestock P P P P N
Recreational - parks, playgrounds, golf courses, zoos P P P P N
Outdoor spectator sports P P P P N
Amphitheaters P N N N N
* Land within the Approach Zone which is north of 3000 North and/or east of
Northfield road may have residential uses as long as they are no more dense than
one dwelling/five acres and are located as far as practical away from the centerline
extended of the runway.
(2) Where any prohibited use of land and buildings set forth in this Section conflicts with
any use of land and buildings set forth in Article III of this Chapter, as an allowed use on
the Zoning Map, the more restrictive regulation shall apply.
Chapter 26 - Article XIV - Page 8
(3) Owners of property within the Approach Zone, prior to receiving a building permit,
shall grant, an avigation easement to Cedar City Corporation. The purpose of this
easement shall be to establish a maximum height restriction on the use of property and to
hold the public harmless for any damages caused by noise, vibration, fumes, dust, fuel,
fuel particles, or other effects that may be caused by the operation of aircraft landing at,
taking off from, or operating on, or near Cedar City Regional Airport.
(4) Owners of property constructing new buildings or structures within the Approach
Zone, where the public is received, office areas, noise sensitive areas, or where the
normal noise level is low, or dwellings, shall incorporate measures to achieve at least 25
dB sound attenuation.
(C) Additional Land Use Regulations.
(1) On property within the Airport Compatible Land Use Overlay Zoning Map
Jurisdiction, but outside the city limits of Cedar City, this Section shall apply to the
property to establish the prohibited uses, but no other provisions of this Chapter shall
apply to this property.
(2) Notwithstanding any other provisions of this Chapter or other Chapter of the Cedar
City, Utah Municipal Code, no use may be made of land, water, or structures within any
zone established by this Chapter in such a manner as to create electrical interference with
navigational signals or radio communication between the Airport and aircraft, make it
difficult for pilots to distinguish between Airport lights and others, or result in glare in the
eyes of pilots using the Airport; impair visibility in the vicinity of the Airport; create bird
strike hazards, or otherwise in any way endanger or interfere with the landing, taking off,
or flight operations of aircraft utilizing the Airport. The FAA documents; FAR Part 77,
Objects Affecting Navigable Airspace and, Advisory Circular (AC) 150/5300-13, Airport
Design, should be consulted.
(3) When a subdivision plat is required for any property within the Approach Zone, the
property owner shall grant an avigation easement to the Cedar City Corporation over and
across that property. This easement shall establish a height restriction on the use of the
property and hold the public harmless from any damages caused by noise, vibration,
fumes, dust, fuel, fuel particles, or other effects that may be caused by the operation of
aircraft taking off, landing, or operating on or near Cedar City Regional Airport.
Section 26-XIV-6. Nonconforming Structures & Uses.
(A) Regulations Not Retroactive
The regulations prescribed by this Ordinance shall not be construed to require the removal,
lowering, or other change or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the regulations
Chapter 26 - Article XIV - Page 9
as of the effective date of this Ordinance, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of
nonconforming use. Nothing contained herein shall require any change in the construction,
alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun
prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, and is diligently prosecuted.
(B) Marking and Lighting
Notwithstanding the preceding provision of this Section, the owner of any existing
nonconforming structure or tree is hereby required to permit the installation, operation, and
maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary by Cedar City
Corporation to indicate to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport the presence of
such airport obstruction. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at
the expense of the Cedar City Regional Airport.
Chapter 26 - Article XV - Page 1
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
ARTICLE XV. CONGREGATE LIVING FACILITIES
Section 26-XV-1. Definitions
Section 26-XV-2. Residential Facilities for Persons with a Disability
Section 26-XV-3. Residential Facilities for Elderly Persons
Section 26-XV-4. Design Standards for Protective Housing,
Rehabilitation/Treatment Facilities (Both Residential and
Nonresidential), Transitional Housing, and Assisted Living
Facilities
Section 26-XVI-5. Non-Residential Treatment Facilities
SECTION 26-XV-1. DEFINITIONS
1. The following definitions shall apply to all sections of Cedar City zoning ordinance and
shall supercede any other definition contained in the Cedar City Zoning Ordinance
(Section 26):
A .ADULT DAYCARE FACILITY. An adult daycare facility means any building
or structure furnishing care, supervision, and guidance for three (3) or more adults
unaccompanied by guardian for periods of less than twenty-four hours per day.
B. ASSISTED LIVING FACILITY. An assisted living facility is a residential
facility, licensed by the State of Utah, with a home like setting that provides an
array of coordinated support of personnel and health care services, available
24-hours per day, to residents who have been assessed under the Utah Department
of Health or the Utah Department of Human Services Rules to need any of these
services. Each resident shall have a service plan based on the assessment, which
may include:
i. specified services of intermediate nursing care;
ii. administration of medication, and;
iii .support services promoting residence independence and self sufficiency.
Such a facility does not include adult day care provided in conjunction
with a residential facility for elderly persons or a residential facility for
persons with a disability.
C .BOARDER. Boarder means a person living in a rented room in a boarding
house. The boarding house operator or member of his or her immediate family
who reside on the premises with the operator, shall not be considered to be a
Chapter 26 - Article XV - Page 2
boarder
.
D. BOARDING HOUSE. A boarding house is a building or a portion thereof where,
for compensation, rooms are rented together with meals for not more than fifteen
(15) boarders who generally do not directly utilize kitchen facilities. The operator
of a boarding house must reside on the premises of the boarding house. The work
shall include compensation in money, services, or other things of value. A
boarding house does not include a residential facility for disable persons or a
residential facility for the elderly. A boarding house does not include a
non-residential facility, such as a rehabilitation/treatment facility, where the
primary purpose of the facility is to deliver rehabilitation, treatment, counseling,
medical, protective or other similar services to the occupants.
E. BUILDING, PUBLIC. For purposes of this section only, a public building is a
building owned and operated, or owned and intended to be operated by the City, a
public agency of the United States of America, the State of Utah, or any of its
political subdivisions. The use of a public building, with immunity, is
non-transferrable and terminates if the structure is devoted to a use other than as a
public building with immunity. A public building referred to as with immunity
under the provisions of this title includes:
i. .properties owned by the State of Utah or the United States Government
which are outside of the jurisdiction of the City zoning authority as
provided under Title 9, Chapter 10, Section 105, Utah Code Annotated,
1953 as amended; and
ii. the ownership or use of a building which is immune from the City zoning
authority under the supremacy clause of the United States Constitution.
F .COMMUNITY CORRECTIONAL FACILITY. Community correctional facility
means a facility licensed or contracted by the State of Utah to provide temporary
occupancy for previously incarcerated persons which assists such persons in
making a transition from a correctional institution environment to independent
living.
G. CORRECTIONAL INSTITUTION. A correctional institution means a prison,
jail, juvenile detention facility, or juvenile secure facility.
H. DISABILITY. A disability means a physical or mental impairments that
substantially limits one or more of a persons major life activities, including a
person having a record of such a problem or being regarded as having such an
impairment. The following definitions are incorporated into the definition of
disability, to wit:
Chapter 26 - Article XV - Page 3
i. disability does not include current illegal use of, or addiction to, any
federally controlled substance as defined in Section 102 of the Controlled
Substances Act, 21 u.f.c. 802, or as defined under Title 58, Chapter 37,
Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended;
ii. .a physical or mental impairment includes the following, to wit:
1 Any psychological disorder or condition, cosmetic disfigurement,
or anatomical loss affecting one or more of the following body
systems: neurological, musculoskeletal; special sense organs;
respiratory, including speech organs; cardiovascular, reproductive;
digestive; genitourinary; hemic and lymphatic; skin; and endocrine;
or
2 Any mental or physiological disorder, such as mental retardation,
organic brain syndrome, emotional or mental illness, and specific
learning disabilities; or
3. Such diseases and conditions as orthopedic, visual, speech and
hearing impairments, cerebral palsy, autism, epilepsy, muscular
dystrophy, multiple sclerosis, cancer, heart disease, diabetes,
human immunodeficiency virus, (HIV), mental retardation,
emotional illness, drug addiction, (other than addiction caused by
current, illegal use of controlled substances) and alcoholism.
I. DOMESTIC STAFF. Domestic staff means persons employed or residing on the
premises of a dwelling or other residential facility to perform domestic services or
to assist residents in performing major life activities.
J. DWELLING. A dwelling means any building or portion thereof containing one or
more dwelling units occupied as or designated or intended for occupancy as a
residence by one or more families.
K. DWELLING, MULTIPLE FAMILY. A multiple family dwelling means any
building arranged or designed to include three (3) or more dwelling units, each to
be occupied by one (1) family.
L. DWELLING, SINGLE FAMILY. Single family dwelling means any building
arranged or designed to include only one (1) dwelling unit.
M .DWELLING, TWO FAMILY/DUPLEX. Two family dwelling (duplex) means a
building arranged or designed to include two (2) dwelling units, each to be
Chapter 26 - Article XV - Page 4
occupied by one (1) family.
N. DWELLING UNIT. Dwelling unit means any building or portion thereof
designated, occupied, or intended as a residence for a family with complete and
independent facilities for living, sleeping, eating, cooking and sanitation.
O. EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION. Educational institution means any elementary
or secondary school, seminary, parochial school or private educational institution
having a curriculum similar to that ordinary given in grades 1 thru 12 in public
school systems. The term educational institution for the purpose of this title does
not include post high school educational facilities or educational facilities which
include residential facilities for its students.
P. EDUCATIONAL INSTITUTION WITH HOUSING. Educational institution with
housing means a public or private educational institution with residential facilities
or housing for its students and or staff.
Q. ELDERLY PERSON. Elderly person means a person who is 60 years or older,
who desires or needs to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who
is capable of living independently.
R. FAMILY. Family means one or more persons related by blood, marriage,
adoption, or guardianship, or a group of not more than four (4) unrelated persons
living together as a single nonprofit housekeeping unit, together with any
incidental domestic staff who may or may not reside on the premises. “Family”
does not exclude the care of foster children.
S. FRATERNITY OR SORORITY HOUSE. A fraternity or sorority house means a
building occupied by and maintained exclusively for students affiliated with an
academic or professional college or university or other recognized institution of
higher learning who are associated together in a fraternity or sorority that is
officially recognized by such institution and who receives lodging and/or meals on
the premises for compensation.
T. HOSPITAL. Hospital means an institution licensed by the State of Utah which
provides diagnostic, therapeutic, and rehabilitative services to individuals on both
an inpatient and out patient basis by or under the supervision of one or more
physicians. A medical clinic or professional office which offers any in-patient or
overnight care, or operates on a 24-hour basis shall be considered to be a hospital.
A hospital may include necessary support service facilities such as laboratories,
out-patient units and training and central services, together with staff offices
necessary to operate the hospital.
Chapter 26 - Article XV - Page 5
U. HOTEL. A hotel is a building designed for or occupied as the more or less
temporary abiding place of individuals who are, for compensation lodged with or
without meals.
V. JAIL. Jail means a place of incarceration owned and operated by the County.
W. JUVENILE DETENTION FACILITY. Juvenile detention facility means a place
of temporary detention for delinquent juveniles, which either is owned or operated
by the State of Utah or is under contract with the State of Utah.
X. JUVENILE SECURE FACILITY. Juvenile secure facility means a place of
incarceration for delinquent juveniles which is either owned or operated by the
State of Utah or is under contract with the State of Utah.
Y. MAJOR LIFE ACTIVITIES. Major life activities means functions such as caring
for ones self, performing manual tasks, walking, seeing, hearing, speaking,
breathing, learning and working.
Z. NON-RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITY. Non-Residential Treatment
Facility is a facility wherein no persons will be housed on an overnight basis, and
provides services including rehabilitation, treatment, counseling, or assessment
and evaluation services related to delinquent behavior, alcohol abuse, drug abuse,
sexual offenders, sexual abuse, or mental health. Associated educational services
may also be provided to juvenile occupants
AA .NURSING HOME. Nursing home means an intermediate care/nursing facility or
a skilled nursing facility licensed by the State of Utah, for the care of individuals
who, due to illness, advance stage, disability, or impairment require assistance
and/or supervision on a 24-hour per day basis. Such a facility does not include an
adult day care facility or adult day care provider in conjunction with residential
facilities for elderly persons or a residential facility for persons with a disability.
BB. PRISON. Prison means a place of incarceration owned or operated by the State of
Utah.
CC. PRIVATE PRISONS. Private prison means a correctional facility established or
operated under a contract with the State of Utah under the provisions of the
Private Correctional Facilities Act, Chapter 13C, Title 64, Utah Code Annotated,
1953 as amended.
DD. PRIVATE JAIL. Private jail means a place of incarceration established or
operated under a contract with the County.
Chapter 26 - Article XV - Page 6
EE. PROTECTIVE HOUSING FACILITY. Protective housing facility means a
facility either (1) operated, licensed, or contracted by a governmental entity, or (2)
operated by a charitable, non-profit organization, where no compensation,
temporary, protective housing is provided to:
(i) Abused or neglected children waiting placement of foster care;
(ii) Pregnant or parenting teens;
(iii) victims of sexual abuse; or
(iv) victims of domestic abuse.
FF. REASONABLE ACCOMMODATION. Reasonable accommodation means a
change in any rule, policy, practice, or service necessary to afford a person with a
disability equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling. The following words
have the following definitions, to wit:
(i) Reasonable. Reasonable means a requested accommodation that will not
undermine the legitimate purpose of existing zoning regulations
notwithstanding the benefit that the accommodation will provide to a
person with a disability.
(ii) Necessary. Necessary means the applicant must show that, but for the
accommodation one or more persons with a disability likely will be denied
an equal opportunity to enjoy the housing of their choice.
(iii) Equal Opportunity. Equal opportunity means achieving equal results as
between a person with a disability and a non-disabled person.
GG. RECORD OF IMPAIRMENT. Having a record of impairment means having a
history of, or having been mis-classified as having a mental or physical
impairment that substantially limits one or more major life activities.
HH. REGARDED AS HAVING AN IMPAIRMENT. A person is regarded as having
an impairment when:
(i) the person has a physical or mental impairment that does not substantially
limit one or more major life activity but is treated by another person as
having such a limitation;
(ii) has a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more
major life activities only as a result of the attitudes of others towards such
Chapter 26 - Article XV - Page 7
an impairment; or
(iii) has none of the impairments defined in this section but is treated by
another person as having such an impairment.
II. REHABILITATION/TREATMENT FACILITY. Rehabilitation/treatment facility
means a facility licensed or contracted by the State of Utah to provide temporary
occupancy and supervision of individuals (adults and/or juveniles) in order to
provide rehabilitation, treatment or counseling services. Without limitation, such
services may include rehabilitation, treatment, counseling, or assessment and
evaluation services related to delinquent behavior, alcohol abuse, drug abuse,
sexual offenders, sexual abuse, or mental health. Associated educational services
may also be provided to juvenile occupants.
JJ. RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR ELDERLY PERSONS. Residential facility for
elderly persons means a dwelling unit that is occupied on a 24-hour per day basis
by 8 or fewer elderly persons in a family type arrangement. A residential facility
for elderly persons shall not include any of the following, to wit:
(i) a facility which is operated as a business; provided that such facility may
not be considered to be operated as a business solely because a fee is
charged for food or for actual and necessary costs of preparation and
maintenance of the facility;
(ii) a facility where persons being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse are
placed; a facility where placement is not on a strictly voluntary basis or
where placement is part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or
treatment in a correctional institution; or a facility which is a health care
facility as defined by Title 26, Section 21, Chapter 2, Utah Code
Annotated, 1953 as amended; or a facility which is a residential facility for
persons with a disability.
KK. RESIDENTIAL FACILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A DISABILITY. Residential
facility for persons with a disability means any residence in which more than one
person with a disability resides and which is:
(i) licensed or certified by the Department of Human Services under Title 62
A, Chapter 2, of the Utah Code, licensor for programs and facilities; or
(ii) licensed or certified by the Department of Human Health under Title 26,
Chapter 21, Health Care Facilities Licensing and Inspection Act.
LL. RESIDENTS, RESIDENTIAL FACILITY. A resident, residential facility means
Chapter 26 - Article XV - Page 8
any building or portion thereof where an individual is actually living at a given
point and time and intends to remain, and not a place of temporary sojourn or
transient visit.
MM. RETIREMENT HOME. Retirement home means a residential facility designated,
occupied, and intending for residents fifty (50) years of age or older where
common facilities for cooking and dining are available to all residents in
independent facilities are provided for living, sleeping and sanitation.
NN. SHELTERED WORKSHOP. Sheltered workshop means an onsite supervised
educational or vocational training facility for persons with a disability and does
not provide any residential facilities.
OO. SHELTER FOR THE HOMELESS. Shelter for the homeless means charitable
lodging or sleeping rooms provided on a temporary basis (usually on a daily basis)
to those members of society lacking other safe, sanitary or affordable shelter. A
shelter for the homeless may also include kitchen and cafeteria facilities.
PP. TRADE OR VOCATIONAL SCHOOL. Trade or vocational school means a post
high school educational or vocational training facility.
QQ. TRANSITIONAL HOUSING FACILITY. Transitional housing facility means a
facility owned, operated or contracted by a governmental entity or a charitable, not
for profit organization, where, for no compensation, temporary housing (usually
three to twenty-four months, but in no event less than thirty days) is provided to
homeless persons, while they obtain work, job skills, or otherwise take steps to
stabilize their circumstances. A transitional housing facility shall not include a
shelter for the homeless, a dwelling unit provided to a family for the exclusive use
as part of a transitional housing program, for more than thirty days, shall not be
considered to be a transitional housing facility.
SECTION 26-XV-2. RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR PERSONS WITH A
DISABILITY.
1 Applicability. This section shall be deemed to govern any facility, residence, or other
circumstance that meets the definition of a residential facility as set forth in this
ordinance, and the definition of a disabled person as set forth in this Ordinance for the
requirements of this section shall govern the same notwithstanding any other provisions
of Cedar City Ordinance.
2. Purpose. The purposes of this section are:
Chapter 26 - Article XV - Page 9
A. To comply with Title 10, Chapter 9, Section 605, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as
amended; and
B. To avoid discrimination and housing against persons with disabilities as provided
in the Utah Fair Housing Act and the Fair Housing Amendments Act as
interpreted by the Courts having jurisdiction over Cedar City.
3. A residential facility for persons with a disability shall be a permitted use in any zoning
district where a dwelling is allowed. Each such facility shall conform to the following
requirements:
A. The facility shall comply with all building, safety and health regulations, the
American with Disabilities Act, fire regulations, and all applicable State core
standards and licensing requirements, and any standards set forth in any contract
with a state agency.
B. The following site development standards and parking standards shall be
applicable:
i. Each facility shall be subject to minimum site development standards
applicable to a dwelling unit in the zone in which the facility is located;
and
ii. The minimum number of parking spaces required shall be the same as the
number required for a dwelling with similar occupancy density in the same
zone.
C. No facility shall be made available to an individuals who has demonstrated, as a
resident, that they:
i. Constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals; or
ii. Engage in conduct resulting in substantial physical damage to the property
of others.
D. Prior to occupancy of the facility, the person or entity licensed or certified by the
Department of Human Services or the Department of Health to establish and
operate the facility shall:
i. Provide a certified copy of such license to the City Recorder;
ii. Certify, in a sworn affidavit submitted with the application for a business
license, compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act;
Chapter 26 - Article XV - Page 10
iii. Certify, in a sworn affidavit submitted with the application for a business
license, that no person will remain in the facility whose behavior has
demonstrated a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals, or
whose behavior has resulted in substantial physical damage to the property
of others.
E. The use permitted by this section is non-transferrable and shall terminate if:
i. A facility is devoted to or used as other than a residential facility for
persons with a disability; or
ii. The license or certification issued by the Department of Human Services
or Department of Health terminates or is revoked; or
iii. The facility fails to comply with the conditions set forth in this section.
F. No residential facility for persons with a disability, licensed for the housing of
persons shall be established or maintained within seven hundred (700) feet
measured in a straight line between the closest property lines of the lots or parcels
of the following facilities:
i. Another residential facility for persons with a disability;
ii. A residential facility for elderly with more than five (5) elderly persons in
a residents; or
iii. Any of the following facilities: Protective housing facility, transitional
housing facility, assisted living facility or rehabilitation/treatment facility,
a non-residential treatment facility, and elementary schools.
G. In a R-1 zone no residential facility for persons with a disability shall exceed four
(4) residents, not including staff, or the family that owns the residence.
H. In a R-2 zone, no residential facility for persons with disabilities shall exceed
eight (8) residents, not including staff, or the family that owns the residence.
I. In a R-3-16 or R-3-36 zone, no residential facility for persons with disabilities
shall exceed twelve (12) residents, not including staff, or the family that owns the
residence.
J. In a general commercial (GC) zone, no residential facility for persons with
disabilities shall be allowed to exceed twelve (12) residents, not including staff.
K. In the downtown commercial (DC) zone and the central commercial (CC) zone,
Chapter 26 - Article XV - Page 11
no residential facility for persons with disabilities shall exceed eight (8) residents,
not including staff.
L. No residential facilities for persons with disabilities shall be permitted in the
following zones: industrial and manufacturing I (I&M I); industrial and
manufacturing II (I&M II); neighborhood commercial (NC); and the highway
services (HS) zone.
4. Reasonable Accommodations. None of the foregoing conditions shall be interpreted to
limit reasonable accommodations necessary to allow the establishment or occupancy of a
residential facility for person(s) with a disability.
A. Any person or entity who wishes to request a reasonable accommodation shall
make application to the City Manager, or the City Manager’s designee. Said
applications shall specifically articulate, in writing, the following:
i. The name, mailing address, and phone number of the applicant;
ii. The nature and extent of the disability;
iii. An exact statement of the ordinance or policy from which the applicant
needs a reasonable accommodation;
iv. The applicant’s proposed reasonable accommodations;
v. A statement detailing why a reasonable accommodation is necessary; and
vi. The physical address of the property where the applicant intends on living.
B. When considering wether or not to grant a reasonable accommodation, the City
Manager or the City Manager’s designee shall use the following factors:
i. The zoning ordinance applicable to the property;
ii. The parking, traffic, and noise impact on the neighborhood if the
reasonable accommodation is granted;
iii. Whether or not the accommodation will be an undue burden or expense to
the City;
iv. The extent to which the accommodation will or will not benefit the
applicant;
v. The extent to which the accommodation will or will not benefit the
Chapter 26 - Article XV - Page 12
community;
vi. Whether or not the accommodation fundamentally alters the City wide
zoning ordinance;
vii. Has the applicant demonstrated that the accommodation will affirmatively
enhance the applicant’s life, or ameliorate the effects of the applicant’s
disability;
viii. Without the accommodation, is similar housing available in Cedar City for
the applicant or group of applicants; and
ix. Given the scope of the accommodation requested, what is the impact on
the immediate neighborhood;
C. Written findings and conclusions of the City Manager, or the City Manager’s
designee, shall be sent to the applicant within thirty (30) days; and
D. If a request for a reasonable accommodation is denied, such decision may be
appealed to the Board of Adjustments.
SECTION 26-XV-3. RESIDENTIAL FACILITIES FOR ELDERLY PERSONS.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this code is to comply with Title 10, Chapter 9, Section 605,
Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended.
2. “Residential facilities for elderly persons” shall comply with the following requirements:
A. The facility shall meet all applicable building codes, safety codes, zoning
regulations, the Americans with Disabilities Act, and health ordinance applicable
to similar dwellings;
B. Minimum site development standards shall be the same as those for a dwelling
unit in the zone in which the facility is located;
C. The facility shall be capable of being used as a residential facility for elderly
persons without structural or landscaping alterations that would change the
structures residential character;
D. The use granted and permitted by this section is non-transferrable and terminates
if the structure is devoted to any use other than as a residential facility for the
elderly or if the structure fails to comply with the applicable health, safety and
building codes; and
E. No residential facility for elderly persons which facility has more than five (5)
Chapter 26 - Article XV - Page 13
elderly persons in residence shall be established or maintained within 700 feet
measured in a straight line between the closest property lines of the lots or parcels
of similar facilities, residential facilities for persons with disabilities protective
housing facilities, transitional housing facilities, assisted living facilities,
rehabilitation/treatment facilities, or a non-residential treatment facility.
SECTION 26-XV-4. DESIGN STANDARDS FOR PROTECTIVE HOUSING,
REHABILITATION/TREATMENT FACILITIES (BOTH RESIDENTIAL AND
NONRESIDENTIAL), TRANSITIONAL HOUSING, AND ASSISTED LIVING
FACILITIES.
1. Any newly constructed, or remodeled, facility in a residential zone or immediately
abutting a residential zone shall comply with the following design standards:
A. All setbacks shall be according to the requirements of the residential zone in
which the facility sits, or if the facility is in a commercial zone abutting a
residential zone the setbacks shall be those of the abutting residential zone;
B. All required or accessory parking areas shall be located either in the rear yard area
of the lot, or behind the main building or garage;
C. Notwithstanding the maximum height restrictions of the individual residential
zone. New building or additional buildings shall not exceed 110% of the average
height of the closest dwellings on both sides of the proposed structure;
D. In order for new construction to reflect the design and character of the existing
neighborhood the following standards shall be met:
i. The roof design of the proposed structure or remodel roof shall be a
pitched roof of the same slope as the most common roof slope of the
homes on the side of the block which the building is proposed on; and
ii. The type of exterior materials shall be of traditional home finished
materials of brick, siding, or stucco. The use of these materials shall be
applied in such a manner as to blend in with the neighborhood where the
building is located and not draw undue attention to the building because of
the materials, their color and combination being uncharacteristic of the
other buildings in the neighborhood.
SECTION 26-XV-5. NON-RESIDENTIAL TREATMENT FACILITIES
1. Non- residential treatment facilities shall be a permitted use in the general commercial
(GC) zone, central commercial (CC) zone, and downtown commercial (DC) zone. In
Chapter 26 - Article XV - Page 14
addition, they shall be permitted as a conditional use in R-3-16 and R-3-36.
Non-Residential treatment facilities shall not be a permitted use in a R-1 zone or a R-2
zone. Each permitted facility shall conform to the following requirements:
A. The facility shall comply with all building, safety and health regulations, the
American with Disabilities Act, fire regulations, and all applicable State core
standards and licensing requirements, and any standards set forth in any contract
with a state agency.
B. The following site development standards and parking standards shall be
applicable:
I. Each facility shall be subject to minimum site development standards
applicable to a business in the zone in which the facility is located; and
ii. The minimum number of parking spaces required shall be the same as the
number required for an office building with similar size, occupancy, and
density in the same zone.
C. Prior to occupancy of the facility, the person or entity licensed or certified by the
Department of human services or the Department of Health to establish and
operate the facility shall:
I. Provide a certified copy of such license with the City Recorder;
ii. Certify, in a sworn affidavit submitted with application for a business
license, compliance with the Americans with Disabilities Act;
D. The use permitted by this section is non-transferrable and shall terminate if:
I. A facility is devoted to or used as other than a residential facility for
persons with a disability; or
ii. The license or certification issued by the Department of Human Services
or Department of Health terminates or is revoked, or the facility fails to
comply with the conditions set forth in this section.
E. No non-residential treatment facility shall be established or maintained within
seven hundred (700) feet measured in a straight line between the closest property
lines of the lots or parcels of the following facilities:
i. A residential facility for persons with a disability;
ii. A residential facility for elderly with more than five (5) elderly persons in
a residence; or
Chapter 26 - Article XV - Page 15
iii. Any of the following facilities: Protective housing facility, transitional
housing facility, assisted living facility or rehabilitation/treatment facility,
a non-residential treatment facility, and elementary schools.
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
CHAPTER 26
PLANNING AND ZONING
ARTICLE XVI CEDAR CITY SIGN ORDINANCE
SECTION 26-XVI-1. Introduction & Purpose
SECTION 26-XVI-2. General Provisions
SECTION 26-XVI-3. Definitions
SECTION 26-XVI-4. Prohibited Signs
SECTION 26-XVI-5. Signs Allowed Without a Permit
SECTION 26-XVI-6. Signs Requiring a Permit
SECTION 26-XVI-7. Sign Permit Procedures
SECTION 26-XVI-8. Signs in Specific Areas
SECTION 26-XVI-9. Temporary Signs
SECTION 26-XVI-10. Measurement of Regulated Sign Area
SECTION 26-XVI-11. Nonconforming Signs
SECTION 26-XVI-12. Removal of Illegal and Unsafe or Abandoned Signs
SECTION 26-XVI-13. Exhibits
SECTION 26-XVI-1 Introduction & Purpose
Signs are an important aspect of the City. Besides providing identification to commercial and
industrial businesses, creative and attractive signs show a community’s economic vitality. The
proliferation and disrepair of signs can deter their effectiveness, as well as cause dangerous
conflicts with traffic-control devices. When abused, signs create a visual blight which detracts
from the quality of the environment.
The purpose of the sign ordinance is to manage the use of signs as to be compatible with their
surroundings, provide effective identification of business establishments, contribute to the
protection and the promotion of the health, safety, and welfare of the traveling public and the
citizens of the City, preserve and enhance property values, promote healthy commercial and
industrial districts, and to enhance the community’s aesthetics by establishing standards and
regulations for sign design, location, size, type and compatibility.
SECTION 26-XVI-2 General Provisions
This section shall govern and control the erection, remodeling, enlarging, moving, alteration,
operation and maintenance of all signs within all zoning districts. It also provides penalties for
violations of this section.
(1) All signs erected in Cedar City shall comply with the provisions of this ordinance and
applicable codes. All sign permit applications shall demonstrate conformance with the
provisions of this ordinance and applicable codes. Where required by the Chief Building
Official, a permit application shall be accompanied by drawings stamped by an engineer
licensed by the State of Utah. Nothing contained in this section shall be deemed a
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
waiver or variance of the provisions of any other articles or sections in this code
applicable to signs. Signs located in areas governed by several articles or sections of this
code shall comply with all such articles and/or sections. In the case of contradicting
requirements or provisions, the more restrictive shall apply.
(2) All signs must be built of durable and permanent materials. Permanent power sources for
signs must be concealed underground away from public view. No sign, fixture or device
involving electrical wiring or connections shall be erected or installed except by a
contractor licensed in the State of Utah.
(3) No sign shall be erected or maintained which has less horizontal or vertical clearance
from communication lines and energized electrical power lines than that prescribed by
the applicable codes.
(4) The Building Inspector shall inspect, as deemed necessary, signs, regulated by this
Chapter to ascertain whether the signs have been adequately installed and adequately
maintained. Every sign shall be kept in complete operating condition. The landscaped
area in which any sign is placed shall be kept free from weeds, garbage and debris.
“Maintenance” includes repair of facades where signs have been removed, the painting,
cleaning and repairing of signs. Upon discovery of a sign in need of maintenance, the
Building Department shall give written notice to the owner stating the item(s) of
needing repair or maintenance. The owner shall have thirty (30) calendar days to make
repairs before legal action may be taken.
(5) Failure to abide by and faithfully comply with any and all terms and conditions that may
be attached to the granting of any sign permit or variance shall constitute grounds for the
revocation of such permit by the Building Department. All remedies provided for in this
ordinance shall be cumulative and not exclusive.
SECTION 26-XVI-3 Definitions
(1) A-frame signs: “A-frame sign” means a temporary and/or movable sign constructed
with two sides attached at the top so as to allow the sign to stand in an upright position.
(2) Abandoned sign: Any sign applicable to a use which has been discontinued for a
period of 30 days.
(3) Alterations: Change or rearrangement in the structural parts or design of the sign,
whether by extending on a side, by increasing in area or height, or in moving from one
location or position to another adding or deleting words from the copy or changing the
size of the letters or figures comprising the copy.
(4) Area of sign: Includes the entire area within any type of perimeter or border which
may enclose the outer limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure or character.
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
The area of the sign having no perimeter or border shall be computed by enclosing the
entire area within the smallest primary shape possible and calculating the area of that
shape.
(5) Animated sign: Sign which involves motion or rotation of any part by mechanical or
artificial means or displays flashing or intermittent lights excluding; time, temperature,
electronic display screens and electronic message centers.
(6) Awning: Roofed structure constructed of fabric or metal placed so as to extend
outward from the building providing a protective shield for doors, windows and other
openings with supports extending back to the building, supported entirely by the building.
(7) Banner: Any sign of lightweight fabric or similar material that is mounted to a pole
or a building at one or more edges. Flags shall not be considered banners.
(8) Billboard sign: An off-premise, free-standing outdoor advertising sign.
(9) Building face or wall: All window, door and wall area of a building in one plane or
elevation.
(10) Building marker: Any sign indicating the name of a building, date and incidental
information about its construction, which is cut into a masonry surface or made of bronze
or other permanent material.
(11) Canopy: A roofed structure constructed of fabric or other material placed so as to
extend outward from a building providing a protective shield for doors, windows, and
other openings, supported by the building and supports extended to the ground directly
under the canopy or cantilevered from the building. A canopy may also be separated
from the primary structure.
(12) Changeable copy sign or changeable letter panel: A sign which is characterized
by changeable copy, whether said sign is a freestanding or wall sign, or whether said sign
projects from and is supported by the building.
(13) Directional sign (guide signs): Signs which serve as directional guides to recognize
areas of regional importance and patronage. To clarify, three (3) types of areas are
intended to be included: 1) Recreational and entertainment centers of recognized regional
significance; 2) Major sports stadiums, entertainment centers or convention centers; and,
3) Schools, emergency services, churches; 4) Historic landmarks.
(14) Electronic display screen: Any sign or portion of a sign that displays an electronic
image or video, which may or may not include text. This definition includes, but is not
limited to, television screens, plasma screens, digital screens, flat screens, LED screens,
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
video boards, and holographic displays.
(15) Electronic message center: A mechanism or device which uses a combination of
lights or lighted panels which are controlled electrically and electronically to produce
words, symbols or messages which may travel, or remain stationary within a given panel.
(16) Flag: Any fabric, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols.
(17) Flat Sign: A sign erected parallel to and attached to the outside wall of a building
and extending not more than twelve inches (12”) from such a wall with messages or copy
on the face side only.
(18) Free standing sign: A sign which is supported by one or more uprights or braces
which are fastened to, or embedded in the ground or a foundation in the ground. Freestanding
signs may refer to permanent (i.e. on premise advertising ground signs) or
temporary signs (i.e. project identification or real estate signs).
(19) Graffiti: Any form of unauthorized printing, writing, spraying, scratching, affixing,
or inscribing on the property of another regardless of the content or nature of the material
used.
(20) Height of sign: The vertical distance measured from the curb to the top of the sign,
including the air space between the curb and the sign.
(21) Hours of operation sign: A sign which displays the hours of operation, including
“open” and “closed” signs.
(22) Identification sign: A sign displayed to indicate the name or nature of buildings or
uses other than commercial or industrial uses on the premises, i.e. schools, churches,
hospitals, etc.
(23) Illuminated sign: A sign which has characters, letters, figures, designs or outlines
illuminated by electric lights or luminous tubes as part of the sign proper.
(24) Interior sign: A sign located within a building so as to be visible from inside the
building in which the sign is located.
(25) Marquee: A permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building wall at an
entrance to a building or extending along and projecting beyond the building’s wall and
generally designed and constructed to provide protection against the weather.
(26) Marquee sign: Any sign attached to and made a part of a marquee.
(27) Master identification sign: A sign which identifies only the name and/or logo
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
and/or address of a commercial or industrial complex, the owner and tenants thereof.
(28) Mobile or portable sign: A sign not permanently attached to the ground or other
permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including but not limited to,
signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A- or T- frames;
balloons used as signs painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right of
way, unless said vehicle is used in the normal day-to-day operations of the business.
(29) Monument sign: A freestanding sign whose face extends vertically from the curb.
(30) Non-conforming signs: Any advertising structure or sign which was lawfully
erected and maintained prior to such time as it came within the purview of this Code and
any amendments thereto, and which fails to conform to all applicable regulations and
restrictions of this Code.
(31) Off-premise sign: An advertising sign which directs attention to a use, product,
commodity or service not related to the premises.
(32) On-premise or business identification sign: A sign which directs attention to a
business, commodity, service, industry or other activity which is sold, offered, or
conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located, or to which it is affixed.
(33) Owner: The entity that holds legal possession of a sign, or the owner of the
property on which the sign is located.
(34) Pedestal sign: A temporary and movable sign supported by a column(s) and a base
so as to allow the sign to stand in an upright position.
(35) Pennant Line: A line suspended in the air with multi-color pennants or hanging
strips of material.
(36) Planned Commercial Center: A commercial location where two or more
businesses are located in one or more main buildings with recorded shared access and
parking easements.
(37) Projecting sign: A sign attached to a building or other structure and extending in
whole or in part more than eight (8) inches beyond any wall of the building structure.
(38) Public property: Any property owned or used by a governmental agency.
(39) Roof sign, integral: Any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially
integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends
vertically above the highest portion of the roof and such that no part of the sign is
separated from the rest of the roof by a space of more than six inches.
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
(40) Sign: A sign shall mean and include every advertising message, announcement,
declaration, demonstration, display, illustration, insignia, surface or space erected or
maintained in view of the observer thereof for identification, advertisement, or promotion
of the interest of any person, entity, product, or service. The definition of sign shall also
include the sign structure, supports, lighting system, and any attachments, ornaments or
other features used to draw the attention of observers. This definition does not include
any flag
(41) Sign frontage: The length in feet of the ground floor level of a building front or side
facing a street that is occupied by an individual business.
(42) Signage plan: A plan designed to show the relationship of signs for any cluster of
buildings or any single building housing a number of users or in any arrangement of
buildings or shops which constitute a visual entity as a whole.
(43) Snipe sign: A sign not otherwise defined herein, typically made of non-durable or
semi durable material mounted, by any means, to a tree, utility pole, the ground, or other
infrastructure within a public right of way, including public strips and medians, or on
public property. Snipe signs located on public facilities, utility poles, trees, or within the
public right of way are a nuisance and constitute litter.
(44) Special purpose sign: Sign of a temporary nature other than those established by a
business; for the purpose of advertising a special event pertaining to drives or events of a
civic, philanthropic, cultural, educational, sporting events, concerts or religious
organization.
(45) Street decorations: Pennants, flags, banners, lights and signs that are temporary
and promote community festivals, events, activities and gatherings.
(46) Structure: The supports, footings, uprights, bracing, guy rods, cables, and
framework of a sign or outdoor display.
(47) Suspended sign: A sign that is suspended from the underside of a horizontal plane
surface (such as the underside of a balcony or canopy) and is supported by such surface.
(48) Subdivision or project entrance sign: An identification sign located at the entrance
to a residential or commercial development.
(49) Temporary sign: A sign which is intended for use during a specified limited time.
Temporary signs, as defined by this ordinance shall include real estate signs and
construction signs.
(50) Wall signs: A sign with messages or copy erected parallel to and attached to or
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
painted on the outside wall of a building, or fence and extending not more than twelve
inches (12") from the wall. The area of a wall is determined by the height and width of
the wall structure without consideration of the non-structural components attached to the
wall.
(51) Wall murals: Murals which are purely decorative in nature and content, and do not
include advertising by picture or verbal message are exempt from sign regulation.
(52) Window sign: A sign installed upon or within one foot of a window for the purpose
of viewing from outside of the premises. This term does not include merchandise
displayed.
(53) Zone districts. Refers to land use regulatory zones under the zoning ordinance of
Cedar City.
(54) Zone lot: A parcel of land in single ownership that is of sufficient size to meet
minimum zoning requirements for area, coverage, and use, and that can provide such
yards and other open spaces as required by the zoning regulations.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 1012-16-2.
SECTION 26-XVI-4 Prohibited Signs
The following signs are prohibited:
(1) A-frame signs not addressed in Section (9 - Temporary Signs).
(2) Animated signs.
(3) Banners. All banners except those expressly permitted under this code. (Temporary Signs).
(4) Flashing signs or lights. Any sign which contains an intermittent or flashing light source, or
which includes the illusion of intermittent or flashing light by means of animation, or an
externally mounted intermittent light source. Flashing light sources are prohibited. Electronic
message centers are allowed.
(5) Graffiti.
(6) Hazardous signs. No sign shall be erected or maintained which, due to structural weakness,
design defect, or other reason, constitutes a threat to the health, safety and welfare of any person
or property.
(7) Inflatable signs or displays. Any inflatable object used for signage or promotional
purposes except as permitted by this ordinance for a grand opening or special promotion.
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
(8) Off-premise signs. Off-premise signs are not allowed, except billboards, planned
commercial center signs and street decorations as described in this ordinance.
(9) Signs creating traffic hazards. No sign shall be erected at or near any public street or the
intersection of any streets or on any curb, sidewalk, hydrant, bridge, in such a manner to create a
traffic hazard by obstructing vision or at any location where it would interfere with, obstruct the
view of, or be confused with any authorized traffic sign.
(10) Signs resembling traffic signs or signals. No sign shall be constructed, erected, or
maintained which purports to be or resembles an official traffic sign or signal except those signs
(11) Snipe signs
(12) Spotlights directed into the night sky except as part of an approved promotional period for
temporary signs.
(13) Wind signs. Any propeller, whirling, or similar device which is designed to flutter, rotate,
or display other movement under the influence of the wind. Pennant signs, street decorations
and wind signs on residential property that do not advertise commerce shall be allowed.
(14) Obscene Signs. Signs that exhibit words or pictures or an obscene nature.
SECTION 26-XVI-5 Signs Allowed Without a Permit
(1) The following signs are permitted within the City subject to the limitations and
requirements, as noted, and the standards described in this ordinance. Sign permits are not
required for these signs unless the limitations and requirements of this section cannot be met. In
such cases, a sign permit is required. Exempt signs shall only be illuminated by indirect lighting,
except, as specifically allowed otherwise within this section, and shall not be included in the
limitation on the number of signs allowed per parcel nor shall they be included in the
computation of aggregate permitted sign area unless otherwise stated in this section.
(a) Apartment, hotel, or motel sign: One vacancy and/or no vacancy sign, which shall
not exceed four (4) square feet in area. Such sign may be internally illuminated.
(b) Building interior sign: Any sign located in the interior of any building or within an
enclosed lobby or court of any building or group of buildings, which is designed and
located to be viewed by patrons. Such sign may be illuminated.
(c) Directional or Instructional sign: A sign which provides direction or instruction and
is located entirely on premise and which does not in any way advertise a business and
shall not exceed six (6) square feet in area. These signs may identify restrooms, public
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
telephones, walkways and parking directions.
(d) Display sign: A sign within a showcase or storefront and, if directly illuminated, shall
conform to this ordinance.
(e) Flag: Flags, emblems or insignia of any nation, or political subdivision may be
displayed in a manner whereby it is not construed as an attraction- gaining device for the
advertising of a product or use. Such a flag shall not be flown from a pole the top of
which is more than 40 feet in height. A corporation flag, limited to one (1) flag per parcel
of land, when flown in conjunction with the State or National flag.
(f) Gasoline price signs: One double-faced sign including each type of fuel sold is
permitted. The area of the sign may not exceed 16 square feet. One additional gasoline
price sign is permitted if the property has more than three hundred feet (300') of lineal
street frontage on a dedicated public street
(g) Home occupation sign or nameplate: Such sign shall not exceed 1.5 square feet in
area denoting only the name and profession of an occupant on the premise where the sign
is placed.
(h) Integral sign: A sign indicating the name(s) of a building, dates or erection,
monumental citation, commemorative tablets and the like, and made an integral part of
the structure. Such shall not exceed ten (10) square feet in area, and shall be carved into
stone, concrete, or similar material or made of metal, bronze, aluminum, or other
permanent type construction material.
(I) Menu sign for drive-thru and dine-in restaurants shall not be designed to be read
from the public right-of-way nor to attract attention to the site from the right-of-way.
Such sign may be illuminated.
(j) New business signs: may be banners for up to eight weeks pending permanent sign
(see Temporary Sign section).
(k) No trespassing sign: Such sign regulating the use of property such as no hunting, no
fishing, etc., and shall be no more than two (2) square feet.
(l) On-premise, individual lot development signs: Individual lots may have signs
identifying businesses developing the lot. The signs shall not be erected prior to
issuance of a valid building permit and must be removed before final occupancy. Signage
shall not exceed one hundred (100) square feet, with the height not to exceed ten (10)
feet.
(m) On-premise, subdivisions and commercial construction development signs:
Subdivisions and commercial construction sites may have promotional signs placed on
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
the premises. The maximum size of any sign shall be ninety-six (96) square feet with the
height not to exceed twelve (12) feet. The total square footage of all signs shall not
exceed one hundred-forty (140) square feet. The signs shall not be erected prior to the
approval of the subdivision or construction by the City and shall be removed within 5
years of issuance of the first building permit, occupancy or upon sale of the last lot,
whichever comes first.
(n) Political Signs.
(o) Public sign: A sign of a noncommercial nature and in the public interest, installed by,
or on the order of, a unit of government, such as but not limited to a safety sign, danger
sign, trespassing sign, traffic sign, memorial plaque, sign of historical interest,
information sign or, a sign of public utility agencies or a construction contractor serving
as a directional or safety aid, street sign, road work sign, etc.
(p) Real estate sign (individual lots): In residential zones, the sign area shall not exceed
six square feet and shall not exceed six feet in overall height. In commercial and
industrial zones, the sign area shall not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet and shall not
exceed eight (8) feet in overall height. Off-premise, directional signs shall be permitted
for special promotional events that are temporary in nature, (i.e parade of homes).
(q) Vehicle signs: Signs painted or attached directly on vehicles advertising the business
establishment using the vehicle, in the normal course of business and not as off-premise
advertising.
(r) Window sign: Shall be affixed to the window or window frame. Multiple window
signs shall be permitted but the total area of all window signs shall not cover more than
twenty-five percent (25%) of the window area upon which it is placed.
SECTION 26-XVI-6 Signs Requiring A Permit
(1) Monument Signs. The use of monument signs is encouraged. The following shall apply:
(a) Monument signs are allowed for any size parcel provided that the parcel has a
minimum thirty (30) feet of frontage. The sign area allowed is determined by the amount
of street frontage along which the sign is to be placed and shall be determined with the
ratio of one (1) square foot of sign area for each foot of lineal frontage, beginning with 30
square feet and shall not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet. Multiple monument
signs may be used along a street frontage as long as the combined area of the signs does
not exceed two hundred (200) square feet. However, signs must be separated by at least
100 feet as measured along the street frontage.
(b) Monument signs must have at least a one-foot pedestal. The height to the top of the
sign shall not exceed twenty (20) feet as measured from the base of the sign at curb level.
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
Monument signs shall be behind the street right-of-way and shall be placed a minimum of
fifteen (15) feet from a driveway and thirty (30) feet from a corner lot line so as not to
impede the view of traffic.
(c) No monument sign shall be more than three (3) feet in height if it is erected at any
vehicular traffic intersection within a triangular area formed by the intersection of straight
lines extended from the back of curb and a line connecting them at points 30 feet from
the intersection.
(2) On-Premise Freestanding signs. When using a freestanding sign, the following shall apply:
(a) One free standing sign is permitted. Sign area shall not exceed one hundred (100)
square feet. In cases where the street frontages exceed one hundred (100) lineal feet, the
sign area may increase at the ratio of one (1) square foot of sign area for each additional
one (1) lineal foot of frontage, not to exceed two (200) square feet. Sign height shall not
exceed thirty (30) feet. Free standing signs shall not extend over the street right of way.
One additional on premise freestanding sign is permitted if the property has more than
three hundred feet (300') of lineal street frontage on a dedicated public street. The
additional sign shall not be higher than seventy percent (70%) of the first sign and shall
be at least one hundred feet (100') apart.
(b) Reader boards, changeable copy areas, gasoline price signs, electronic message
centers and electronic display screens are allowed and shall be considered as a portion of
the total sign copy area.
(c) Freestanding signs shall not extend over any pedestrian or vehicular access. Free
standing sign bases shall not obstruct the view of vehicular traffic at intersections.
(d) Interstate 15 Interchanges Areas. (Areas defined in Section 13 Exhibits). On
parcels located within the Interstate 15 areas, signs may have a height not greater than
fifty (50) feet above the nearest travel way (traffic lane) of Interstate 15. Sign area shall
not exceed two hundred (200) square feet. In cases where the street frontages exceed
one hundred (100) lineal feet, the sign area may increase at the ratio of one (1) square
foot of sign area for each additional foot of frontage, not to exceed three (300) square
feet.
(3) Wall Signs. Wall signs are encouraged as the primary form of identification for business uses
in the City.
(a) Signs may not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of the face of the front wall to
which they are attached, nor more than fifteen percent (15%) on the face of a side or rear
wall. If a sloping facade or roof exists, the signs may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of
the face of the front wall to which they are attached, nor more than fifteen percent (15%)
on the face of al side or rear wall.
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
(b) Wall signs on sloping roofs shall be erected so as to appear as a sign applied to a
similarly vertical wall surface and finished in such a manner that the visual appearance
from all sides is such that they appear to be part of the building. All such signs shall be
installed or erected so there is no visual support structure such as guy wires or braces.
(c) No part of any wall sign or of the sign structure shall project above or below the
highest or lowest part of the wall upon which the sign is mounted or painted.
(d) No wall sign, including any light box or structural part, shall project more than twelve
(12) inches from the face of the building to which it is attached.
(e) Projecting signs are permitted if they are not more than four (4) feet from the wall, not
more than ten (10) square feet in area, and not lower than ten (10) feet above the
sidewalk.
(4) Billboard Signs. Billboard signs are allowed only along the I-15 freeway corridor. The
following shall apply:
(a) Billboard signs shall be allowed only on property adjacent to and fronting I-15 or I-15
frontage roads and on property zoned industrial. These signs must be oriented for freeway
viewing only and located within 100 feet of the freeway right of way.
(b) Maximum area of one side of a sign (whether single or double faced) shall be 675
square feet, with the face not exceeding forty-eight (48) feet in length or fourteen (14)
feet in height.
(c) Embellishments shall be permitted but the total area of the embellishments shall not
exceed ten percent (10%) of the total permitted sign area. Embellishments may extend
above and outward from the billboard but may not extend below the billboard.
(d) Maximum height of signs shall be thirty (30) feet above the most adjacent grade of
the traveled way of the Interstate. Embellishments may extend above the maximum
height, but may not extend more than five feet (5') above the height of the billboard.
(e) No sign shall be erected within 1,000 feet of another existing billboard sign. No sign
shall be erected within two hundred (200) feet of a residential zone.
(f) Lighting shall be designed to light only the sign and not neighboring property.
(5) Suspended Signs. Suspended signs may be used in place of wall signs. The following shall
apply:
(a) Any sign may not exceed 15% of the flat wall of the tenant space.
(b) No sign may project beyond the outside limit of the marquee, canopy or facade to
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
which it is attached.
(c) Any sign must have at least a ten (10) foot clearance above the sidewalk or any
landscaped area.
(6) Awning Signs. Awning signs are allowed. The following shall apply:
(a) Awning signs shall be limited to single story buildings or to the first level only of
multistory buildings.
(b) The area of awning signs shall be a maximum of 15% of the primary wall upon
which the awning is attached.
(c) Awning signs shall not project above the roof line, defined as the highest part of the
vertical wall.
(d) Awning signs shall maintain a minimum clearance of 7 feet to the bottom of the
valance and 8 feet to the frame above the sidewalk and comply with all other clearance
requirements.
(7) Canopies. Signs for canopies not connected to the primary structure over gas islands are
allowed. The following shall apply:
(a) Sign copy, corporate logos, etc. may be a maximum of fifty percent (50 %) of each
face used for signage.
(b) Up to 3 sides of the canopy may be used for signs.
(c) Canopies may not exceed twenty (20) feet from grade and no canopy fascia shall
exceed four (4) feet in height.
(d) Individual letters, logos, or symbols may not exceed three (3) feet in height or project
out from the surface of the canopy more than eight (8) inches or project above or below
the canopy face.
(8) Planned Commercial Centers:
(a) Where businesses are located in a planned commercial center, monument and
freestanding signs are limited to one sign per commercial area. That sign shall be for the
purpose of identifying all businesses within the planned commercial center and shall have
a maximum area of one hundred (100) square feet. In cases where the lineal street
frontage exceeds one hundred (100) square feet, the sign area may increase at the ratio of
one (1) square foot of sign area for each additional foot of frontage, not to exceed two
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
hundred (200) square feet. One additional monument or freestanding sign in a planned
commercial center is permitted if the planned commercial center has more than three
hundred feet (300') of lineal street frontage on a dedicated public street. The additional
sign shall not be higher than seventy percent (70%) of the first sign and shall be at least
one hundred feet (100') apart.
(b) Planned Commercial Center signs may be off-premise signs if the sign is located on
the property of one of the businesses in the Planned Commercial Center or property
jointly owned by the Planned Business Center.
SECTION 26-XVI-7 Sign Permit Procedures
(1) No person shall erect, install, replace or repair any sign requiring a permit, whether it be
temporary or permanent in nature, without obtaining a sign permit from the Building
Department, except as outlined in this ordinance. This includes new signs, signs to be added to
existing buildings or uses, and existing signs that are to be enlarged, changed in sign structures or
a change in business identification. When new buildings or developments are presented for
Project Review, signs for the development shall be reviewed concurrently.
(2) Required Permit Information. An application for a sign permit and site plan will be
reviewed by the Building Department and shall be accompanied by the following:
(a) Monument, Freestanding and Billboard Signs. A site plan indicating all existing and
proposed signs on the site, including the relationship of sign(s) to buildings, property
lines, setbacks from public rights-of-way, intersections, easements and driveways. The
plan shall also include sign elevation indicating height, overall dimensions, colors,
materials, proposed
copy and illumination specifications. Details of sign construction including electrical
plan, foundation design and property frontage shall also be included.
(b) Wall, Suspended, Awning and Canopy Signs Applications shall include drawings
showing the square foot dimensions of the building and the sign and how the sign will
appear on the building from the street or parking area, and details of sign construction
and any electrical plans.
(c) Temporary Signs. A site plan indicating all existing and proposed signs on the site,
including the relationship of sign(s) to buildings, property lines, setbacks from public
rights-of-way, intersections, easements and driveways. The proposed time period for
display shall be included.
SECTION 26-XVI-8 Signs in Specific Areas
(1) Because of the unique character and special standards and/or requirements of certain areas,
signs within these areas shall also have specific sign standards set forth below.
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
(2) Historic Downtown Area. (Area defined in Section 13 Exhibits).
(a) The overall facade composition, including ornamental details and signs shall be
coordinated. Signs shall be proportional to the building, such that they do not dominate
the appearance. In no case shall a sign obscure the architectural features or details of the
building. Simple letter styles and graphic designs are more appropriate.
(b) Flush mounted wall signs are preferred. Flush mounted wall signs may not exceed
twenty percent (20%) of the face of the wall to which they are attached.
(c) Projecting signs are permitted if they are not more than three (3) feet from the wall,
not more than eight (8) square feet in area, and not lower than eight (8) feet above the
sidewalk.
(d) Window signs may be painted or hung from inside but should not obstruct the view.
(e) Monument signs may be permitted on lots having set-back space.
(f) Awning signs are permitted. Awning colors shall be compatible with historic theme,
which includes, but are not limited to, maroon, forest green, navy blue. Lettering shall
be in scale and placed on the valance portion of the awning.
(g) Suspended signs are permitted. No suspended sign may project beyond the outside
limit of the marquee, canopy or facade to which it is attached. Suspended signs shall not
be lower than eight (8) feet above the sidewalk and shall be made of wood, metal or
heavy canvas. Wood and metal suspended signs shall be three (3) dimensional or routed.
The total square footage of all suspended signs shall apply to the maximum allowable
square footage for flush mounted wall signs as stated in Section 8-2-b.
(h) Sign materials shall be compatible with building facade. Signs shall be three (3)
dimensional or routed and made of wood and metal.
(I) Simple sign designs are preferred. Symbols and simple typefaces that are in keeping
with the historic are preferred. Lettering shall not exceed twenty-four inches in height.
(j) Lighting design shall enhance the entire building. Sign lighting shall not overwhelm
the architectural features of the building. Light shall be directed at the sign from an
external source. Internal illumination is not permitted, except for theatre marquees. All
sign plans shall be reviewed by the Downtown Architectural Review Committee.
SECTION 26-XVI-9 Temporary Signs
(1) A temporary sign is one which is intended for use during a specified, limited time as
determined by the City Building Official. Temporary signs shall not be placed in or over the
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
public right-of-way or on telephone poles, fences, or trees or cause a public nuisance of any kind.
They must be firmly secured to the building or ground. Temporary signs may be attached to
existing permanent signs. Temporary signs may cover or obscure an existing permanent sign
only if the business has changed hands or changed names. No off-premise signs are allowed
except those specifically noted and regulated for real estate purposes or otherwise noted in the
ordinance.
(2) Temporary signs requiring a permit.
(a) Directional signs for Subdivisions/PUDs. These signs need written permission of
the property owner presented to the Building Official before they are erected.
(i.) Three (3) directional signs are allowed for a developer to guide traffic to the
site and should contain only the name, address, and direction of the development.
They are limited to twenty-four (24) square feet in area and six (6) feet in height
and must be placed entirely upon private property and ten (10) feet from the street
right-of-way.
(ii) Such signs shall be removed within six (6) months of final plat approval of the
project or immediately upon the sale of the last lot, whichever comes first.
(b) Going Out of Business. A business may apply for a special permit in order to
facilitate the liquidation of inventory for a closing business for a period not to exceed 90
calendar days. Such a permit will be allowed only once for any business license. A
banner or portable sign is allowed during this period.
(c) A-frame sign. A sign which does not exceed six square feet per side and is not more
than forty-two inches (42") high. There may be one sign A-frame per business and the
sign must be located adjacent to business, on premise.
(3) Temporary signs allowed without a permit
(a) Holiday periods. A business may advertise a special service, product or sale during
holiday periods without a permit:
(b) Religious functions may advertise the function no longer than five (5) days) before
the event.
(c) Grand opening signs. Temporary signs announcing the initial opening of a
business, or the relocation, or change of ownership of an existing business may be
allowed provided that the event shall not continue for more than thirty (30) days and that
the sign is erected within the first year of operation. There shall be no more than two (2)
signs allowed per business. Banners and portable signs may be permitted. Signs must
comply with size and location standards.
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
(d) Special promotion periods. A business may hold a monthly special promotion
period. Each period may not exceed thirty (30) days in length. A banner, portable, or
inflatable sign is allowed during this time.
SECTION 26-XVI-10 Measurement of Regulated Sign Area
(1) Monument Signs. The measurement area of a monument sign shall include all parts of the
sign or structure that contains identification (words and symbols) and information. The height of
a monument sign shall be the distance from the highest point of the sign to the height of the
street curb or sidewalk.
(2) Freestanding Signs. The measurement area of a freestanding sign shall include all parts of
the sign or structure that contains identification (words and symbols) and information. The height
of a freestanding sign shall be the distance from the highest point of the sign to the base at
ground level of the sign.
(3) Wall Signs. Sign copy mounted or painted on a background panel or area distinctly painted,
textured or constructed as a background for the sign copy shall be measured as area contained
with the outside dimensions of the background panel or surface. Any illuminated bands or
illuminated structures which contain sign copy, corporate logos, etc. are by definition wall signs
in their entirety and as such may not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the face of the front wall to
which they are attached, nor more than fifteen percent (15%) on the face of a side or rear wall
(a) For sign copy mounted as individual letters and/or graphics against a wall or fascia of
a building or other structure that has not been painted, textured or otherwise altered to
provide a distinctive background for the sign copy, the area shall be defined as the area
enclosed by the smallest single rectangle that will enclose all sign area.
(b) For sign copy on an illuminated sign or illuminated architectural element of a
building, the entire illuminated surface or illuminated architectural element which
contains sign copy shall be counted as sign area.
(4) Multiple Face Signs
(a) Single Panel - Measure the area of the single face only.
(b) Double Panel - If the interior angle between the two faces is 45 degrees or less, the
area to be measured will be the area of one face only. If the angle between the two sign
faces is greater than 45 degrees, the sign area to be measured shall include the sum of the
area of the two faces.
(c)Three or More - The sign area shall be the sum of the areas of the three or more faces.
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
SECTION 26-XVI-11 Nonconforming Signs
(1) Existing Signs. For any sign existing in the City on (The effective date of the ordinance),
the Building Department will determine if the sign is conforming or non-conforming according
to this ordinance and issue a notice to the owner.
Alterations: A nonconforming sign shall not be raised, moved, replaced, extended or enlarged
unless said sign is changed so as to conform to all provisions of this chapter. Alterations shall
also mean the changing of the text of the sign when there is a major change in the use of the
property. A major change in use occurs whenever the use changes from one of the following
land use categories to another: office, retail, food/restaurant service, personal service,
entertainment, lodging, repairs, institutional, public utility, manufacturing, and warehouse uses.
Any major change in use requires any affected nonconforming sign to conform to all the
provisions of this chapter. Alterations shall not be interpreted to include changing the text of a
marquee.
Restoration: Nonconforming signs which have been allowed to deteriorate or which have been
damaged by fire, collision or any other cause beyond the control of the owner, to the extent of
more than sixty percent (60%) of its assessed value shall, if repaired or rebuilt, be repaired or
rebuilt in conformity with the regulations of this chapter or shall be removed.
Maintenance of Legal Nonconforming Signs: Nonconforming signs shall be required to comply
with the requirements of this chapter when any change, other than normal maintenance, is made
to the sign.
SECTION 26-XVI-12 Removal of Illegal and Unsafe or Abandoned Signs
(1) Abatement or removal of signs.
(a) Snipe Signs. If a Code Enforcement Officer, or designee, sees a snipe sign he/she
shall treat the snipe sign as litter, remove the sign and deposit the sign in the trash.
Placement of a snipe sign on public property or within the public right of way is
littering and may be punishable as a class C misdemeanor and carry a fine of not less
than $100 for each violation.
(b) Signs not reasonably capable of being immediately abated. If, upon inspection, a
Code Enforcement Officer, or a designee, determines a sign, or awning to be unsafe,
dangerous, non-maintained, or abandoned, the Code Enforcement Officer, or a
designee, may issue a written order to the owner of the sign stating the nature of the
violation and requesting them to repair or remove the sign within fourteen (14)
calendar days after receipt of notice from the City. In cases of emergency, the
Building Official may cause, at the owner’s expense, the immediate removal of
dangerous or defective signs. Signs removed in this manner must present an
imminent hazard to the public safety.
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
(2) Any person who hangs, posts, or installs a sign which requires a permit under this
Ordinance, and who fails to obtain a sign permit before installing the sign, shall be guilty
of an infraction, fined accordingly and ordered, in writing, to remove the sign within
fourteen (14) days.
(3) After obtaining a court order, the Code Enforcement Officer, or designee, may cause the
removal of an illegal sign. The cost to remove the sign shall be billable to the owner, or
subject to a restitution order from the court.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 1012-16-2.
SECTION 26-XVI-13. Exhibits
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
Chapter 26 - Article XVI - Pa
CHAPTER 27
PUBLIC OFFENSES
SECTION 27-1 Barbed Wire Prohibited
SECTION 27-2 Discharging Firearms
SECTION 27-3 Disturbance of the Peace
SECTION 27-4 Cheats and Swindlers
SECTION 27-5 Unlawful Acts in or About Schools
SECTION 27-6 Sale of Alcoholic Beverage to a Minor
SECTION 27-7 Possession of Alcoholic Beverages by Person Under Twenty-One
Years of Age
SECTION 27-8 Employment of Minor as Misdemeanor
SECTION 27-9 Permitting Minors on Premises; Minors Entering Premises
SECTION 27-10 Refrigerators and Self-Locking Boxes Not In Use
SECTION 27-11 False Report of a Crime
SECTION 27-12 Hotel Registration Must Be Kept
SECTION 27-13 Dropping Refuse in Street
SECTION 27-14 Moving Buildings
SECTION 27-15 Posting Bills Without Permission
SECTION 27-16 Blasting
SECTION 27-17 Cleaning Sidewalks
SECTION 27-18 Flooding Streets and Sidewalks
SECTION 27-19 Culverts and Boxes Over Water Ditches
SECTION 27-20 Children Not To Be On Streets. When
SECTION 27-21 Vagrancy
SECTION 27-22 Weed Abatement
SECTION 27-23 Attempt
SECTION 27-24 Outside Dances
SECTION 27-25 Penalty
Ch. 27 Pg. 1
CHAPTER 27
PUBLIC OFFENSES
SECTION 27-1. Barbed Wire Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect or cause to be erected or to maintain, any barbed
wire fence along or adjacent to any public street within this City and such fence so erected or
maintained is hereby declared to be a nuisance.
SECTION 27-2. Discharging Firearms.
Subject to applicable State Law defenses or justifications, it shall be unlawful for any person
to fire, discharge or set off any gun, pistol, or firearm of any description, or instrument loaded with
powder or other explosive within this City, except by written permit of the Mayor. This ordinance
shall not be applicable to the discharge of a firearm within the confines of an indoor shooting range
that is duly licensed to do business in Cedar City and in compliance with the regulations set forth
in the City’s zoning ordinance.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0309-16-1.
SECTION 27-3. Disturbance of the Peace.
It shall be unlawful for any person within this City to commit a disturbance of the peace or
quiet of any neighborhood, family or persons, by loud or unusual noises or by tumultuous or
offensive conduct, or by threatening, traducing, quarreling, challenging to fight or fighting.
SECTION 27-4. Cheats and Swindlers.
It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to use or practice any game, trick, or device
with intent to defraud, cheat or swindle another, or force any persons to conspire together to
accomplish such purpose, within the limits of this City.
SECTION 27-5. Unlawful Acts in or About Schools.
l. It shall be unlawful for any person to annoy, disturb, or otherwise prevent the orderly
conduct of the activities, administration or classes of any school, college, or university.
2. It shall be unlawful for any person to annoy, disturb, assault or molest any student or
employee of any school, college, or university while in or on such school, college, or university
building or on the grounds thereof.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter, idle, wander, stroll, or play in, about or on any
school, college, university grounds or building, either on foot or in or on any vehicle, without having
some lawful business therein or thereof.
Ch. 27 Pg. 2
4. It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct himself or herself in a lewd, wanton, or
lascivious manner in speech or behavior in, about, or on any school, college, or university building,
or grounds.
5. It shall be unlawful for any person to park or move a vehicle in the immediate vicinity of
or on the grounds of any school, college, university for the purpose of annoying or molesting the
students or employees thereof or in an effort to induce, entice, or invite students or employees into
or on the vehicle for immoral purposes.
SECTION 27-6. Sale of Alcoholic Beverages to Minor.
(a). Every person who sells, procures, furnishes, gives, or causes to be sold; furnished or
given away, any alcoholic beverage to any person under the age of twenty one (21) years is guilty
of a misdemeanor.
(b). Any person under the age of twenty one years who purchases any alcoholic beverage,
or any person under the age of 21 years who consumes any alcoholic beverage in any place licensed
to sell or serve alcoholic beverages, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(c). Any licensee of a place licensed to sell or serve alcoholic beverages, who permits a
person under the age of 21 years to consume any alcoholic beverage in the premises, whether or not
the licensee has knowledge of the person's minority is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(d). For the purpose of preventing the violation of this Section, any licensee, or his agent or
employee, may refuse to sell or serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is unable to produce
adequate written evidence that he or she is over the age of 21 years.
(e). Bona Fide evidence of majority and identity of the person is a document issued by a
federal, state, county, or municipal government, or subdivision of agency thereof, including, but not
limited to, a motor vehicle operator's license, a registration certificate issued under the Federal
Selective Service Act, or an identification card issued to members of the Armed Forces. Proof that
the defendant-licensee, or his employee or agent, demanded, was shown and acted in reliance upon
such bona fide evidence in any transaction, employment, use or permission forbidden by this Section
shall be a defense to any criminal prosecution therefor or to any proceedings for the suspension or
revocation of any license based thereon.
(f). Any person who sells, gives, or furnishes to any person under the age of 21 years any
false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of the majority and identity of such
person is guilty of a misdemeanor.
(g). Any person under the age of 21 years who presents or offers to any licensee, his agent
or employee, any written, printed or photostatic evidence of age and identity which is false,
fraudulent or not actually his own for the purpose of ordering, purchasing, attempting to purchase
or otherwise procuring or attempting to procure, the serving of any alcoholic beverage, or who has
Ch. 27 Pg. 3
in his possession any false or fraudulent written, printed, or photostatic evidence of age and identity,
is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of at least One Hundred dollars ($100.00),
no part of which shall be suspended.
Ch. 27 Pg. 4
SECTION 27-7. Possession of Alcoholic Beverages by Person
Under Twenty-One Years of Age: Misdemeanor.
Any person under the age of 21 years who has any alcoholic beverage in his possession, or
who consumes an alcoholic beverage is guilty of a misdemeanor. This section does not apply to
possession by a person under the age of 21 years making a delivery of any alcoholic beverage in
pursuance of the order of a parent or in the course of his employment.
SECTION 27-8. Employment of Minor as Misdemeanor.
Every person who employs or uses the services of any person under the age of 21 years in
or on that portion of any premises, during business hours, which are primarily designed and used for
the sale and service of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises is guilty of a
misdemeanor.
SECTION 27-9. Permitting Minors on Premises: Minors Entering Premises.
Any licensee of a place licensed to sell or serve alcoholic beverages who permits a person
under the age of 21 years to enter and remain in the licensed premises without lawful business
therein is guilty of a misdemeanor. Any person under the age of 21 years who enters and remains in
the licensed public premises without lawful business therein is guilty of a misdemeanor. This shall
not be construed to prohibit minors from eating meals in a restaurant when the primary business of
the restaurant is the serving of meals.
SECTION 27-10. Refrigerators and Self-Locking Boxes Not In Use.
All refrigerators or self-locking boxes of any kind except those being used regularly in the
manner for which they are intended, shall be kept in a building that is entirely enclosed and locked
at all times or the locks removed from said boxes so that they cannot be closed.
SECTION 27-11. False Report of a Crime.
Every person who orally or in writing reports to any police officer, sheriff, district attorney,
county attorney, deputy sheriff, deputy district attorney, deputy county attorney, or member of the
Utah Highway Patrol that a felony or misdemeanor has been committed, knowing such report to be
false, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 27-12. Hotel Registration Must Be Kept.
It shall be unlawful for the keeper of any hotel, boarding house or rooming house, auto court,
motel, tourist home, within this City to fail to keep a register, in which such keeper shall require each
guest to write his or her name and place of residence, before occupying any sleeping room in any
Ch. 27 Pg. 5
such hotel, boarding or rooming house; or to fail to keep such register open to inspection at all
times. Any owner, or clerk or any other person, having regular or temporary charge of any hotel,
boarding house, or rooming house who shall violate any provisions of this Section shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 27-13. Dropping Refuse in Street.
Every person who shall haul or transport through any of the streets, alleys or public grounds
of this City, any coal, gravel, stone, offal, manure, rubbish, ashes, or stumps in any vehicle or other
conveyance so constructed that such coal, stone, gravel, offal, manure, rubbish, brush, ashes or
stumps drop, or in any other manner is strewn, or deposited on any of said streets, alleys, or public
grounds is guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 27-14. Moving Buildings.
Before any person, firm, or corporation shall move any building or structure into Cedar City
or from one place of location within the City to another place or location within the City, they shall
first obtain a permit from the Inspector, authorizing them to do so. If the Inspector shall determine
that such structure and/or building shall constitute a nuisance, create a fire hazard, a source of
contamination, be unsightly or deleterious to their surroundings or otherwise violate this Ordinance,
he shall refuse to issue a permit to move an/or locate said building and/or structure. The applicant
shall have the right of appeal directly to the City Council as hereinafter provided and the decision
of the City Council shall be final. Any person, firm, or corporation who moves any such building
and/or structure without a permit is guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 27-15. Posting Bills Without Permission.
It shall be unlawful for any person to paint, paste, or in any way post up any notice, card,
advertisement, or other device upon any tree, post, pole, device or standard, upon any street or
sidewalk, at any time, without permission of the City Council.
SECTION 27-16. Blasting.
It shall be unlawful for any person to blast with dynamite or other explosive in Cedar City,
Utah, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City. All applications for permits shall be
referred to the Building Inspector who shall determine if life, limb, or property will be endangered
by said blasting and if it is determined that the contemplated blasting will be dangerous, the Building
Inspector may either refuse said permit or grant it upon condition that such reasonable precautions
for safety of persons or property as he shall require, are complied with.
SECTION 27-17. Cleaning Sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any occupant or owner of any property abutting on any street, within
Ch. 27 Pg. 6
the platted portion of this City, to neglect or fail to clean and keep clean of all weeds, ice, or snow
or rubbish, the sidewalks and walkways abutting on his premises.
SECTION 27-18. Flooding Streets and Sidewalks.
Every person who willfully, carelessly, or negligently obstructs, injures or floods any street
or sidewalk by the flow or seepage of water, or who willfully, carelessly, or negligently permits water
under his control to escape in any manner so as to obstruct, injure or flood any street or sidewalk,
within the limits of this City, is guilty of a misdemeanor.
SECTION 27-19. Culverts and Boxes Over Water Ditches.
It shall be unlawful for any person to convey water across any sidewalk within the limits of
this City, except in a covered culvert or box extending the whole width of the sidewalk; it shall
likewise be unlawful for any person to use or maintain any such culvert or box without keeping the
same in good repair.
SECTION 27-20. Children Not To Be On Streets. When.
It shall be unlawful for any person under the age of l6 years to be or remain in or upon any
streets, alleys, or public places or vacant lots within the limits of the City at night between the hours
of 11:00 p.m. and 4:00 a.m. following, unless such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian, or
other person having legal custody of such minor person, or whose employment makes it necessary
to be upon the streets during the night time after said specified hour. Any person violating any of the
provisions of this Section shall be arrested by any peace officer and delivered over to the probation
officer for trial in the Juvenile Court.
SECTION 27-21. Vagrancy.
The following persons shall be deemed vagrants:
Every person without visible means of support, who has the physical ability work and who
does not for the period of ten days, seek employment, nor labor when employment is offered him;
Every health beggar, who solicits alms as a business;
Every person who roams from place to place without any lawful business.
Every idle or dissolute person or associate of known thieves who wanders about the streets
at late or unusual hours at night; or who lodges in any barn, shed, shop, outhouse, vessel or place
other than such as is kept for lodging purposes, without permission of the owner or party entitled to
the possession thereof;
Every lewd and dissolute person who lives in and about houses of ill-fame, and every
common prostitute and common drunkard;
It shall be unlawful for any person to be a vagrant within the limits of this City.
Ch. 27 Pg. 7
SECTION 27-22. Weed Abatement.
l. The City Fire Marshal or his Deputy is hereby appointed as the City Inspector for the
purpose of carrying out the provisions of this ordinance.
2. It shall be the duty of the City Inspector to investigate the growth and spread of injurious
and noxious weeds and of garbage, refuse or unsightly or deleterious objects or structures and
ascertain the names of the owners or occupants of such premises and to serve said person notice in
writing, either personally or by mailing notice, postage pre-paid, addressed to the owner or occupant
at the last known post office address as disclosed by the records of the County Assessor, requiring
such owner or occupant as the case may be, to eradicate or destroy and remove the same within such
time as the Inspector may designate which shall not be less than ten (10) days from the date of
service of such notice. One notice shall be deemed sufficient on any lot or parcel of property for the
entire season of weed growth during that year. The inspector shall make proof of service of such
notice under oath and file the same in the office of the Iron County Treasurer.
3. If any owner or occupant of lands described in the Notice referred to above shall fail or
neglect to eradicate or destroy and remove such weeds, garbage, refuse, object or structure from the
premises in accordance with such Notice, it shall be the duty of the Inspector, at the expense of
Cedar City, to employ necessary assistance and cause such weeds, garbage, refuse, objects or
structures to be removed or destroyed. He shall prepare an itemized statement of all expenses
incurred in the removal and destruction of the same and shall mail a copy thereof to the owner
demanding payment within twenty (20) days of the date of the mailing. Said notice shall be deemed
delivered when mailed by registered mail, addressed to the property owner's last known address. In
the event the owner fails to make payment of the amount set forth in said statement to the Cedar City
Treasurer within said twenty days, the Inspector may cause suit to be brought in an appropriate court
of law or may refer the matter to the County Treasurer, provided he shall make in triplicate, an
itemized statement of all expenses incurred in the removal and destruction of the same and shall
deliver the three copies of such statement to the Iron County Treasurer within ten (10) days after the
completion of the work of removing such weeds, garbage, refuse, or objects or structures to be
handled by the County Treasurer in accordance with 10-11-4, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as
amended.
SECTION 27-23. Attempt.
A person is guilty of attempt to commit a crime if, acting with a kind of capability otherwise
required for the commission of the offense, he engages in conduct constituting a substantial step
toward commission of the offense. For purposes of this part, conduct does not constitute a substantial
step unless it is strongly corroborative of the actors intent to commit the offense.
SECTION 27-24. Outside Dances: No outside dance for twenty (20) or more persons shall
be conducted within the Municipal Limits of Cedar City without having first obtained a permit as
set forth herein. Any outside dance for which a permit is issued shall be conducted in compliance
with all laws and regulations applicable thereto.
Ch. 27 Pg. 8
(A) Application Process. Every person or entity desiring to conduct an outside dance shall
be required to procure a permit, and shall submit an application for the same:
(1) Timely Filing of Application. An application for an outside dance permit shall
be filed with the City Office fifteen (15) days prior to the requested date of the outside dance.
(2) Process. Any such application shall be reviewed and either approved or denied
by the City Manager and Chief of Police. The matter shall be referred to the City Council
only if a variance from Ordinance is requested.
(3) Compliance with the Law. Any permit issued pursuant to the above process
shall be subject to strict compliance with all laws, including Disturbing of Peace.
(B) Hours. Unless otherwise specified in writing on the permit, and so approved by the City
Manager and Chief of Police, the following hours shall be strictly adhered to for outside dances:
(1) Weekdays (Sunday through Thursday). No outside dance shall be conducted on
a weekday between the hours of 10:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
(2) Weekends (Friday, Saturday and Holidays). No outside dance shall be conducted
on weekends between the hours of 11:30 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. In addition to the above, no
indoor dance shall be conducted between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 7:00 a.m. (Amended
7/00)
SECTION 27-25. Parking Cars on Vacant Lots.
It shall be unlawful for the owner of a motor vehicle or trailer to park it or allow it to be
parked on a vacant lot or parking lot owned by another person for the purpose of displaying it for
sale, unless the owner or lessee of the property on which it is parked has a City business license to
engage in the business of selling motor vehicles or trailers at that location. It shall also be unlawful
for the owner or lessee of such property to allow another person to park a motor vehicle or trailer on
the property for the purpose of displaying it for sale unless such owner or lessee has a City business
license to engage in the business of selling motor vehicles or trailers at that location. (amended
9/91).
SECTION 27-26. Penalty.
1. Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction, and unless otherwise provided, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00). (amended 6/5/86)
CHAPTER 27a
PUBLIC PARKS AND GROUNDS
SECTION 27a-1 General Purpose.
SECTION 27a-2 General Provisions.
SECTION 27a-3 Definitions.
SECTION 27a-4 Park Property.
SECTION 27a-5 Sanitation.
SECTION 27a-6 Traffic.
SECTION 27a-7 Recreational Activities.
SECTION 27a-8 Prohibited Behavior.
SECTION 27a-9 Merchandising, Advertising and Signs.
SECTION 27a-10 Park Operating Policy.
SECTION 27a-11 Regulations for the Leigh Hill Reservoir
SECTION 27a-12 Enforcement and Penalties.
SECTION 27a-13 Severability.
SECTION 27a-14 Ordinances Repealed.
SECTION 27a-15 Parks and Recreation Advisory Committee
Ch 27a, page 1
CHAPTER 27a
PUBLIC PARKS AND GROUNDS
SECTION 27a-1. General Purpose.
The provisions of this Chapter are to preserve the public parks and
grounds for the enjoyment of all, to insure that all individuals shall be able to
enjoy public parks and grounds, to encourage compatible activities in appropriate
areas, and to promote the safety and welfare of the public.
SECTION 27a-2. General Provisions.
The provisions of this Chapter shall govern all public parks and grounds
within the municipal limits of Cedar City, Utah, and shall regulate all conduct
therein.
SECTION 27a-3. Definitions.
For purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and
their derivations shall have the meaning given therein. The word "shall" is always
mandatory and not merely directory.
(A) City: Cedar City, Utah.
(B) Director: Person designated as Parks Department Director, or
person immediately in charge of any park area and its activities,
and to whom all park attendants of such area are responsible. If
the text clearly indicates, Director may also refer to the Leisure
Services Director.
(C) Hills Recreational Complex: shall mean the +/- 50 acres of City
owned land used for a recreational complex and located in the
vicinity of 2000 West and Royal Hunte Drive and containing the
Fields at the Hills, the Lake at the Hills (referred to at other places
in this ordinance as the Leigh Hills Reservoir), the Aquatic Center
at the Hills, associated parking facilities, the beach facilities, and
the adjoining vacant land.
(D) Public Parks and Grounds: Park, playground, recreation center,
aquatic center, cemetery, monument, statue, memorial, pavilion,
sports field, the Leigh Hill Reservoir, or any other area in the City
Ch 27a, page 1
owned or used by the City, and devoted to active or passive
recreation, or designated as public grounds.
(E) Person: Any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation,
company or organization of any kind.
(F) Vehicle: Any device for carrying passengers, whether motor
powered or self-propelled. The terms shall include any trailer in
tow of any size, kind or description. Exception is made for baby
carriages and vehicles in service of the City Parks.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance no. 1013-10
SECTION 27a-4. Park Property.
(A) Buildings and Other Property.
(1) Disfiguration and Removal: No person shall willfully mark,
deface, disfigure, injure, tamper with, displace or remove any
buildings, tables, benches, fire places, railing, paving material,
memorials, monuments, statues, water lines or other public
utilities, or parts or appurtenances thereof, signs, notices or
placards, whether temporary or permanent, survey monuments,
stakes, posts, or other boundary markers or other structures or
equipment, facilities or park properties, or appurtenances
whatsoever, either real or personal.
(2) Restrooms and Washrooms: No person shall fail to cooperate
in maintaining restrooms and washrooms in a neat and sanitary
condition.
(3) Removal of Natural Resources: No person shall dig or remove
any soil, rock, stones, trees, shrubs or plants, down-timber or other
wood or materials, or make any excavation by tool, equipment,
blasting or other means.
(4) Erection of Structures: No person shall construct or erect any
structure of whatever kind, whether permanent or temporary in
character, or run or string any public service utility into, upon or
across such lands, except on special permits issued hereunder.
(B) Trees, Shrubbery, Lawns.
Ch 27a, page 3
(1) Injury and Removal: No person shall damage, cut, carve,
transplant or remove any tree or plant, or injure any tree or plant;
nor shall any person attach any rope, wire or other contrivance to
any tree or plant. A person shall not dig or otherwise disturb grass
area, or in any other way injure or impair the natural beauty or
usefulness of any area.
(2) Climbing Trees, Etc.: No person shall climb any tree,
monument, fountain, railing, fence, or upon any property not
designated or customarily used for such purposes.
(3) Hitching of Animals: No person shall tie or hitch an animal to
any tree, plant, monument, or memorial.
(C) Wild Animals, Birds, Etc.:
(1) Hunting. No person shall hunt, molest, harm, frighten, trap,
chase, tease, shoot or throw missiles at any animal; nor
shall anyone remove or have in their possession the young of any
wild bird or the eggs or nest or young of any reptile or bird; .
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit fishing in the
Leigh Hill Reservoir.
SECTION 27a-5. Sanitation.
(A) Pollution of Waters: No person shall throw, or otherwise place or
cause to be placed in the waters of any fountain, pond, stream or other
body of water in or adjacent to any park, any substance, liquid or solid,
which will or may result in the pollution of said waters.
(B) Refuse and Trash: No person shall dump, deposit or leave any
rubbish, waste, garbage or refuse or other trash. No such refuse or trash
shall be placed in any waters in or contiguous to any park, or left
anywhere on the grounds thereof, but shall be placed in the proper
receptacles where these are provided; where receptacles are not provided,
all such rubbish or waste shall be carried away from the park by the person
responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere.
SECTION 27a-6. Traffic.
(A) State Motor Vehicle Laws Apply. No person shall fail to comply
with all applicable provisions of the State Motor Vehicle Traffic Laws,
Ch 27a, page 3
together with such regulations as are contained in this and other
ordinances.
(B) Enforcement of Traffic Regulations. No person shall fail to obey all
traffic officers and park employees, such persons being hereby authorized
and instructed to direct traffic whenever needed in the park and on the
highways, streets or roads immediately adjacent thereto.
(C) Obey Traffic Signs. No person shall fail to observe all traffic signs
indicating speed, direction, caution, stopping or parking, and all others
posted for proper control.
(D) Speed of Vehicles. No person shall ride or drive a vehicle at a speed
exceeding 10 miles per hour, except upon such roads as the Parks and
Outdoor Facilities Director, or his designee, may designate by posted signs
for speedier travel.
(E) Operation Confined to Road. No person shall drive any vehicle on
any area except the paved park road or parking areas, or such other areas
as may on occasion be specifically designated by the Parks and Outdoor
Facilities Director, or his designee.
(F) Parking.
(1) Designated Areas. No person shall park a vehicle in other than
a designated parking area, and such use shall be in accordance with
the posted directions there and with the instructions of any
attendant who may be present.
(2) Immovable Vehicles. No person shall leave any vehicle
anywhere in the park overnight or in any manner fixed or arranged
so such vehicle cannot readily be moved by hand.
(3) Emergency Procedure. No person shall fail to immediately
notify an attendant of an emergency in the nature of a break-down
requiring the assistance of a tow-truck, mechanic or other person.
(4) Double-Parking. No person shall double-park any vehicle on
any road or parkway unless directed by a park official.
(G) Bicycles, Skateboards, Roller Blades, and Scooters.
Ch 27a, page 4
(1) Confined to Roads. No person shall ride a bicycle, skateboard,
roller blades, or scooters on other than a paved vehicular road or
path designated for that purpose. Bicycles, skateboards, roller
blades, and scooters shall not be ridden across walk ways, pavers,
or hard surface areas incorporated within a monument or
memorial. A bicyclist, skateboarder, rollerblader, or scooter
operator shall be permitted to wheel or push a bicycle by hand over
any grassy area or wooded trail.
(2) Operation. No person shall ride a bicycle other than on the
right-hand side of the road paving as close to the edge as
conditions permit, and bicycles shall be kept in single file when
two or more are operating as a group. Bicyclists shall at all times
operate with reasonable regard to the safety of others, signal all
turns, and pass in a safe manner given the existing circumstances.
(3) Exit 59 Skate Park. The use of bicycles and skateboards
within the confines of the Exit 59 Skate Park is permitted.
SECTION 27a-7. Recreational Activities.
(A) Hunting and Firearms.
(1) Within the City’s parks or on the City’s public grounds:
(a) no person shall hunt, trap, or pursue wildlife at any time;
(b) except as provided herein, no person shall use, carry or
possess air rifles, spring guns, bow-and-arrows, slings or
any other forms of weapons potentially dangerous to
wildlife or human safety, or any instruments that can be
loaded with and fire blank cartridges, or any kind of
trapping device;
(c) subject to applicable State Law defenses or justifications,
use of a firearm is prohibited;
(d) if under State Law a person is permitted to carry a firearm
that person may carry the firearm while in the City’s parks
or on the City’s public grounds; and
(e) this section shall not be interpreted to prohibit fishing at the
Lake at the Hills.
Ch 27a, page 4
(2) Special Event Exception. The sponsor of an event in a City park
wanting to use items prohibited above must be issued a special
event permit. The special event permit is issued by the City’s
Director of Leisure Services after submitting a copy of the permit
and application to the Chief of Police, the Director of Parks and
Outdoor Facilities, and the City Recorder.
(3) At a minimum the application and permit shall include a
management plan. The management plan shall include the
following:
(a) the name of the sponsor, the date of the event, and a short
description of the event and what items the sponsor is
proposing to use that would otherwise be prohibited by the
terms of this ordinance;
(b) a statement indicating level of adult supervision. No
special event permit will be issued absent supervision by
responsible adults;
(c) the event sponsor shall, prior to the issuance of the permit,
provide a certificate of liability insurance naming Cedar
City as an additional insured. The liability insurance shall
include coverage in excess of $2,000,000.00 and be issued
by a reputable insurance agency;
(d) A description of the area where the event is to be staged
and a description of the security measures. The area where
the activity is to take place shall be arranged so that the
target area has a back stop reasonably sufficient to in size
and material to prevent wayward projectiles from
impacting individuals or property other than the intended
target. As an alternative to a backstop the sponsor shall
provide an adequate safe zone around the target so that
wayward projectiles will not impact individuals or property
other than the intended target. The adequacy of the safe
zone shall be determined in relation to the projectile being
used;
(e) Except as may otherwise be required for the event such as
paint ball or other similar event, there shall be a prohibition
included and enforced by the sponsor restricting
Ch 27a, page 4
participants from aiming or shooting the projectile at any
individual. If the event is intended to shoot a projectile at
an individual the sponsor shall include a description of the
safety equipment that will be required;
(f) there shall be a prohibition included and enforced by the
sponsor restricting people from shooting any projectile at
any tree, shrub, structure, or other City owned property;
and
(g) a statement providing a detailed description of all other
measures the event sponsor intends on taking to protect
public safety and property.
This ordinance was amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0711-12 and 0309-16-
1.
(B) Picnic Areas.
(1) Reservations. It is the policy of Cedar City Corporation to
restrict the use of certain facilities in areas of its public parks by
means of reservation.
(a) Reservations may be made on a "first-come, firstserved
basis." Only one reservation may be made in
advance without approval of City Council. A subsequent
reservation may be made after the initial reservation date
has expired.
(b) The maximum allowed reservation shall be established
by the Director of Leisure Services in consultation with the
Parks and Outdoor Facilities Director. In no event shall the
maximum allowed reservation time be established based
on: promoting or restricting free speech; race; gender;
national origin; religion; age; color; sex; or disability. All
reservations shall be made at the parks and recreation
office.
(c) Parks and Recreation shall post the facility with a sign
identifying the reserving party and the reservation’s
duration.
Ch 27a, page 4
(d) Liability of Permittee. Any person or entity to whom a
permit is issued shall be liable for any loss, damage or
injury sustained by any person whatever by reason of the
negligence of the person or persons to whom such permit
shall have been issued.
(2) Proper Use of Facilities.
(a) No dangerous horse play or use of the facilities for
purposes other than the designed use will be allowed.
(b) All persons shall leave area clean and picked-up on
departure.
(c) All persons shall respect the rights of others, the
reservation signs, and any specifically posted rules and
regulations at the facilities.
(d) Any damage done to the facilities, intentionally or as a
result of violation of posted rules, will be charged to the
entity responsible, and that entity will be held liable for
damage.
(3) Duty of Picnicker. No person shall leave a picnic area before a
fire is completely extinguished and before all trash is placed in the
disposal receptacles where provided. If no such trash receptacles
are available, refuse and trash shall be carried away by the
picnicker to be properly disposed of elsewhere.
(C) Camping: No person shall set up tents, any other temporary shelter for
the purpose of overnight camping; nor shall any person after closing hours
leave in a park any movable structure or vehicle to be used or that could
be used for such purpose. As an exception, camping may be allowed at the
Main Street park when a nonprofit charitable organization is holding a
multi-day event. The purpose of the camping must be to protect vendor’s
merchandise. This exception will be granted upon obtaining written
permission from the Leisure Services Department Head, Chief of Police
and City Manager. As a condition to this exception, the nonprofit
charitable organization will be required, at their own cost, to provide
adequate sanitation facilities.
Ch 27a, page 4
SECTION 27a-8 Prohibited Behavior.
(A) Intoxicating Beverages.
(1) Prohibition. No person shall bring alcoholic beverages nor
drink alcoholic beverages at any time in the park.
(2) Drunkenness. No person shall be under the influence of any
intoxicating liquor in the park to such a degree that the person
would violate State Public Intoxication law (see the current
provisions UCA §76-9-701, or applicable provisions as the state
legislature may from time to time amend UCA §76-9-701).
(B) Domestic Animals. No person shall be responsible for the entry of a
dog or domestic animal into areas other than automobile parking and
walks immediately adjacent thereto, and in such other areas as may be
clearly marked by signs bearing the words "Domestic Animals Permitted
in This Area." Nothing herein shall be construed as permitting the running
of dogs at large. All dogs in those areas where animals are permitted shall
be restrained at all times with adequate leashes. No person shall be
permitted to allow a domestic animal to urinate or defecate on any
monument or portion thereof, statute, or field that may be used to host
sporting events. With the exception of service animals as defined in UCA
§62-5b-102, no person may bring a dog onto the Hills Recreational
Complex.
(C) Fires. No person shall build or attempt to build a fire except in such
areas and under such regulations as may be designated by the Director.
No person shall drop, throw or otherwise scatter lighted matches, burning
cigarettes or cigars, tobacco paper or other flammable material within any
park area or on any highway, road or street abutting or contiguous thereto.
(D) Interference with Permittees. No person shall disturb or interfere
unreasonably with any person or party occupying any area, or
participating in any activity under the authority of a permit.
(E) Smoking Prohibitions. Smoking is hereby prohibited in city parks,
within twenty-five (25) feet of bus stops, and within fifty (50) feet
of mass gatherings. A violation of this ordinance is an infraction
punishable by a fine of twenty-five dollars ($25.00). The
following definitions apply only to the prohibition of smoking in
City Parks:
Ch 27a, page 9
1. “Smoke” or “smoking” means and includes: possession,
carrying, or holding a lighted pipe, cigar, cigarette or
electronic cigarette of any kind, or any other lighted
smoking equipment, or the lighting or emitting or exhaling
of smoke or a pipe, cigar, or cigarette of any kind, or of any
other lighted smoking equipment or an electronic device
used to deliver or capable of delivering vapor containing
nicotine or other substance into an individual’s respiratory
system.
2. “City Park” means and includes city-owned parks, public
squares, ball diamonds, soccer fields, the Leigh Hill
Reservoir, the aquatic center, the Cedar City Library in the
Park, the outdoor grand stands at the Cross Hollows Arena
and fifty (50) foot radius from the grand stands, and other
recreational areas, city-owned cemeteries and trails. “City
Park” does not include golf courses and areas outside of a
fifty (50) foot radius from the grand stands at the Cross
Hollows Arena.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 1013-10, 0612-19-3
SECTION 27a-9. Merchandising, Advertising and Signs.
(A) Vending and Peddling. No person shall offer for sale any article or
thing; nor shall any person place any stand, cart or vehicle for the
transportation, sale or display of any such article or thing. Exception is
made to any regularly licensed concession acting by and under the
authority and regulation of the Leisure Services Director.
(B) Advertising. No person shall announce, advertise, or call the public
attention in any way to any article or service for sale or hire without prior
approval of the Parks and Outdoor Facilities Director, and in areas
designated for such purpose.
(C) Signs. No person shall paste or otherwise post any sign,
advertisement or inscription whatsoever without prior approval of the
Parks and Outdoor Facilities Director, and in areas designated for such
purpose; nor shall any person erect or cause to be erected any sign
whatever on any public lands or highways or roads adjacent to a park.
SECTION 27a-10. Park Operating Policy.
Ch 27a, page 10
(A) Hours. Except for unusual and unforeseen emergencies, parks shall
be open to the public every day of the year during designated hours.
Opening and closing hours for each individual park shall be posted.
(B) Closed Areas. Any section or any part of any park may be declared
closed to the public by the Parks and Outdoor Facilities Director at any
time, either temporarily or at regular and stated intervals, as the
Director shall find reasonably necessary.
(C) Penalty. The penalty for violating this section of the parks and public
grounds ordinance shall be an infraction and punishable by a fine not to exceed
two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00).
SECTION 27a-11. Regulations for the Leigh Hill Reservoir.
(A) Purpose. The Leigh Hill Reservoir is a 99 acre foot multi use
reservoir located in the vicinity of 2000 West and Royal Hunte Drive. The
City has constructed the facility to serve as a secondary irrigation storage
facility, urban fishery, adjacent picnic areas, and a general recreational
facility. The regulations in this section are intended to be in addition to
the rest of Section 27a of the Cedar City Ordinance.
(B) Access. The following shall regulate access to the Leigh Hill
Reservoir:
1. The Reservoir shall be closed for the winter season as
posted by City Staff During the winter the reservoir may be
used for City sponsored special events as determined by
City staff. During the time of year when the facility is open
it shall be unlocked and open for such hours as are posted
by staff.
2. The Reservoir shall be open to the public seven (7) days a
week.
3. The Reservoir shall have one (1) public vehicle access
located in the Southeast corner. Staff shall designate by a
fence an area around the reservoir where no public vehicle
access will be allowed, hereinafter referred to as the fenced
perimeter.
4. The City shall establish and mark a separate access for
authorized City maintenance vehicles and emergency
Ch 27a, page 10
service vehicles (i.e. ambulance, fire, and police). The
authorized maintenance and emergency service vehicles
shall have access to all areas including the fenced
perimeter. The City shall also provide a turnaround area
outside the fenced perimeter in the vicinity of 1950 West so
the Police Department may perform security checks.
(C) Use. The following regulate use of the Leigh Hill Reservoir.
1. Swimming will be allowed in areas designated by staff.
Swimming shall be at the patron’s own risk. There will be
no lifeguards on duty. In order to swim, children under
twelve (12) years of age must be accompanied by a
responsible adult.
2. Only non-motorized boats will be allowed to be used at the
reservoir. Motorized remote controlled and un-manned water craft
will be allowed in designated areas only. All non-motorized boats
shall comply with the safety equipment pursuant to the State of
Utah Boating Act (see UCA Title 73, chapter 18).
3. Pursuant to an agreement with the Utah Division of
Wildlife Resources to stock the reservoir with fish, fishing
shall be allowed in accordance with Title 23 of the Utah
code. Fish cleaning shall only be allowed at designated fish
cleaning stations.
4. Cedar City reserves the right to close the reservoir to
public use without advance notice.
(D) Prohibited activities. The following shall be prohibited at the
reservoir facility.
1. The possession and use of glass containers.
2. Operation of a vehicle, other than an authorized
maintenance or public safety vehicle, within the fenced
perimeter.
3. Cleaning of fish other than at a designated fish cleaning
station.
Ch 27a, page 10
4. The use of motorized water craft except un-manned
remote controlled water craft in designated areas.
5. The use of stakes, shovels, spikes, umbrellas, or any other
item that might puncture the reservoir lining system will be
prohibited within the fenced perimeter. Such items may be
used in the park and picnic area east of the beach area.
6. No pits or holes deeper than six inches (6") shall be dug in
the beach area. The rocks lining the reservoir shall not be
disturbed.
7. With the exception of service animals as defined in UCA
§62A-5b-102, dogs are prohibited.
8. The public shall not access manholes, pipes, vaults, or other
structures used for the operation of the reservoir. The
public is prohibited from tampering with any fence, pipe,
manhole, vault, or other City equipment on the site.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance Nos. 1209-09-2 & 1013-10
SECTION 27a-12. Enforcement and Penalties.
Any person, firm or corporation violating any provisions of this Chapter
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be
fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00, or by imprisonment for a period not
exceeding six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day such
violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
SECTION 27a-13. Severability.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase or a portion of this
Chapter is for any reason held invalid or unconstitutional by any court of
competent jurisdiction, such portion shall be deemed a separate, distinct and
independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the validity of the
remaining portions hereof.
SECTION 27a-14. Ordinances Repealed.
Ch 27a, page 10
All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with the provisions of this
Ordinance are hereby repealed.
AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NOs. 1029-08-1 & 0408-09.
SECTION 27a-15. LEISURE SERVICES ADVISORY BOARD
(A) CREATION AND PURPOSE. There is hereby created the Cedar City Leisure
Services Advisory Board. The purpose of said Board shall be to provide citizen
input and advice to the City Council, on matters related to the promotion of
health, wellness, quality of life for all residents of the City. The Committee shall
also make recommendations to the City Council related to both short range and
long range planning for the City’s parks, recreation facilities, leisure services,
and trails system.
(B) (APPOINTMENT AND TERMS OF OFFICE. The Board shall consist of seven
(7) members. The members of this Board shall be selected from the residents of
Cedar City. Board members shall be nominated by the Mayor and approved by a
majority vote of the Cedar City Council. One member of the board may be
appointed from the Cedar City Council and that member’s term shall be the same
as their elected term of office. Each of the remaining member’s terms of office
shall be for four (4) years, all terms shall be adjusted so that they shall expire on
June 30 in the year they are currently set to expire. Excluding the Council
representative, in order to stagger the terms of office the Mayor shall designate
two (2) initial members shall serve a two (2) year term; two (2) initial members
shall serve a three (3) year term; and three members shall serve a four (4) year
term. Once the initial term is completed each reappointed or new member shall
serve a four (4) year term. If a member resigns from the board during his/her
term, the Mayor shall appoint a Cedar City resident to serve the remainder of the
term. This appointment is also subject to the approval of a majority of the Cedar
City Council. The Mayor may remove board members for the following reasons,
to wit: (1) Misconduct including, but not limited to, commission of a criminal act
other than minor traffic violations, and (2) Excessive absenteeism including, but
not limited to, missing three (3) consecutive meetings.
(C) ORGANIZATION OF THE BOARD AND MEETINGS.
(1) The members of the Cedar City Leisure Services Advisory Board shall
select one of their members to serve as the chair of the board. The chair
of the board shall conduct the meetings. The chair of the board shall be a
voting member on all matters. In the absence of the duly elected chair,
the Board shall select from the members present a chair pro tempore,
who shall serve with the same powers and duties of the Chair in the
absence of the Chair.
Ch 27a, page 10
(2) (In order to conduct any business there must be a majority of the voting
members present. All meetings shall comply with the Open and Public
Meetings Act. All meetings shall be conducted pursuant to Robert’s
Rules of Order as administered by the Chairperson. In applying Robert’s
Rules of Order the Chair is encouraged to reject overly formal
applications, and adopt the application that favors the following goals:
(1) allow the Chair the ability to facilitate or direct the discussion and
keep order; (2) protect the ability of all board members to bring up their
ideas, discuss them, receive input from the public and staff, and come to
their individual opinions and conclusions on each issue; (3) allow all
members the opportunity to express their individual opinions and
conclusions on each issue through their vote; and (4) assure the majority
vote of the board is the opinion of the board while at the same time
protecting the minority ofs22 board members’ ability to speak, express
ideas, and vote.
(3) The Board shall meet at least once a month. The Board may meet more
frequently if deemed necessary by the Chairperson. The Board shall
comply with the Open and Public Meetings Act. In order to call a
meeting, the Chair must notify all members of the Board at least twentyfour
(24) hours prior to the meeting. The notice from the Chair must
contain the time, location, and date of the meeting. The Chair shall
inform the members of the general subject matter of the meeting. The
notice may be sent by mail, email, text, personal contact, or by phone.
(4) If a committee member is unable to attend a meeting they shall notify the
board secretary in advance of the meeting.
(D) COMPENSATION and ETHICS. Service on the Leisure Services Advisory
Board is voluntary and without pay. The appointed members of the Board are
subject to the provisions of the Public Employees Ethics Act.
(E) EMPLOYEES and EXPENDITURES. One member of the Leisure Services
Advisory Board shall serve as the secretary for the Leisure Services Advisory
Board. The secretary shall be responsible for advertising meetings; recording
meetings; keeping the minutes of the meetings; and keeping the general records
and documents for the board. The department heads for the leisure services
department and the parks department shall be required to attend the meetings.
Other City staff shall be available as a resource to the board, but shall not be
required to attend the meetings. The Board shall have such budget as the City
Council may from time to time appropriate. The Leisure Services Department
Staff shall be responsible to provide new members of the board such training as
Ch 27a, page 10
is reasonably necessary. Leisure Services may solicit other city staff as necessary
to aid in such training.
(F) POWERS AND DUTIES. In order to fulfill its primary purpose of providing
citizen input and advice to the City Council, on matters related to the promotion
of health, wellness, quality of life for all residents of the City; and making
recommendations to the City Council related to both short range and long range
planning for the City’s parks, recreation facilities, leisure services, and trails
system, the Board shall have the following powers and duties:
(1) provide recommendations to the Council related to naming of, hours of
operation for, fees to be charged by, and types of operations allowed in
new and/or existing public parks and grounds facilities;
(2) provide a forum to evaluate public complaints and provide the City
Council with recommended resolutions;
(3) evaluate park, trail, and general recreation facilities and make prioritized
recommendations to the City Council as to types of improvements in the
parks and areas for expansion;
(4) consistent with the City’s General Land Use Plan and Parks Master Plan,
provide the City Council with recommendations as to future locations for
parks and trail expansion;
(5) provide the City Council with recommendations for leisure activities and
programing that would benefit the public;
(6) survey City residents in order to provide recommendations as to future
priorities for trail and recreational facilities and programing;
(7) provide recommendations as to the design of future city public parks and
grounds;
(8) establish reasonably necessary advisory sub-committees, including but
not limited to the following; cross hollows events center advisory subcommittee,
veteran’s park steering committee, trails committee, golf
course advisory committee, and shade tree sub-committee. These
subcommittees shall at a minimum make quarterly reports to the Leisure
Services Advisory Board. The sub-committees may make more frequent
reports if necessary;
(9) provide recommendations for both long range and short range planning
related to parks, recreational facilities, trails, and public grounds;
(10) make recommendations to the parks department and leisure services
department for annual RAP tax funding requests; and
Ch 27a, page 10
(11) coordinate efforts with and receive regular updates from the City’s
events coordinator on matters related to the City’s public parks and
grounds.
ENACTED BY ORDINANCE 1013-10-1
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0612-13-6 and 0921-16
Chapter 28
Of the Ordinances of Cedar
City, Utah
Repealed by Ord. #0918-13
CHAPTER 29
REFUSE ORDINANCE
SECTION 29-1 Refuse Ordinance
SECTION 29-2 Definitions
SECTION 29-3 Residential Refuse Generators, Collection Procedures; and City
Owned Containers
SECTION 29-4 Prohibited Substances
SECTION 29-5 Collection Rates; Billing; Time for Payment; Penalty and Remedy for
Non-Payment
SECTION 29-6 Penalties
Ch. 29 Pg. 1
CHAPTER 29
REFUSE ORDINANCE
SECTION 29-1. Refuse Ordinance.
This Chapter shall be known and cited as the “Refuse Ordinance”.
SECTION 29-2. Definitions.
In this chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
Assessments: Means the fee imposed for recovery of refuse collection costs incurred for benefitting
particular property or any person, which is levied on pursuant to the chapter.
Prohibited Substance: Means hot ash; any liquid, solid or gas with an ignition temperature or flash
point of less the 200 degrees F., including but not limited to gasoline, benzene, naphtha, or other
flammables or explosives; any material having a ph lower than five and one half (5 ½) or higher than
nine (9) or having any other corrosive property that could be injurious or hazardous to City collection
employees or which could cause damage to equipment; any noxious of malodorous substance
offensive to the senses and depriving a neighborhood or three or more persons of the comfortable
enjoyment of life or property; any hypodermic needle or syringe; or any other material not permitted
by State or Federal Regulations in the Iron County Landfill.
Residential Refuse Generator: Means any person in charge of, owning, leasing, renting or occupying
any building or buildings used solely for a family or private residential domicile, including but not
limited to single and multiple family dwelling units, apartments, townhouses, cooperatives,
condominiums, planned unit developments (PUD’s), board and rooming houses.
SECTION 29-3. Residential Refuse Generators, collection procedures, and City
Owned Containers.
A. A Residential Refuse Generator requesting City garbage collection service shall obtain at
least 90 gallons of City owned refuse container volume for each residential dwelling unit
served; the required volume can be in a single container or multiple containers.
B. City owned containers shall be distributed, positioned, and picked-up as scheduled by the
Superintendent of Streets.
C. Residential refuse generators equipped with City-owned containers shall place such
containers alongside the street curb or in a common parking area at a location that is
unobstructed for pick-up, does not require a backing maneuver for pick-up and will not
interfere with vehicular traffic on days designated for pick-up by the City.
D. To insure optimal use of the City-owned containers and the ancillary equipment used
therewith, the content of the individual containers shall not exceed three hundred (300)
pounds weight limit.
E. Each residential refuse generator shall maintain containers in and operable and sanitary
condition.
F. Each residential refuse generator obtaining containers after the effective date of this
Ch. 29 Pg. 2
ordinance shall make payment to the City in the amount of the cost of said container which
cost shall be established by City pursuant to its cost for such containers and at a reduce cost
for used containers. This amount must be paid prior to receiving City sewer and water
services or the container whichever occurs earlier. Charges of refuse collection will begin
when a building has received a certificate of occupancy or when the container is first used
whichever occurs earlier.
G. All containers used in conjunction with City refuse removal operations shall remain as City
property and shall be replaced by the City at no cost when the same requires replacement
because of normal wear and tear, subject to paragraph “H” below.
H. The City shall replace any container lost by a refuse generator or stolen from a refuse
generator or damaged as a result of anything other than the normal wear and tear involved
in the use of a container and the cost for the same shall be paid before replacement or added
to the monthly charge for refuse services in the amount of 1/12 of the actual cost of the
replacement container or 12 monthly payments with no interest charge.
I. Any refuse generator desiring more than one container for a dwelling unit may purchase an
additional container at cost and shall pay a monthly charge of each container, as provided in
Section 29-5.
SECTION 29-4. Prohibited Substances.
No person shall deposit or cause to be deposited in any refuse container, which is serviced by the
City any prohibited substance as defined in Section 29-2. All prohibited substances shall be
separated from containers used for regular collections and disposed of by the Refuse Generator
according to applicable State and Federal Regulations.
SECTION 29-5. Collection Rates; Billing; Time for Payment; Penalty and Remedy for
Non-payment
A. Periodically the City Council by resolution published and posted, shall establish appropriate
rates for the various categories of refuse collection service.
B. The rates charged for collection service shall be uniform for the various classes of users;
discrimination as to rates is hereby prohibited.
C. The City Council finds that the City’s storm drain system, flood control system, sanitary
sewer system, culinary water system, and refuse collection system are interrelated services
that are part of a unified City plan to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the City and
its residents in an environmentally responsible manner. Therefore, the refuse collection
service shall be included on the City’s regular monthly utility bill for any given property. The
refuse collection service fee shall be charged to the owner or entity responsible for the
property or properties served by each individual City water meter. The time of payment shall
be as stated in the City’s Waterworks Ordinance and associated resolutions. The fee shall be
deemed a civil debt owed to the City by the person or entity paying for the City utility
services provided to the property or properties. Failure to pay any portion of the utility bill
Ch. 29 Pg. 3
may result in penalties and/or termination of water service in accordance with the City’s
Waterworks Ordinance and associated resolutions.
D. If upon examination of the customers bill staff determines that the customer was likely not
receiving a bill for garbage removal services staff is authorized to take one of the following
actions:
1. If the period of time when the customer was not receiving a bill for this utility service is
longer than two (2) years staff shall bill the customer for two (2) years of service at the
rates applicable during the two (2) years immediately preceding the bill. Staff is
authorized to write off any amount that exceeds the bill for the preceding two (2) years.
If the period of time when the customer was not receiving a bill is anything shorter than
two (2) years staff shall collect the entire bill.
2. If when the customer is notified they request additional time to pay for up to two (2)
years of services for which they have not received a bill, then staff is authorized to offer
the customer an agreement whereby the customer shall make monthly payments of the
principle. The length of any such agreement shall not exceed two (2) years. During the
course of such an agreement the customer shall not be charged interest or penalty on the
initial principle amount. Interest may be charged if the customer is late on a payment
pursuant to the payment agreement. The Mayor is hereby authorized to sign any such
agreement on behalf of the City.
3. If staff can document that the customer has engaged in intentional fraud or deceit in order
to avoid paying for utility services received, then staff shall not be allowed to offer the
customer the benefit of a two (2) year repayment and shall proceed with all legal
collection efforts to collect the entire amount of un-paid bills due to the customer’s
intentional fraud or deceit.
A. A customer may appeal staff’s decision that the customer engaged in intentional
fraud and/or deceit. The appeal is to the City Manager. A brief written statement
must be submitted by the customer. The City Manager is required to receive
staff’s input prior to making a decision. The City Manager shall render a
decision within ten (10) working days, and notify the customer in writing. In
cases where the City Manager does not agree with staff’s finding of intentional
fraud or deceit, the City Manager’s authority is limited to allowing the customer
to take advantage of the two (2) year payback provisions contained in this
ordinance.
4. Staff shall be able to rely on the City’s billing records in order to make a determination
if the customer has been receiving a bill for these services and if the bill has been sent
to the address requested by the property owner.
Ch. 29 Pg. 4
5. If the staff is not successful in collecting the bill pursuant to this section, nothing in this
section shall be construed to limit, restrict, or prohibit the City from using its other
collection remedies contained in the Cedar City Ordinance including, but not limited to
discontinuing the customer’s water service, or collecting the debt as a civil debt.
Amended by ordinance No. 1214-11
SECTION 29-6. Penalties
A. Violation of any provision of this Ordinance shall be deemed a misdemeanor, and a violator
upon conviction thereof, shall be fined in an amount not exceeding One Thousand Dollars
($1,000) or be imprisoned for a period not exceeding thirty (30) days or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
B. Each day a violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense
and shall be punishable as such hereunder.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
Cedar City Corporation
Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance 30a
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Page Number
SECTION 30A-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS ......................................................................................................... 1
30A-1.1 PURPOSE AND POLICY ............................................................................................................................ 1
30A-1.2 ADMINISTRATION ................................................................................................................................... 2
30A-1.3 DEFINITIONS ........................................................................................................................................... 2
30A-1.4 ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................................................................... 12
SECTION 30A-2 - GENERAL POTW USE REQUIREMENTS .......................................................................... 12
30A-2.1 PROHIBITED DISCHARGE STANDARDS .................................................................................................. 13
30A-2.2 CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARDS ........................................................................................ 15
30A-2.3 STATE PRETREATMENT REQUIREMENTS ............................................................................................... 16
30A-2.4 CCRWTF LOCAL LIMITS ..................................................................................................................... 16
30A-2.5 CEDAR CITY CORPORATION'S RIGHT OF REVISION ............................................................................... 16
30A-2.6 SPECIAL AGREEMENT ........................................................................................................................... 16
30A-2.7 DILUTION ............................................................................................................................................. 17
SECTION 30A-3 - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER .............................................................................. 17
30A-3.1 PRETREATMENT OPERATIONS............................................................................................................... 17
30A-3.2 ACCIDENTAL DISCHARGE/SLUG LOAD CONTROL PLANS ........................................................................ 20
30A-3.3 TENANT RESPONSIBILITY ..................................................................................................................... 21
30A-3.4 HAULED WASTEWATER ........................................................................................................................ 21
30A-3.5 VANDALISM.......................................................................................................................................... 22
SECTION 30A-4 - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION ................................................. 22
30A-4.1 INDUSTRIAL WASTE SURVEY ............................................................................................................... 22
30A-4.2 APPLICATION QUESTIONNAIRE CONTENTS ........................................................................................... 23
30A-4.3 CERTIFICATION ..................................................................................................................................... 25
30A-4.4 GENERAL MANAGER EVALUATION ...................................................................................................... 25
SECTION 30A-5 - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ............................................................................. 26
30A-5.1 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT REQUIREMENT .............................................................................. 26
30A-5.2 CONNECTIONS ...................................................................................................................................... 26
30A-5.3 CONTENTS ............................................................................................................................................ 27
30A-5.4 MODIFICATION ..................................................................................................................................... 30
30A-5.5 DURATION ............................................................................................................................................ 30
30A-5.6 WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPEALS ....................................................................................... 31
30A-5.7 REVOCATION ........................................................................................................................................ 32
SECTION 30A-6 - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS ........................................................................................... 33
30A-6.1 BASELINE MONITORING REPORTS (BMR) ............................................................................................ 33
30A-6.2 COMPLIANCE SCHEDULE PROGRESS REPORT ....................................................................................... 35
30A-6.3 CATEGORICAL PRETREATMENT STANDARD COMPLIANCE REPORT ...................................................... 36
30A-6.4 PERIODIC COMPLIANCE REPORT ........................................................................................................... 36
30A-6.5 CHANGED CONDITIONS REPORT ........................................................................................................... 37
30A-6.6 REPORT OF POTENTIAL PROBLEMS ........................................................................................................ 37
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
30A-6.7 NONPERMITTED INDUSTRIAL USERS REPORTS .................................................................................... 38
30A-6.8 REPEAT SAMPLING REPORT .................................................................................................................. 38
30A-6.9 HAZARDOUS WASTE DISCHARGE NOTIFICATION ................................................................................. 39
30A-6.10 TIMING ................................................................................................................................................. 40
30A-6.11 RECORD KEEPING ................................................................................................................................. 40
SECTION 30A-7 - COMPLIANCE MONITORING ............................................................................................. 40
30A-7.1 INSPECTION .......................................................................................................................................... 40
30A-7.2 MONITORING ........................................................................................................................................ 41
30A-7.3 OBSTRUCTIONS AND DELAYS ............................................................................................................... 43
SECTION 30A-8 - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION ....................................................................................... 43
SECTION 30A-9 - ANNUAL PUBLICATION ..................................................................................................... 44
30A-9.1 REQUIREMENT TO PUBLISH .................................................................................................................. 44
30A-9.2 SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE ............................................................................................................ 44
SECTION 30A-10 - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES ........................................................ 45
30A-10.1 NOTIFICATION OF VIOLATION .............................................................................................................. 45
30A-10.2 CONSENT ORDERS ................................................................................................................................ 46
30A-10.3 SHOW CAUSE HEARING ........................................................................................................................ 46
30A-10.4 COMPLIANCE ORDERS .......................................................................................................................... 46
30A-10.5 CEASE AND DESIST ORDERS ................................................................................................................. 47
30A-10.6 ADMINISTRATIVE FINES ....................................................................................................................... 47
30A-10.7 EMERGENCY SUSPENSIONS ................................................................................................................... 48
30A-10.8 TERMINATION OF DISCHARGE .............................................................................................................. 49
SECTION 30A-11 - JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES ......................................................................... 49
30A-11.1 INJUNCTIVE RELIEF .............................................................................................................................. 49
30A-11.2 CIVIL FINE PASS THROUGH RECOVERY ................................................................................................ 50
30A-11.3 REFERRAL TO STATE OF UTAH FOR ACTION ......................................................................................... 50
30A-11.4 NONEXCLUSIVE REMEDIES .................................................................................................................. 50
SECTION 30A-12 - SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION ................................................................. 51
30A-12.1 PERFORMANCE BONDS ......................................................................................................................... 51
30A-12.2 LIABILITY INSURANCE .......................................................................................................................... 51
30A-12.3 WATER SUPPLY SEVERANCE ................................................................................................................ 51
30A-12.4 PUBLIC NUISANCES .............................................................................................................................. 51
SECTION 30A-13 - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES ................................................................................................. 52
30A-13.1 UPSET ................................................................................................................................................... 52
30A-13.2 GENERAL/SPECIFIC PROHIBITIONS ....................................................................................................... 53
30A-13.3 BYPASS ................................................................................................................................................. 53
SECTION 30A-14 - USER FEES ............................................................................................................................. 55
SECTION 30A-15 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS ...................................................................................... 55
30A-15.1 PRETREATMENT FEES ........................................................................................................................... 55
30A-15.2 SEVERABILITY ...................................................................................................................................... 55
30A-15.3 CONFLICTS ........................................................................................................................................... 56
SECTION 30A-16 - EFFECTIVE DATE ................................................................................................................ 56
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
SECTION 30a-1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS
30a-1.1 Purpose and Policy
This Ordinance sets forth uniform requirements for users of the Publicly Owned Treatment
Works, (POTW) for the Cedar City Regional Wastewater Treatment Facility, (CCRWTF)
of Cedar City Utah, and enables the CCRWTF to comply with all applicable State and
Federal laws including the Clean Water Act, (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), the General
Pretreatment Regulations found in the U.S. Code of Federal Regulations, (CFR) 40 CFR
Part 403, and the Utah Administrative Code R317-8-8. The objectives of this Ordinance
are:
A. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW that will interfere
with the operation of the POTW;
B. To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the POTW which will pass
through the POTW, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the
atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the POTW;
C. To ensure that the quality of the wastewater treatment plant sludge is
maintained at a level which allows its use and disposal in compliance with
applicable statutes and regulations found in 40 CFR Part 503;
D. To protect POTW personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge
in the course of their employment and to protect the general public;
E. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge
from the POTW;
F. To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation,
maintenance and improvement of the POTW; and
G. To enable the CCRWTF to comply with its Utah Pollution Discharge
Elimination System Permit, (UPDES) conditions, sludge use and disposal
permit conditions and any other Federal or State laws to which the POTW
is subject.
1
This Ordinance shall apply to all Users of the POTW. This Ordinance authorizes issuance
of wastewater discharge permits; authorizes monitoring, compliance and enforcement
activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires Industrial User reporting;
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
2
and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the
Program established herein.
30a-1.2 Administration
Except as otherwise provided herein, the General Manager of the Cedar City Regional
Wastewater Treatment Facility, (CCRWTF) shall administer, implement, and enforce the
provisions of this Ordinance. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the General
Manager may be delegated by the General Manager to other CCRWTF personnel.
30a-1.3 Definitions
Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in
this Ordinance, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated.
A. Act. The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean
Water Act, as amended, (33 U.S.C. 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent
amendment thereto.
B. Approval Authority means the director of the State of Utah, Department of
Environmental Quality, Division of Water Quality, (DWQ) or its successor
agency.
C. Authorized Representative of the Industrial User or Authorized
Representative.
1. If the Industrial User is a corporation, Authorized Representative
shall mean
a. the president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the
corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any
other person who performs similar policy or decisionmaking
functions for the corporation; or
b. the manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or
operation facilities, provided the manager is authorized to
make management decisions that govern the operation of the
regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit
duty of making major capital investment recommendations,
and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to
assure long-term environmental compliance with
environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
3
necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather
complete and accurate information for individual
wastewater discharge permit requirements; and where
authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated
to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures;
2. If the Industrial User is a partnership, or sole proprietorship, an
Authorized Representative shall mean a general partner or
proprietor, respectively;
3. If the Industrial User is a Federal, State or local governmental
facility, an Authorized Representative shall mean a director or
highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and
performance of the activities of the government facility, or his/her
designee;
4. The individuals described in paragraphs 1-3 above may designate
another Authorized Representative if the authorization is in writing,
the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for
the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge
originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters
for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the
CCRWTF.
D. Best Management Practices or BMPs. Means schedules of activities,
prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management
practices to implement the prohibitions listed in Section 2.1 A and B of this
Ordinance. BMPs may also, but are not limited to, treatment requirements,
operating procedures, and practices to control plant site runoff, spillage or
leaks, sludge or waste disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage.
BMPs may be developed by the Pretreatment Program as Local Limit to
control discharges from SIU as needed. BMPs shall be considered Local
Limits and Pretreatment Standards for the purposes of this Ordinance and
Section 307(d) of the Act, 40 CFR 403.5(c)(4) and R317-8-8.8.
Additional and/or modifications to existing BMP's reflected within this
Ordinance may be developed.
E. Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD). The quantity of oxygen utilized in
the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory
procedure, five, (5) days at 20? centigrade expressed in terms of mass and
concentration [milligrams per liter (mg/l)]. This test must be performed in
accordance with approved procedures found in 40 CFR Part 136.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
4
F. Categorical Industrial User. An Industrial User subject to a Categorical
Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard.
G. Categorical Pretreatment Standard or Categorical Standard. Any regulation
containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the U.S. EPA in
accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which
apply to a specific category of Industrial Users and which appear in 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471.
H. Color. The optical density at the visual wave length of maximum
absorption, relative to distilled water. One hundred percent (100%)
transmittance is equivalent to zero, (0.0) optical density.
I. Composite Sample. The sample resulting from the combination of
individual wastewater samples taken at selected intervals based on an
increment of either flow or time, to minimize the effect or the variability of
the individual samples. This sampling should be in accordance with 40
CFR Part 403 Appendix E Sub-part I - Composite Method.
J. Control Authority. Cedar City Corporation.
K. Daily Maximum. The arithmetic average of all effluent samples for a
pollutant collected during a calendar day.
L. Daily Maximum Limit. The maximum allowable discharge limit of a
pollutant during a calendar day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are
expressed in units of mass, the daily discharge is the total mass discharged
over the course of the day. Where Daily Maximum Limits are expressed in
terms of a concentration, the daily discharge is the arithmetic average
measurement of the pollutant concentration derived from all measurements
taken that day.
M. Environmental Protection Agency or EPA. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the term may also be used as a
designation for the Regional Water Management Division Director or other
duly authorized official of said agency.
N. Existing Source. Any source of discharge that is not a “New Source.”
O. Food Establishment. Shall mean any location where a person or persons
is/are primarily engaged in the activities of cooking, preparing, serving or
otherwise making available for human consumption any form of food, and
which uses one or more of the following cooking or preparation methods in
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
5
connection with such activities: cooking or preparation by frying (all
methods), baking (all methods), grilling, sautéing, rotisserie cooking,
broiling (all methods), boiling, blanching, roasting, toasting, poaching, or
any type of cooking or preparation that produces a hot non-potable product
in or on a receptacle that requires washing, rinsing or other form of cleaning.
Such establishments include, but are not limited to, restaurants, cafeterias,
extended care facilities, juvenile, adult detention, and prisons, school
cafeterias (public and private), and daycare facilities, (excluding private
residential homes) where meals for more than twelve, (12) children are
prepared, served or otherwise made available for human consumption on a
daily basis.
P. General Manager. The person designated by the CCRWTF to supervise the
operation of the POTW, and who is charged with certain duties and
responsibilities by this ordinance or his duly authorized representative.
Q. Governing Authority (CCRWTF Board). The Cedar City Regional
Wastewater Treatment Facility, (CCRWTF) Board is comprised of seven
members, one which shall be the Cedar City Engineer, one which shall be
the regional wastewater treatment plant Director, five of which shall be
representatives from each of the Communities as follows: one, (1) elected
official from Cedar City, two, (2) (one shall be an elected official) from
Enoch, two, (2) from the County (one shall be an elected official).
R. Grab Sample: A sample that is taken from a waste stream without regard
to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed
fifteen, (15) minutes.
S. Grease, Oil, and/or Sand Interceptor. “Grease Interceptor” shall mean a
device for separating and retaining waterborne fats, oil, and greases before
the wastewater, which contains such grease, exits the Grease Interceptor
into the city’s wastewater collection system or POTW. The Grease
Interceptor also collects settable solids generated by or incidental to
commercial, industrial and food preparation activities. The Grease
Interceptor shall at a minimum be equipped with a two-cell construction and
be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes in temperature. The Grease Interceptor shall be of
substantial construction, water tight and equipped with easily removable
covers which, when bolted in place, shall be gas and water tight.
T. Grease Trap. Shall mean a device for separating and retaining
waterborne fats, oil, and greases, it shall be installed under a sink as an
accessory to an operating certified Grease Interceptor. The installation of
Grease Traps on all New Source commercial or industrial establishments,
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
6
in lieu of the installation of a certified Grease Interceptor, will be strictly
prohibited under any circumstances.
U. Hazardous Waste as defined in 40 CFR 261.3 and this reference is
incorporated herein and made a part hereof
V. Indirect Discharge or Discharge: Means the introduction of pollutants into
a POTW from any non-domestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c)
or (d) of the Act.
W. Industrial User (User). A source of Indirect Discharge.
X. Instantaneous Allowable Discharge Limit. The maximum or minimum
concentration, (or loading) of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any
time, determined from the analysis of any grab or composite sample
collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the
sampling event.
Y. Interference. A Discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a Discharge
or Discharges from other sources both:
1) inhibits or disrupts the POTW, treatment processes or operations,
or its sludge processes, use or disposal and
2) causes a violation of any of the CCRWTF's permit conditions,
(issued by the approval authority) or prevents sewage sludge use or disposal
in compliance with any of the following statutory/state or local regulations:
Section 405 of the Clean Water Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA),
including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and
Recovery Act (RCRA); 40 CFR Part 503 governing the use and disposal of
sewage sludge; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and
the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act.
Z. Local Limit. Specific discharge limits developed and enforced by Cedar
City Corporation upon industrial or commercial facilities to implement the
General and Specific Discharge Prohibitions listed in Section 2.1 A and B
of this Ordinance in accordance with 40 CFR 403.5. The development
documents are kept on file at the City office and can be reviewed if
requested..
AA. Medical wastes, Isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood
byproducts, pathological wastes, body parts, fomites, etiologic agents,
contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory
wastes and dialysis wastes.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
7
BB. Monthly Average. The sum of all “daily discharges” measured during a
calendar month divided by the number of “daily discharges” measured
during that month.
CC. Monthly Average Limit. The highest allowable average of “daily
discharges” over a calendar month, calculated as the sum of all “daily
discharges” measured during a calendar month divided by the number of
“daily discharges” measured during that month.
DD. National Pretreatment Standards or Standards. National Pretreatment
Standards shall mean any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits
promulgated by the EPA in accordance with section 307 (b) and (c) of the
Act, which applies to Industrial Users, which includes but is not limited to
Prohibited Discharge Standards, Categorical Pretreatment Standards, and
Local Limits.
EE. New Source.
1. Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is
or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which
commenced after the publication of proposed Pretreatment
Standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable
to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in
accordance with that section, provided that:
a. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed
at a site at which no other source is located; or
b. The building, structure, facility or installation totally
replaces the process or production equipment that causes the
discharge of pollutants at an Existing Source; or
c. The production or wastewater generating processes of the
building, structure, facility or installation are substantially
independent of an Existing Source at the same site. In
determining whether these are substantially independent,
factors such as the extent to which the new facility is
integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the
new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity
as the Existing Source, should be considered.
2. Construction on a site at which an Existing Source is located results
in a modification rather than a New Source if the construction does
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
8
not create a new building, structure, facility or installation meeting
the criteria of Section (1)(b) or (c) above but otherwise alters,
replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment.
3. Construction of a New Source as defined under this section has
commenced if the owner or operator has:
a. begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site
construction program.
i. Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities
or equipment; or
ii. Significant site preparation work including clearing,
excavation, or removal of existing buildings,
structures, or facilities which is necessary for the
placement, assembly, or installation of New Source
facilities or equipment; or
b. Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the
purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be
used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to
purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified
without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility,
engineering, and design studies do not constitute a
contractual obligation under this paragraph.
FF. Non-contact Cooling Water. Water used for cooling which does not come
into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste
product, or finished product.
GG. Non-Domestic Wastewater. Any wastewater that is not produced as
sanitary wastewater from restroom facilities, showers, or kitchens.
HH. Oil /Water Separator. Shall mean an approved and industry standard
system that is specifically designed for the removal of free oils
(hydrocarbons and other petroleum products), and settleable oily coated
solids from oil/water discharges associated with many types of industrial
facilities. The source of the influent to the Oil/Water Separator shall be
gravity flow from storm water runoff, hydrocarbon spills, and/or
cleaning/maintenance operations. The system shall allow the oil to be
collected and removed on a regular basis as to prevent it from being
discharged into the wastewater collection system. Only Oil/Water
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
9
Separators manufactured for that specific operation will be approved.
Adequate support literature from the manufacturer will be required so as
to allow a proper review by the CCRWTF.
II. Pass Through. A discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the State
in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a
discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any
requirement of the CCRWTF’s permit (including an increase in the
magnitude or duration of a violation).
JJ. Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company,
corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental
entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or
assigns. This definition includes all Federal, State or local governmental
entities.
KK. pH. A measure of the acidity or basicity of a substance, expressed in
standard units.
LL. Pollutant. Any dredged spoil, solid waste, filter backwash, incinerator
residue, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes,
chemical wastes, industrial wastes, biological materials, radioactive
materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt,
agricultural and industrial wastes, and the characteristics of the wastewater
[i.e., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, Chemical Oxygen
Demand, toxicity, odor].
MM. Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of Pollutants, the elimination of
Pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of Pollutant properties in
wastewater prior to or in lieu of introducing such Pollutants into the POTW.
This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or
biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by
diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable
Pretreatment Standard. Appropriate Pretreatment technology includes
control equipment, such as equalization tanks or facilities, for protection
against surges or slug loadings that might interfere with or otherwise be
incompatible with the POTW. However, where wastewater from a
regulated process is mixed in an equalization facility with unregulated
process, the effluent from the equalization facility must meet an adjusted
Pretreatment Standard calculated in accordance with 403.6 (e).
NN. Pretreatment Requirements: Any substantive or procedural requirement
related to Pretreatment imposed on an Industrial User, other than a National
Pretreatment Standard.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
10
OO. Prohibited Discharge Standards or Prohibited Discharges. Absolute
prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances or wastewater
characteristics; these prohibitions appear in Section 30a-2.1 of this
ordinance.
PP. Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW). A treatment works as defined
by section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. section 1292) which is owned by the
City here being Cedar City Corporation. This definition includes any
devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and
reclamation of municipal/domestic sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid
nature and any conveyances, such as pipelines, conduits or channels which
convey wastewater to a treatment plant. The term also means the
municipality as defined in section 502(4) of the Act, which has jurisdiction
over the Indirect Discharges to and the discharges from such a treatment
works.
QQ. Septic Tank Waste. Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels,
chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and Septic Tanks.
RR. Sewage. Human excrement and gray water (household showers, dish
washing operations, etc.).
SS. Significant Industrial User. Shall apply to:
a) Industrial Users subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards;
or
b) an Industrial User that,
i) discharges an average of 25,000 god or more of
process wastewater excludes sanitary, Non-contact
cooling and boiler blow-down wastewater,
ii) contributes a process waste stream which makes up
5 percent or more of the average dry weather
hydraulic or organic capacity of the treatment Plant
or,
iii) is designated as significant by the CCRWTF on the
basis that the Industrial User has a reasonable
potential for adversely affecting the POTW's
operation or for violating any Pretreatment Standard
or Requirement.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
11
TT. Slug Load/Discharge. Any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which
could cause a violation of the Prohibited Discharge Standards in Section 2.1
of this Ordinance. A Slug Discharge is any discharge of a non-routine,
episodic nature, including but not limited to, an accidental spill or a noncustomary
batch discharge, which has a reasonable potential to cause
Interference or Pass Through, or in any other way violate the POTW’s
regulations, Local Limits or permit conditions.
UU. Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code. A classification pursuant to
the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the U.S. Office of
Management and Budget.
VV. Storm Water. Any flow which occurs during, or following any form of
natural precipitation, and results from such an event, including snow melt.
WW. Total Suspended Solids (TSS). The total suspended matter that floats on
the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and
which is removable by laboratory filtering.
XX. Toxic Pollutant. One of 126 pollutants, or combination of those pollutants,
listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA under the provision
of Section 307 (33 U.S.C. 1317) of the Act.
YY. Treatment plant effluent. Any discharge from the POTW into waters of the
State of Utah or the environment.
ZZ. Water of the State. Means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, watercourses,
waterways, wells, springs, irrigation systems, drainage systems,
and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface and underground,
natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow
through, or border upon this state or any portion thereof, except that bodies
of water confined to and retained within the limits of private property, and
which do not develop into or constitute a nuisance, or a public health hazard,
or a menace to fish and wildlife, shall not be considered to be "Waters of
the State" under this definition.
AAA. Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes, and sewage from
residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing
facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are
contributed to the POTW.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
12
BBB. Wastewater Treatment Plant or Treatment Plant. That portion of the POTW
which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and compatible
industrial waste.
Shall is mandatory; may is permissive or discretionary. The use of the singular shall be
construed to include the plural and the plural shall include the singular as indicated by the
context of its use.
30a-1.4 Abbreviations
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings. Some of the
abbreviations are included in the definition section but are repeated here for the sake of
clarity.
• BMP - Best Management Practices
• BMR - Baseline Monitoring Report
• BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand
• CIU - Categorical Industrial User
• CFR - Code of Federal Regulations
• COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand
• CWA - Clean Water Act (P.L. 95-217 as amended)
• EPA - U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
• GPD - Gallons Per Day
• IU - Industrial User
• L - Liter
• MGD - Million Gallons per day
• mg - Milligrams
• mg/l - Milligrams Per Liter
• NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System or the Utah
Pollutant Discharge Elimination System
• O&M - Operation and Maintenance
• OSHA - Occupational Safety and Health Administration
• POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works
• RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act
• SIC - Standard Industrial Classification
• SWDA - Solid Waste Disposal Act (42 U.S.C. 6901, et seq.)
• TSS - Total Suspended Solids
• UPC - Unified Plumbing Code
• USC - United States Code
SECTION 30a-2 - GENERAL POTW USE REQUIREMENTS
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
13
30a-2.1 Prohibited Discharge Standards
A General Prohibitions. No Industrial User shall introduce or cause to be
introduced into the POTW any pollutant(s) or wastewater which cause pass
through or interference, or in any other way violate the POTW’s regulations,
Local Limits or Permit conditions. These General Prohibitions apply to all
users of the POTW whether or not the source is subject to categorical
Pretreatment Standards or any other National, State or local Pretreatment
Standards or Requirement.
B. Specific Prohibitions. No User shall introduce or cause to be introduced into
the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater:
1. Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW
system, including, but not limited to waste streams with a closedcup
flash-point of less than 140?F, (60?C) using the test methods
specified in 40 CFR 261.21. At no time shall two readings on an
explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or
at any point in the POTW, be more than 16% nor any single reading
over 16% of the lower explosive limit, (LEL) of the meter.
2. Any pollutants which will cause, but in no case discharges with a
pH of less than 5.0 or more than 12.5, corrosive structural damage
to the POTW or equipment, or endangering CCRWTF personnel.
3. Solid or viscous substances which will or may cause obstruction to
the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the
wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease,
garbage with particles greater than one-quarter inch (1/4”) in any
dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair,
hides, fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand,
spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, straw, shavings, grass
clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops waste, paper, wood, plastic,
gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of
fuel or lubricating oil, mud, glass grinding, or polishing wastes.
4. Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.)
released in a single extraordinary discharge episode of such volume
and/or strength as to cause interference to the POTW.
5. Any wastewater having a temperature greater than 140?F, (60?C),
or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
14
resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the
temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed
104?F, (40?C).
6. Any petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil or products of
mineral oil origin in amounts which causes interference or passthrough.
7. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a
public nuisance in the opinion of the POTW. This includes any
pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors or
fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute or
chronic worker health or safety problems.
8. Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points
designated by the CCRWTF in accordance with Section 3.4 of this
Ordinance.
9. Any noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other
wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes,
are capable of creating a public nuisance or a hazard to life or are
sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and
repair.
10. Any wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by
the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and
vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the
treatment plant's effluent thereby violating the CCRWTF's UPDES
permit. Color (in combination with turbidity) shall not cause the
treatment plant effluent to reduce the depth of the compensation
point for photosynthetic activity by more than ten, (10) percent from
the seasonably established norm for aquatic life.
11. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes
except as specifically approved by the General Manager in
compliance with applicable State or Federal Regulations.
12. Storm water, surface water, ground water, artisan well water, roof
runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate,
deionized water, non-contact cooling water, and unpolluted
industrial wastewater, unless specifically authorized by General
Manager.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
15
13. Any sludges, screening, or other residues from the Pretreatment of
industrial wastes.
14. All medical waste not limited to bulk, expired, outdated or
concentrated prescription or non-prescription drugs is prohibited
that causes or contributes to a violation of a Pretreatment Standard.
15. Any wastewater causing the treatment plant effluent to fail a toxicity
test.
16. Any wastes containing detergents, surface active agents, or other
substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW.
17. Any wastes containing emulsifiers, enzymes, or bacteria for the
specific purpose of eliminating solids and sludges from Grease, Oil
and/or Sand Interceptors and/or Oil/Water Separators.
18. Any discharge of fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin
is limited to 100 mg/l.
Pollutants prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that
they could be discharged to the POTW. All floor drains located in process or materials
storage areas must discharge to the Industrial User's Pretreatment facility before connecting
with the POTW. If the Industrial User storing the specified pollutant does not have a
Pretreatment facility, the floor drain shall be either plugged with concrete or valved. The
valve shall be locked closed at all times and opened only with permission from the
CCRWTF.
30a-2.2 Categorical Pretreatment Standards
A. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards specifying quantities or
concentrations of pollutants or pollutant properties which may be discharged to a
POTW by existing or new industrial users in specific industrial subcategories have
been established by EPA in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 and
are hereby incorporated.
B. Users must comply with the categorical Pretreatment Standards found at 40 CFR
Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405–471.
C. When wastewater subject to a categorical Pretreatment Standard is mixed with
wastewater not regulated by the same Standard, the General Manager shall impose
an alternate limit in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e).
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
16
30a-2.3 State Pretreatment Requirements
State of Utah Pretreatment Standards contained in the Utah Administrative Code R317-8-
8 are hereby incorporated.
30a-2.4 CCRWTF Local Limits
A. The Superintendent, and/or General Manager is authorized to establish Local
Limits pursuant to 40 CFR 403.5(c). The pollutant limits are established to protect
against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater
containing in excess of the limits as established and amended from time to time
and set forth in Section 4 of the Pretreatment Program. The Local Limits are
developed and implemented per the requirements of 40 CFR 403.
B. Local limits apply at the point where the indirect discharge is introduced to the
POTW before mixing with other wastewaters. All limits for metallic substances
are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. In addition to, or in place of,
concentration-based limitations, the General Manager may impose mass
limitations.
C. The General Manager may develop Best Management Practices (BMPs), by
ordinance or in individual wastewater discharge permits, to implement Local
Limits and the requirements of Section 2.1 of this Ordinance.
30a-2.5 Cedar City Corporation's Right of Revision
Cedar City Corporation reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater
discharge permits, more stringent Standards or Requirements on discharges to the POTW
consistent with the purpose of this Ordinance. In addition, the CCRWTF General Manager
shall be authorized to temporarily or permanently revoke or suspend issuance of any type
of permit at any time to protect the POTW from Pass Through and/or Interference in order
to maintain compliance with any UPDES permit requirement or Pretreatment Program
Requirement. The CCRWTF General Manager shall also have the right to deny new or
increased contributions or to set additional conditions on such contributions to protect the
POTW, including limits that may be more stringent than the approved Local Limits.
30a-2.6 Special Agreement
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
17
The CCRWTF reserves the right to enter into Special Agreements with Industrial Users
setting out special terms under which they may discharge to the POTW. In no case will a
Special Agreement waive compliance with a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement.
30a-2.7 Dilution
No Industrial User shall increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute
a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve
compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement. The General Manager may impose mass
limitations on Industrial Users which are using dilution to meet applicable Pretreatment
Standards or Requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is
appropriate.
SECTION 30a-3 - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER
30a-3.1 Pretreatment Operations
A. Industrial Users shall provide wastewater treatment as needed to comply
with this Ordinance, and shall achieve compliance with all Pretreatment
Standards stated in Section 2 within this Ordinance and within the time
limitations specified by the EPA, the State, or according to compliance
schedules as specified by the General Manager -- whichever is more
stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided,
operated, and maintained at the Industrial User's expense. Detailed plans
showing the Pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be
submitted to the CCRWTF for review and shall be acceptable to the
CCRWTF before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and
operating procedures shall in no way relieve the Industrial User from the
responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an
acceptable discharge to the CCRWTF under the provisions of this
Ordinance.
B. The General Manager may require Industrial Users to restrict their
discharge during peak flow periods, designate certain wastewater be
discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of
discharge, separate municipal waste streams from industrial waste streams,
and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and
secure the Industrial User's compliance with the Requirements of this
Ordinance.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
18
C. Grease, Oil and/or Sand Interceptors, and/or Oil/Water Separators such as
described by the International Plumbing Code, shall be provided when, in
the opinion of the General Manager, they are necessary for the proper
handling of wastewater containing liquid waste, floatable grease and oil,
sand, or any flammable wastes; except that such Interceptors and/or
Separators shall not be required for, private living quarters, or dwelling
units. All Grease, Oil and/or Sand Interceptors, and/or Oil/Water Separator
units shall be of design, type as detailed within Cedar City Corporation
Engineering Standards. All Grease, Oil and/or Sand Interceptors, and/or
Oil/Water Separator units shall be sized to at a design capacity of which
when properly maintained shall not cause or contribute to a violation of a
Pretreatment Standard. All Grease, Oil and/or Sand Interceptors, and/or
Oil/Water Separator units shall be located as to be readily accessible for
cleaning and inspection. In maintaining the Grease, Oil and/or Sand
Interceptors, and/or Oil/Water Separator units the owner or any other person
as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement set forth by the owner, shall
be responsible for the proper removal and disposal by appropriate means of
the captured material and shall maintain records of the dates and means of
disposal, which are subject to review by the General Manager. Either or
both parties may be held responsible for compliance with the provisions of
this Ordinance. A currently licensed waste disposal firm must perform any
removal and hauling of the collected material. Such Interceptors and/or
Separators shall be inspected and cleaned regularly at the owner’s expense.
D. All Grease, Oil and/or Sand Interceptors, and/or Oil/Water Separators shall
be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and
extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of substantial construction,
water tight and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted
in place, shall be gas and water tight.
E. The installation of Grease Traps on all New Source commercial or industrial
establishments, in lieu of the installation of a certified Grease, Oil and/or
Sand Interceptor, will be strictly prohibited under any circumstances.
F. All New Source commercial structures, strip malls, multi-tenant plannedoccupied,
or planned-un-occupied buildings will be required to install
independent 6-inch wastewater discharge lines stubbed out within each
designated future food establishment unit.
If a New Source commercial structure, strip mall, or multi-tenant building
has planned occupancy by one or more businesses approved through the
General Manager to not need a Grease, Oil and/or Sand Interseptor and the
owner of such commercial structure, strip mall, or multi-tenant structure
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
19
does not facilitate the installation of independent 6-inch wastewater
discharge lines then no future food establishments shall be permitted.
Independent unit discharge lines will have designation to future Grease, Oil
and/or Sand Interceptor location of which will be sized, and/or verified by
the General Manager. The Grease, Oil and/or Sand Interceptor shall be
sized depending on future tenant occupancy of the commercial structure,
strip mall, and/or multi-tenant occupied building. Sizing of Grease, Oil
and/or Sand Interceptor will be based on type of business, food
establishment, etc.
G. Regardless of the sizing method used, design shall comply with the effluent
temperature range. The calculations for future Grease, Oil and/or Sand
Interceptor capacity will be based on available tenant space, and/or flow
through retention time. All related outsourced Grease, Oil and/or Sand
Interceptor calculations are subject to review and approval by the General
Manager, who will have the final decision on pumping frequency for all
existing, and New Source Grease, Oil and/or Sand Interceptors. All 6-inch lines
will be placed according to the engineering calculations, which will be sized
and/or verified by the General Manager.
H. Where a New Source commercial structure, strip mall, multi-tenant building is
planned-un-occupied, and the owner of such commercial structure, strip mall,
or multi-tenant building does not facilitate the installation of independent 6-
inch wastewater lines to be designated for future food establishments, then no
future food establishments shall be permitted.
I. For existing commercial kitchens without Grease Traps or Grease, Oil and/or
Sand Interceptors, the General Manager may require the installation of a new
Grease, Oil, and/or Sand Interceptor that fully complies with this Ordinance, or
to modify, replace, or repair any noncompliant plumbing or existing Grease
Trap or Grease, Oil and/or Sand Interceptor upon notice to the food
establishment, and (or) commercial kitchen facility that one, (1) or more of the
following conditions exist:
(1) The facility is found to be contributing fats, oils or grease in
quantities sufficient to cause sewer line stoppages or to necessitate
increased maintenance on the wastewater collection system; or
(2) Changes are made to the menu or kitchen equipment that, in the
opinion of the General Manager, threatens to contribute fats, oils, or
grease in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or necessitate
increased maintenance on the wastewater collection system.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
20
J. Grease, Oil and/or Sand Interceptors and/or Oil/Water Separators shall be
required of all New Source commercial or Industrial User establishments
upon construction, where in the opinion of the General Manager installation
of subject Grease, Oil and/or Sand Interceptor(s) and/or Oil/Water
Separator(s) have been deemed necessary. Any Existing Source commercial
or Industrial User establishment will be reviewed to determine if existing
mechanical, building, plumbing and electrical systems will require
upgrading. Any new kitchen, which shall meet the definition of a “food
establishment”, shall meet all the mechanical, building, plumbing and
electrical requirements for a commercial kitchen.
K. All existing commercial or Industrial User establishments shall have one
year upon notification from the CCRWTF to install a Grease, Oil and/or
Sand Interceptor and/or Oil/Water Separator where required.
L. Industrial Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may
be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection
meter.
M. At no time shall two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of
discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, be more than 16%
nor any single reading over 16% of the lower explosive limit (LEL) of the
meter.
30a-3.2 Accidental Discharge/Slug Load Control Plans
The General Manager may require any Industrial User to develop, submit for approval, and
implement such a plan or take other action that may be necessary to control Slug
Discharges. At least once, (1) every two, (2) years the General Manager shall evaluate
whether each Significant Industrial User needs such a plan. Any Industrial User required
to develop and implement a Slug Load Control Plan shall submit a plan which addresses,
at a minimum, the following:
A. Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges.
B. Type and quantity of stored chemicals.
C. Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW of any accidental or slug
discharge. Such notification must also be given for any discharge which
could violate any of the Prohibited Discharge Standards in Section 30a-2
and Report of Potential Problem in Section 30a-6.6 of this Ordinance and
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
21
D. Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge.
Such procedures include, but are not limited to,
- Inspection and maintenance of storage areas,
- Handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading
operations,
- Control of plant site run-off,
- Worker training,
- Building of containment structures or equipment,
- Measures for containing toxic organic pollutants (including
solvents), and/or
- Measures and equipment for emergency response.
30a-3.3 Tenant Responsibility
Where an owner of property leases premises to any other person as a tenant under any
rental or lease agreement, if either the owner or the tenant is an industrial, and /or
commercial user as determined by the General Manager, either or both may be held
responsible for compliance with the provisions of this Ordinance. It shall be the duty of
every property owner, and/or person as a tenant under any rental or lease agreement whom
contracts, and/or performs work for the installation or repair of building, structure,
mechanical or plumbing systems, for which this Ordinance is applicable, to comply with
this Ordinance and to ensure all subcontracts under them also comply with this Ordinance
to include obtaining the required permits and ensuring the required inspections are
completed.
30a-3.4 Hauled Wastewater
A. Septic tank waste may be accepted into the POTW at a designated receiving
structure within the treatment plant area, and at such times as are established
by the General Manager, provided such wastes do not violate Section 30a-
2 of this Ordinance or any other requirements established or adopted by the
CCRWTF. Wastewater discharge permits for individual vehicles to use
such facilities shall be issued by the General Manager.
B. The discharge of hauled industrial wastes as "industrial septage" requires
prior approval and a hauler wastewater discharge permit from the
CCRWTF. The General Manager shall have authority to prohibit the
disposal of such wastes, if in the opinion of the General Manager, such
disposal would interfere with the treatment plant operation or violate
Section 30a-2 of this Ordinance. Waste haulers are subject to all other
Sections of this Ordinance.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
22
C. Fees for dumping septage will be established as part of the Industrial User
fee system as authorized in Section 30a-15 of this Ordinance.
D. Waste haulers must provide a waste tracking form for every load. This form
shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste
hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources
of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste.
30a-3.5 Vandalism
No person shall maliciously, willfully or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover,
deface, tamper with or prevent access to any structure, appurtenance or equipment, or other
part of the POTW. Any person found in violation of this requirement shall be subject to
the sanctions set out in Sections 30a-10 thru 30a-12 of this Ordinance.
SECTION 30a-4 - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION
30a-4.1 Industrial Waste Survey
When requested the by General Manager any or all Industrial Users must submit
information on the nature and characteristics of their wastewater by completing an
Application Questionnaire and a Baseline Monitoring Report, (BMR) prior to commencing
discharge. The Application Questionnaire and BMR will include the information as stated
in Section 4.2 of this Ordinance and additional information as needed to determine
compliance with this Ordinance and any applicable Pretreatment Standards and
Requirements. The General Manager is authorized to prepare a form(s) (see Part 3A of
Pretreatment Program) for this purpose and may periodically require Industrial Users to
update the survey or Baseline Monitoring Report. Failure to complete this Application
Questionnaire and return to the CCRWTF within, (90) days of the request shall be
reasonable grounds for IU permit revocation or terminating service to the Industrial User
and shall be considered a violation of this Ordinance. If the User changes or adds a process
the User is required to update the information provided to the General Manager and/or His
Authorized Representative thirty, (30) days prior to the process being changed or added.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
23
30a-4.2 Application Questionnaire Contents
The General Manager shall approve a form to be used as a permit application. To be
considered for a wastewater discharge permit, all Industrial Users required to have a
wastewater discharge permit must submit the following information:
A. Identifying Information: The name and address of the facility including the
name of the operator and owners.
B. Hours of Operation: Number and type of employees, hours of operation,
and proposed or actual hours of operation.
C. Permits: A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the
facility.
D. Description of Operations: A description of the activities, facilities and
processes on the premises, average rate of production, and Standard
Industrial Classifications, (SIC) of the operation(s) carried out by the
Industrial User. This description should include a schematic process
diagram which indicates all points of discharge to the POTW from the
regulated processes.
E. Facility Plans: The site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans,
and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size,
location, and elevation, and all points of discharge.
F. Raw Materials: Type and amount of raw materials processes (average and
maximum per day) and chemicals used or stored at the facility.
G. Products: Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes,
and rate of production.
H. Pretreatment Standards: Identify the Categorical Pretreatment Standards
and Requirements applicable to each regulated process.
I. Pollutants: Submit the results of sampling and analysis identifying the
nature and concentration, (and/or mass, where required by the standard or
by the CCRWTF) of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each
regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum and long-term average
concentration, (or mass, where required) shall be reported. The sample shall
be representative of daily operations and shall be sampled and analyzed in
accordance with procedures set out in Section 30a-6 of this Ordinance.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
24
Where the Standard requires compliance with a BMP or pollution
prevention alternative, the Industrial User shall submit documentation as
required by the General Manager or the applicable Standards to determine
compliance with the Standard.
J. Flow Measurement: Time, duration and quantity of discharge. In addition,
measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the
POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to
allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in Section 2.2 of
this Ordinance, (40 CFR 403.6(e)).
K. Measurement of Pollutants:
a. The Categorical Pretreatment Standards and Requirements
applicable to each regulated process and any new Categorically
regulated processes for Existing Sources.
b. The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and
concentration, and/or mass, where required by the Standard or by
the General Manager, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from
each regulated process.
c. Instantaneous, Daily Maximum, and long-term average
concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported.
d. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be
analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in Section 7.2 of
this Ordinance. Where the Standard requires compliance with a
BMP or pollution prevention alternative, the User shall submit
documentation as required by the General Manager or the
applicable Standards to determine compliance with the Standard.
e. Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out
in Section 7.2 of this ordinance.
L. Certification: A statement reviewed by the industrial user's authorized
representative as defined in Section 1.3 C of this Ordinance 30a and
certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether Pretreatment
Standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional
Operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is
required to meet the Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
25
M. Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required for the User to meet the Pretreatment Standards; the shortest
schedule by which the Industrial User will provide such additional
Pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not
be later than the compliance date established for the applicable Pretreatment
Standard and Requirement and must meet the requirements set out within
Section 6.2 of this Ordinance.
N. Additional Information: Any other information as may be deemed
necessary by the General Manager to evaluate the wastewater discharge
permit application.
Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and shall be returned to the
Industrial User for revision. Should any of the information requested or supplied be
considered by the Industrial User to be of a confidential nature, the Industrial User should
request confidential status in accordance with Section 30a-8 of this Ordinance.
Information regarding sampling and analysis of the discharge is not considered confidential
information.
30a-4.3 Certification
All wastewater discharge permit applications, user reports, compliance reports, and/or
Non-Permitted Industrial Users Reports shall contain the following certification statement
and be signed by an authorized representative of the user.
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared
under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure
that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted.
Based on my inquiry of the person or people who manage the system, or those
people directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted
is to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware
that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the
possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations."
30a-4.4 General Manager Evaluation
The General Manager will evaluate the data furnished by the Industrial User and may
require additional information. Within Thirty, (30) days of receipt of a complete
wastewater discharge permit application, the General Manager will determine whether or
not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The General Manager may deny for cause any
application for a wastewater discharge permit. The basis for denial shall be provided to
the Industrial User.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
26
SECTION 30a-5 - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT
30a-5.1 Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement
A. It shall be unlawful for any Significant Industrial User, (SIU) to discharge
wastewater into the CCRWTF's POTW without first obtaining a wastewater
discharge permit from the General Manager. Any violation of the terms and
conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of
this Ordinance and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the
sanctions set out in Sections 30a-10 thru 30a-12 of this Ordinance.
Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its
obligation to comply with all Federal and State Pretreatment Standards or
Requirements nor with any other requirements of Federal, State or local law.
B. Within either one hundred eighty, (180) days after the effective date of a
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, or the final administrative decision on a
Categorical determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing Significant Industrial Users subject to such Categorical
Pretreatment Standards, and currently discharging to or scheduled to
discharge to the POTW, shall submit to the General Manager a report which
contains the information listed within Section 6.1 C of this Ordinance.
C. At least ninety, (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, New
Sources, and sources that become Categorical or Significant Industrial
Users subsequent to the issuance of this Ordinance, shall be required to
submit to the CCRWTF an application for a wastewater discharge permit.
A New Source shall also be required to report the method of Pretreatment
it intends to use to meet applicable Pretreatment Standards and
Requirements. A New Source shall also give estimates of its anticipated
flow and quantity of pollutants discharged.
D. The General Manager may require other Industrial Users, including liquid
waste haulers, to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out
the purposes of this Ordinance.
30a-5.2 Connections
A. Existing: Any Significant Industrial User which has an indirect discharge
into the POTW prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and who wishes
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
27
to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 60 days after said
date, apply to the CCRWTF for a wastewater discharge permit in
accordance with Sections 30a-4.2 and 30a-4.3 of this Ordinance, and shall
not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after thirty, (30)
days of the effective date of this Ordinance, except in accordance with a
wastewater discharge permit issued by the General Manager.
B. New: Any Significant Industrial User proposing to begin or recommence
discharging industrial wastes into the POTW must obtain a wastewater
discharge permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge.
In accordance with Section 4.2 of this Ordinance, an application for this
wastewater discharge permit must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date
upon which any discharge will begin. The CCRWTF has the right to place
conditions on new or increased contributions from Existing Users.
C. Extra-jurisdictional
1. Any existing Significant Industrial User located outside the
CCRWTF boundaries shall submit a wastewater discharge permit
application, in accordance with Sections 4.2 and 4.3 of this
Ordinance, within 60 days of the effective date of this Ordinance.
New Significant Industrial Users located beyond the CCRWTF
limits shall submit such applications to the General Manager 90 days
prior to any proposed discharge into the POTW.
2. Alternately, the General Manager may enter into an agreement with
the neighboring jurisdiction in which the Significant Industrial User
is located to provide for the implementation and enforcement of
Pretreatment Program Requirements against said Industrial User.
30a-5.3 Contents
Wastewater discharge permits shall include such conditions as are reasonably deemed
necessary by the General Manager to prevent pass through or interference, protect the
quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and
safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, protect ambient air quality, and protect
against damage to the POTW.
A. Wastewater discharge permits shall contain, but need not be limited to the
following:
1. A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration,
which in no event shall exceed five, (5) years.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
28
2. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable
without prior notification to and approval from the CCRWTF, (in
accordance with Section 5.5 of this Ordinance) and provisions for
furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing
wastewater discharge permit.
3. Effluent limits, including Best Management Practices, based on
applicable Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
4. Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping
requirements. These requirements shall include an
identification of pollutants, (or best management practice) to be
monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type
based on Federal, State, and local law.
5. Statement of applicable civil, criminal, and administrative penalties
for violation of Pretreatment Standards and Requirements, and any
applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule shall not extend the
time for compliance beyond that required by applicable Federal,
State, or local law.
6. A statement that the wastewater discharge permit may be revoked
upon violation of the terms and conditions of the permit as stated in
Section 5.7 of this Ordinance.
7. A statement that grants the General Manager the right of entry into
all Industrial User properties, facilities, buildings, etc. when
wastewater is known or expected to be generated and/or discharged.
8. A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit
does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with
all applicable Federal and State Pretreatment Standards and
Requirements, including those which become effective during the
term of the wastewater discharge permit.
9. Requirements to control Slug Discharge, if determined by the
Control Authority or the Industrial User with the written
concurrence of the Control Authority to be necessary.
10. Requirements to report to the General Manager any Slug Discharge.
11. Requirements to notify the General Manager of changes to the
Industrial Users discharge thirty, (30) days prior to the change. The
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
29
General Manager may deny or conditional approve the change prior
to the user making the change at the facility that may impact the
discharge at the facility to the POTW.
12. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the General Manager
and/or His Duly Authorized Representative to ensure compliance
with this ordinance, and State and Federal laws, rules, and
regulations.
B. Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the
following:
1. Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of
discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization.
2. Limits on the instantaneous, daily and monthly average and/or
maximum concentration, mass, or other measure of identified
wastewater pollutants or properties.
3. A compliance schedule for the installation of Pretreatment
technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate
containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the
introduction of pollutants into the POTW.
4. Development and implementation of Slug Load Control Plans or
other special conditions including Best Management Practices
necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or routine
discharges.
5. Development and implementation of waste minimization or
pollution prevention plans to reduce the amount of pollutants
discharged to the POTW.
6. The unit charge or schedule of Industrial User charges and fees for
the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW.
7. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and
sampling facilities and equipment, including flow measurement
devices;
8. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the General Manager to
ensure compliance with this ordinance, and State and Federal laws,
rules, and regulations.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
30
30a-5.4 Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification
The General Manager may modify the wastewater discharge permit for good cause
including, but not limited to, the following:
A. To incorporate any new or revised Federal, State, or local Pretreatment
Standards or Requirement.
B. To address significant alterations or additions to the Industrial User's
operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of
wastewater discharge permit issuance.
C. A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent
reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge.
D. Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the
CCRWTF's POTW, CCRWTF personnel, sludge or the receiving waters.
E. Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit.
F. Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit Application Questionnaire or in any required
reporting.
G. Revision of or a grant of variance from Categorical Pretreatment Standards
pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13.
H. To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit
and/or
I. To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership and/or operation to a new
owner/operator in accordance with Section 5.5 C of this Ordinance.
The filing of a request by the permittee for a wastewater discharge permit modification
does not stay any wastewater discharge permit condition.
30a-5.5 Duration
A. Expiration: Wastewater discharge permits shall be issued for a specified
time period, not to exceed five, (5) years. A wastewater discharge permit
may be issued for a period less than five, (5) years, at the discretion of the
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
31
General Manager. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a
specific date upon which it will expire.
B. Reissuance: An Industrial User shall apply for wastewater discharge permit
reissuance by submitting a complete wastewater discharge permit
Application Questionnaire in accordance with Section 4 of this Ordinance,
a minimum of 60 days prior to the expiration of the Industrial User's existing
wastewater discharge permit.
C. Transfer: Wastewater discharge permits may be reassigned or transferred
to a new owner and/or operator only if the permittee gives at least thirty,
(30) days advance notice to the General Manager and the General Manager
approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the
General Manager must include a written certification by the new owner
and/or operator which:
1. States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate
intent to change facility's operations and processes.
2. Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur.
3. Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the
existing wastewater discharge permit.
4. The conditions of the permit will not change.
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater
discharge permit voidable on the date of facility transfer.
30a-5.6 Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals
Any person, including the Industrial User, may petition the General Manager to reconsider
the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within fifteen, (15) days of its issuance.
A. Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver
of the administrative appeal.
B. In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge
permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the
alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge
permit.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
32
C. The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed
pending the appeal.
D. If the CCRWTF fails to act within fifteen, (15) days, a request for
reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider
a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit,
or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit, shall be considered final
administrative action for purposes of judicial review.
E. Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative
wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with
the 5th Judicial District Court in and for Iron County, State of Utah.
30a-5.7 Revocation
The General Manager may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause,
including, but not limited to, the following reasons;:
A. Failure to notify the CCRWTF of significant changes to the wastewater
prior to the changed discharge.
B. Failure to provide prior notification to the CCRWTF of changed condition
pursuant to Section 6.5 of this Ordinance.
C. Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the
wastewater discharge permit Application Questionnaire.
D. Falsifying self-monitoring reports.
E. Tampering with monitoring equipment.
F. Refusing to allow the CCRWTF timely access to the facility premises
and/or records.
G. Failure to meet effluent limitations.
H. Failure to pay fines.
I. Failure to pay sewer charges.
J. Failure to meet compliance schedules.
K. Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit
application or reapplication.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
33
L. Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of a permitted facility or
M. Violation of any Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, or any terms of the
wastewater discharge permit or the Ordinance.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon non-operation of permitted facility,
cessation of operations, or transfer of business ownership. All individual wastewater
discharge permits issued to a User are void upon the issuance of a new individual
wastewater discharge permit to that User.
SECTION 30a-6 - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS
All reports shall be accompanied by a certification statement and be signed by an
authorized representative of the Industrial User as stated in Section 4.3 of this Ordinance.
30a-6.1 Baseline Monitoring Reports (BMR)
A. Within either one hundred eighty, (180) days after the effective date of a
Categorical Pretreatment Standard, or the final administrative decision on a
category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later,
existing Categorical Industrial Users currently discharging to or scheduled
to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the General Manager a report
which contains the information listed in paragraph B, below. At least
ninety, (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, New Sources,
and sources that become Categorical Industrial Users subsequent to the
promulgation of an applicable categorical Standard, shall submit to the
General Manager a report which contains the information listed in
paragraph B, below. A New Source shall report the method of Pretreatment
it intends to use to meet applicable Categorical Standards. A New Source
also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to
be discharged. The General Manager may require the submission of
additional, more current BMRs from time to time from an Industrial User.
Revised BMRs should use historical data where the data provides
information sufficient to determine the need for additional industrial
Pretreatment measures.
B. The BMR shall indicate the time, date, and location of all sampling
provided, methods of analysis, and shall certify that the sampling and
analysis is representative of the normal work cycles and expected pollutant
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
34
discharges to the POTW. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed
and certified in accordance with Section 4.3 of this Ordinance.
C. If the General Manager determines that a BMR is needed the information
as stated in Section 4.2 of this Ordinance, must be submitted as well as any
additional information required by the General Manager to determine
compliance with this Ordinance as well as the information provided below:
1. Measurement of pollutants.
a. The User shall provide the information required in Section 4.2
(K) a through e of this Ordinance.
b. The User shall take a minimum of one representative sample to
compile that data necessary to comply with the requirements of
this paragraph.
c. Samples should be taken immediately downstream from
Pretreatment facilities if such exist or immediately downstream
from the regulated process if no Pretreatment exists. If other
wastewaters are mixed with the regulated wastewater prior to
Pretreatment the User should measure the flows and
concentrations necessary to allow use of the combined waste
stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e) to evaluate compliance with
the Pretreatment Standards and Requirements. Where an
alternate concentration or mass limit has been calculated in
accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(e) this adjusted limit along with
supporting data shall be submitted to the Control Authority;
d. Sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with
Section 7.2 of this Ordinance;
e. The General Manager may allow the submission of a baseline
report which utilizes only historical data so long as the data
provides information sufficient to determine the need for
industrial Pretreatment measures; and
f. The baseline report shall indicate the time, date and place of
sampling and methods of analysis, and shall certify that such
sampling and analysis is representative of normal work cycles
and expected pollutant Discharges to the POTW.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
35
2. Compliance Certification. A statement, reviewed by the User’s
Authorized Representative as defined in Section 1.3 C of this
Ordinance, and certified, (pursuant to Section 4.3 of this Ordinance)
by a qualified professional, indicating whether Pretreatment Standards
and Requirements are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not,
whether additional Operation and Maintenance (O&M) and/or
additional Pretreatment is required to meet the Pretreatment Standards
and Requirements.
3. Compliance Schedule. If additional Pretreatment and/or O&M will be
required for the User to meet the Pretreatment Standards and
Requirements, the shortest schedule by which the User will provide
such additional Pretreatment and/or O&M must be provided. The
completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance
date established for the applicable Pretreatment Standard. A
compliance schedule pursuant to this Section must meet the
requirements set out in Section 6.2 of this Ordinance.
4. Signature and Report Certification. All baseline monitoring reports
must be certified in accordance with Section 4.3 of this Ordinance and
signed by an Authorized Representative as defined in Section 1.3 C of
this Ordinance.
30a-6.2 Compliance Schedule Progress Report
The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by the
Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Questionnaire, Section 6.1 of this Ordinance.
The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement
and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional
Pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable Pretreatment Standards (such
events include but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final
plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing
construction, beginning and conducting routine operation). No increment referred to above
shall exceed nine, (9) months. The Industrial User shall submit a progress report to the
General Manager no later than fourteen, (14) days following each date in the schedule, and
the final date of compliance, including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the
increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken
by the Industrial User to return to the established schedule. In no event shall more than
nine, (9) months elapse between such progress reports to the General Manager.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
36
30a-6.3 Categorical Pretreatment Standard Compliance Report
Within ninety, (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable
Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in the case of a New Source following
commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any User subject to such
Pretreatment Standards and Requirements shall submit to the General Manager a report
containing the information described in Sections 4.2 J and K and 6.1 C 1 of this Ordinance.
For all other Industrial Users subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards expressed in
terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production, (or other measure of
operation) this report shall include the Industrial User's actual production during the
appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in
accordance with Section 4.3 of this Ordinance. All sampling will be done in conformance
with Section 7.2 of this Ordinance.
30a-6.4 Periodic Compliance Report
A. Any Significant Industrial User subject to a Pretreatment Standard shall, at
a frequency determined by the General Manager but in no case less than
twice per year, (in June and December), submit a report indicating the
nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by
such Pretreatment Standards, the measured or estimated average, and
maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance
reports must be signed and certified accordance with Section 4.3 of this
Ordinance. In cases where the Pretreatment Standard requires compliance
with Best Management Practice, (BMP) or pollution prevention alternative,
the User must submit documentation required by the General Manager or
the Pretreatment Standard necessary to determine the compliance status of
the User.
B. All wastewater samples must be representative of the Industrial User's
discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be
properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all
times. Failure of an Industrial User to keep its monitoring facility in good
working order shall not be grounds for the Industrial User to claim that
sample results are not representative of its discharge.
C. If an Industrial User, subject to the reporting requirement in and of this
Section, monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the
POTW, using the procedures prescribed in Section 7.2 of this Ordinance,
the monitoring results shall be included in the report.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
37
30a-6.5 Changed Conditions Report
A. Each Industrial User is required to notify the General Manager of any planned
changes to the Industrial User's operations or system which might alter the
nature, quality or volume of its wastewater at least thirty, (30) days before the
change, including changes that may affect Slug Discharges to the POTW. The
General Manager may approve, deny or conditionally approve the change based
on the affects the change may have on the POTW and/or the Pretreatment
Program.
1. The General Manager may require the Industrial User to submit such
information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed
condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit
Application Questionnaire under Section 4.2 of this Ordinance.
2. The General Manager may issue a wastewater discharge permit under
Section 5.5 (B) of this Ordinance or modify an existing wastewater
discharge permit under Section 5.4 of this Ordinance.
3. No Industrial User shall implement the planned changed condition(s)
until and unless the General Manager has approved the Industrial
User's change.
4. For purposes of this requirement, flow increases of ten percent
(10%) or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported
pollutants, shall require a changed condition report.
B. The General Manager and/or His Dully Authorized Representative may
approve, deny or conditionally approve the change based on the affects the
change may have on the POTW and/or the Pretreatment Program.
30a-6.6 Report of Potential Problem
A. In the case of any discharge including, but not limited to, accidental
discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary
batch discharge, or a slug load which may cause potential problems for the
POTW, (including a violation of the Prohibited Discharge Standards in
Section 2.1 of this Ordinance), it is the responsibility of the Industrial User
to immediately telephone and notify the General Manager, or his designee
of the incident. This notification shall include the location of discharge,
type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions
taken by the Industrial User.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
38
B. Within five, (5) days following such discharge, the Industrial User shall,
unless waived by the General Manager, submit a detailed written report
describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the
Industrial User to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification
shall not relieve the Industrial User or any expense, loss, damage, or other
liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural
resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such
notification relieve the Industrial User of any fines, civil penalties, or other
liability which may be imposed by this Ordinance.
C. Failure to notify the CCRWTF of potential problem discharges shall be
deemed a separate violation of this Ordinance.
D. A notice shall be permanently posted on the Industrial User's bulletin board
or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a
discharge described in paragraph A, above. Employers shall ensure that all
employees, who may cause or suffer such a discharge to occur, are advised
of the emergency notification procedure.
E. Significant Industrial Users are required to notify the Superintendent, and/or
General Manager immediately of any changes at its facility affecting the
potential for a Slug Discharge.
30a-6.7 Nonpermitted Industrial Users Reports
All Industrial Users not subject to Categorical Pretreatment Standards, not classified as a
CIU or SIU, and not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide
appropriate reports to the CCRWTF as the General Manager may require.
30a-6.8 Repeat Sampling Report
If sampling performed by an Industrial User indicates a violation, the Industrial User must
notify the CCRWTF within twenty-four, (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation.
The Industrial User shall also repeat the sampling and analysis within thirty, (30) days after
becoming aware of the violation and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the
CCRWTF. The Industrial User is not required to re-sample if the POTW performs
monitoring at the Industrial User's at least once a month, or if the POTW performs sampling
between the Industrial User's initial sampling and when the Industrial User receives the
results of this sampling. Upon the POTW conducting a sample of the Industrial Users, and
analytical results of the POTWs sample indicates a violation of the Industrial Users permit,
the POTW can require the Industrial User to conduct a resample.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
39
30a-6.9 Hazardous Waste Discharge Notification
A. Any Industrial User who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall
notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director,
and State Hazardous Waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the
POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous
waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of
the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous
waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If
the Industrial User discharges more than (100) kilograms of such waste per
calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the
following information to the extent such information is known and readily
available to the Industrial User: an identification of the hazardous
constituents contained in the wastes, and estimation of the mass and
concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during the
calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste
stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months.
All notifications must take place no later than one hundred and eighty, (180)
days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph
need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged.
However, notifications of changed discharges must be submitted under
Section 6.5 of this Ordinance. The notification requirement in this section
does not apply to pollutants already reported under the self-monitoring
requirements of Sections 6.1, 6.3, and 6.4 of this Ordinance.
B. Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (A) of this
Section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than
fifteen, (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute
hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e).
Discharge of more than fifteen, (15) kilograms of non-acute hazardous
wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as
specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time
notification. Subsequent months during which the User discharges more
than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional
notification.
C. In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying
additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional
substance as a hazardous waste, the industrial user must notify the General
Manager, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and
State Hazardous Waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within
ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
40
D. In the case of any notification made under this section, the Industrial User
shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity
of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be
economically practical.
E. This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not
otherwise permitted to be discharged by this Ordinance, a permit issued
thereunder, or any applicable Federal or State law.
30a-6.10 Timing
Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports
which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the U.S. Postal
Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern.
30a-6.11 Record Keeping
Industrial Users shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of
information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this ordinance, any
additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by
the User independent of such requirements, and documentation associated with Best
Management Practices established under Section 2.4 C of this Ordinance. These records
shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the
person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the
analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These
records shall remain available for a period of at least three, (3) years. This period shall be
automatically extended for the duration of any enforcement action concerning compliance
with this Ordinance, or where the Industrial User has been specifically notified of a longer
retention period by the General Manager.
SECTION 30a-7 - COMPLIANCE MONITORING
30a-7.1 Inspection
A. Right to Enter: The CCRWTF shall have the right to enter the facilities of
any Industrial User to ascertain whether the purpose of this Ordinance, and
any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, is being met
and whether the Industrial User is complying with all requirements thereof.
Industrial Users shall allow the General Manager or his representatives
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
41
ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection,
sampling, records examination and copying, and/or the performance of any
additional duties. Monitoring and inspections shall be conducted at a
frequency as determined by the CCRWTF and may be announced or
unannounced.
Where an Industrial User has security measures in force which require
proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the
Industrial User shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards
so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the General Manager,
his representatives, State, and/or EPA shall be permitted to enter without
delay, for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities.
B. Search Warrants: If the General Manager and/or his representatives have
been refused access to a building, structure or property or any part thereof,
and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a
violation of this Ordinance or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample
as part of a routine inspection and/or sampling program of the CCRWTF
designed to verify compliance with this Ordinance or any permit or order
issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare
of the community, then upon application by the CCRWTF Attorney, the
District Court Judge of Iron County shall issue a search and/or seizure
warrant describing therein the specific location subject to the warrant. The
warrant shall specify what, if anything, may be searched and/or seized on
subject property(s) and/or facilities described. Such warrant shall be served
by the General Manager and/or his duly authorized representatives; while
in the company of a uniformed officer of Cedar City, Enoch City and/or
Iron County
30a-7.2 Monitoring
Samples collected to satisfy reporting requirements must be based on data obtained through
appropriate sampling and analysis performed during the period covered by the report, based
on data that is representative of conditions occurring during the reporting period.
A. Except as indicated in Section B and C below, the Industrial User must
collect wastewater samples using 24-hour flow-proportional composite
sampling techniques, unless time-proportional composite sampling or grab
sampling is authorized by the General Manager. Where time-proportional
composite sampling or grab sampling is authorized by CCRWTF, the
samples must be representative of the discharge. Using protocols,
(including appropriate preservation) specified in 40 CFR Part 136 and
appropriate EPA guidance, multiple grab samples collected during a
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
42
24-hour period may be composited prior to the analysis as follows: for
cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides the samples may be composited in the
laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and oil and grease, the
samples may be composited in the laboratory. Composite samples for other
parameters unaffected by the compositing procedures as documented in
approved EPA methodologies may be authorized by the CCRWTF, as
appropriate. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance
with Instantaneous Limits.
B. Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, total phenols,
sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab
collection techniques.
C. For sampling required in support of baseline monitoring and 90-day
compliance reports required in Section 6.1 and 6.3 of this Ordinance, a
minimum of four, (4) grab samples must be used for pH, cyanide, total
phenols, oil and grease, sulfide and volatile organic compounds for facilities
for which historical sampling data do not exist; for facilities for which
historical sampling data are available, the General Manager may authorize
a lower minimum. For the reports required by paragraphs Section 6.4 of this
Ordinance, the Industrial User is required to collect the number of grab
samples necessary to assess and assure compliance by with applicable
Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
D. Monitoring Equipment: The CCRWTF, State, and EPA shall have the right
to set up on the Industrial User's property, or require installation of, such
devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the User's
operations.
The CCRWTF may require the Industrial User to install monitoring
equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment
shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by
the Industrial User at its own expense. All devices used to measure
wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at a frequency determined
by the General Manager and/or his representatives to ensure their accuracy.
E. Analytical Requirements: All pollutant analyses, including sampling
techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit
application or for any of the reports required in this Ordinance shall be
performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136,
unless otherwise specified in an applicable Categorical Pretreatment
Standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical
techniques for the pollutant in question, or where the EPA determines that
the Part 136 sampling and analytical techniques are inappropriate for the
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
43
pollutant in question, sampling and analyses shall be performed by using
validated analytical methods or any other applicable sampling and
analytical procedures, including procedures suggested by the General
Manager, his representatives or other parties approved by EPA Multiple
grab samples collected during a 24-hour period may be composited prior to
the analyses as follows: for cyanide, total phenols, and sulfides, the samples
may be composited in the laboratory or in the field; for volatile organics and
oil and grease, the samples may be composited in the laboratory.
Composited samples for other parameters unaffected by the compositing
procedures as documented in approved EPA methodologies may be
authorized by the General Manager as appropriate.
F. All laboratory samples collected for this ordinance shall be analyzed by a
laboratory that is either certified by the Utah Bureau of Laboratory
Improvements or approved by the General Manager. Unless the analysis is
completed by the permittee and meets the requirments in 40 CFR 136.
G. Determination of Noncompliance: The General Manager may use a grab
sample(s) to determine noncompliance with Pretreatment Standards. The
decision to use this method is at the discretion of the General Manager
and/or his duly authorized representitive and would not be announced in
advance to the Industrial User. .
30a-7.3 Obstructions and Delays
A. Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the
industrial facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed
by the Industrial User at the written or verbal request of the General
Manager and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall
be born by the Industrial User.
B. Delays in allowing CCRWTF personnel access to the Industrial User's
premises shall be a violation of this Ordinance.
SECTION 30a-8 - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
Information and data on an Industrial User obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater
discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs,
and from CCRWTF inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public
without restriction unless the Industrial User specifically requests, and is able to
demonstrate to the satisfaction of the CCRWTF, that the release of such information would
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
44
divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade
secrets under applicable State law. When requested and demonstrated by the Industrial
User furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of
a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available
for inspection by the public, but shall immediately be made available, upon request, to
governmental agencies for uses related to the UPDES program or Pretreatment Program,
and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater
constituents and characteristics and other "effluent data" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will
not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without
restriction. The CCRWTF will provide a secure facility to maintain documentation
considered confidential.
SECTION 30a-9 - ANNUAL PUBLICATION
30a-9.1 Requirement to Publish
The CCRWTF shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the
municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the Industrial Users which, during the
previous twelve, (12) months, were in Significant Non-Compliance, (SNC) with applicable
Pretreatment Standards and Requirements.
30a-9.2 Significant Non-Compliance
The term Significant Non-Compliance shall mean:
A. Chronic Violations: Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits,
defined here as those in which sixty-six percent, (66%) or more of all of the
measurements taken during a six, (6-) month period exceed, (by any
magnitude) a numeric Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, including
instantaneous limits, as defined in Section 2 of this Ordinance, for the same
pollutant parameter by any amount;
B. TRC Violations: Technical Review Criteria, (TRC) violations, defined here
as those in which thirty-three percent, (33%) or more of all the
measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a 6-month
period equals or exceeds the product of the numeric Pretreatment Standard
or Requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined in Section 2 of
this Ordinance. multiplied by the applicable criteria [1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats,
oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH];
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
45
C. Discharge Violations: Any other violation of a Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement as defined in Section 2 of this Ordinance. (daily maximum,
long-term average, instantaneous limit or narrative Standard) that the
CCRWTF determines has caused, alone or in combination with other
discharges, interference or pass through, (including endangering the health
of CCRWTF personnel or the general public);
D. Endangerment: Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent
endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the
CCRWTF's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a
discharge;
E. Failure to Comply: Failure to meet, within 90 days after the schedule date,
a compliance schedule milestone contained in a control mechanism or
enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or
attaining final compliance;
F. Failure to Report: Failure to provide within thirty, (30) days after the due
date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, 90-day
compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on
compliance with compliance schedules;
G. Failure to accurately report Non-Compliance; or
H. Other Violations: Any other violation or group of violations, which may
include a violation of Best Management Practices, which the CCRWTF
determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the
local Pretreatment Program.
SECTION 30a-10 - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
30a-10.1 Notification of Violation
Whenever the General Manager finds that any User has violated or is violating this
Ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the General Manager or his agent may serve upon
said user a written Notice of Violation, (NOV). Such written notice shall be served in
person or by certified mail where a receipt is obtained. Within thirty, (30) days of the
receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory
correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted
by the User to the General Manager. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the User
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
46
of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the NOV. Nothing in this
Section shall limit the authority of the CCRWTF to take any action, including emergency
actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a NOV.
30a-10.2 Consent Orders
The General Manager is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of
voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any User
responsible for Non-Compliance. Such documents shall include specific action to be taken
by the User to correct the Non-Compliance within a time period specified by the document.
Such documents shall have the same force and effect as administrative orders issued
pursuant to Sections 30a-10.4 and 30a-10.5 below and shall be judicially enforceable.
30a-10.3 Show Cause Hearing
The General Manager may order any User which causes or contributes to violation(s) of
this Ordinance, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, or any other
Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, to appear before the General Manager and show
cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on
the User specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action,
the reasons for such action, and a request that the User show cause why this proposed
enforcement action should not be taken. Such written notice shall be served in person or
by certified mail where a receipt is obtained. The notice of the meeting shall be served
personally or by registered or certified mail, (return receipt requested) at least seven, (7)
days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of
the User. Whether or not the user appears as ordered, immediate enforcement action may
be pursued following the hearing date. A show because hearing shall not be a prerequisite
for taking any other actions against the User.
30a-10.4 Compliance Orders
When the General Manager finds that a User has violated or continues to violate any
provision of this Ordinance, an industrial wastewater discharge permit, or order issued
hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the General Manager may
issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the User come into
compliance within thirty, (30) days. If the User does not come into compliance within
thirty, (30) days, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities,
devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance
orders also may contain other requirements to address the Non-Compliance, including
additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of
pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order, and/or schedule can be initiated
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
47
by the control authority for the installation of technology required to meet applicable
Pretreatment Standards and Requirements; a compliance order may not extend the deadline
for compliance established for a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, nor does a
compliance order relieve the User of liability for any violation, including any continuing
violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for,
taking any other action against the User.
30a-10.5 Cease and Desist Orders
When the General Manager finds that a User is violating this Ordinance, the User's
wastewater discharge permit, any order issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment
Standard or Requirement, or that the User's past violations are likely to recur, the General
Manager may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations
and directing the user to:
A. Immediately comply with all requirements.
B. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to
properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting
operations and/or terminating the discharge.
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a prerequisite to taking any other action
against the User.
30a-10.6 Administrative Fines
A. Not with standing any other section of this Ordinance, any User found to
have violated any provision of this Ordinance, its wastewater discharge
permit, and orders issued hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or
Requirement may be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000. Such fines
shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly
or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each
day during the period of violation. The General Manager may add the costs
of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders,
to the fine.
B. Assessments may be added to the User's next scheduled sewer service
charge and the General Manager shall have such other collection remedies
as may be available for other service charges and fees.
C. Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after sixty, (60) calendar days,
be assessed an additional penalty of ten, (10) percent of the unpaid balance
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
48
and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of 1% per month. A lien against
the individual User's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and
penalties.
D. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the
General Manager to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine
amount within thirty, (30) days of being notified of the fine. Where a
request has merit, the General Manager shall convene a hearing on the
matter within fourteen, (14) days of receiving the request from the Industrial
User. In the event the User's appeal is successful, the payment, together
with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the Industrial User.
The General Manager and/or his representatives may add the costs of
preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to
the fine.
E. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a prerequisite for taking any
other action against the User.
30a-10.7 Emergency Suspensions
The General Manager may immediately suspend a User's discharge, (after informal notice
to the User) whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened
discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial
endangerment to the health or welfare of any people. The General Manager may also
suspend a User's discharge, (after notice and opportunity to respond) that threatens to
interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents or may present an
endangerment to the environment.
Any User notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its
contribution. In the event of a User's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the
suspension order, the General Manager shall take such steps as deemed necessary,
including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to
the POTW, its receiving stream, contamination of sludge, or endangerment to any
individuals. The General Manager shall allow the User to recommence its discharge when
the User has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the CCRWTF that the period of
endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings set forth in Section 10.8 of
this Ordinance is initiated against the User.
A User that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent
endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the
harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the
General Manager, prior to the date of any show cause or termination of discharge hearing
under Sections 10.3 and 10.8 of this Ordinance.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
49
Nothing in this Section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency
suspension under this Section.
30a-10.8 Termination of Discharge
In concert with the wastewater discharge permit revocation provisions in Section 5.7 of
this Ordinance, any User that violates any of the following conditions of this Ordinance,
wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder, is subject to discharge
termination.
A. Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions.
B. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics
of its discharge.
C. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume,
constituents and characteristics prior to discharge.
D. Refusal of reasonable access to the User's premises for the purpose of
inspection, monitoring or sampling or
E. Violation of the Standards in Section 2 of this Ordinance.
The Industrial User will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered
an opportunity to show cause under Section 10.3 of this Ordinance why the proposed action
should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the General Manager shall not be a bar to, or a
prerequisite for, taking any other action against the Industrial User.
SECTION 30a-11 - JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES
30a-11.1 Injunctive Relief
Whenever a User has violated a Pretreatment Standard or Requirement or continues to
violate the provisions of this Ordinance, wastewater discharge permits or orders issued
hereunder, or any other Pretreatment Standard or Requirement, the General Manager may
petition the 5th Judicial District Court in and for Iron County, State of Utah through the
CCRWTF's Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as
appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater
discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this Ordinance on activities of
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
50
the Industrial User. In addition, the CCRWTF may recover reasonable attorney's fees,
court costs, and other expenses of litigation by appropriate legal action against the User
found to have violated any provision herein, or any other rules, regulations, permits, or
agreements issued herein. Such other action as appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief
may also be sought by the CCRWTF. A petition for injunctive relief need not be filed as
a prerequisite to taking any other action against a User.
30a-11.2 Civil Fine Pass Through Recovery
In the event that an Industrial User discharges such pollutants which cause the CCRWTF
to violate any conditions of its UPDES Permit and the CCRWTF is fined by EPA or the
State of Utah for such violations, then such Industrial Users shall be fully liable for the
total amount of the fines and civil penalties assessed against the CCRWTF by EPA or the
State of Utah and administrative costs incurred.
30a-11.3 Referral to State of Utah for Action
The CCRWTF will refer to the State of Utah or the EPA, criminal violations of any
Pretreatment Standards or permit conditions. The Attorney General's office for Utah will
offer the city wherein the violation occurred the option to prosecute the violator. Should
the local entity decline, the State, at its discretion, may initiate appropriate criminal action.
The CCRWTF will assist the Attorney General's office any way it can with appropriate
support for the action taken.
30a-11.4 Nonexclusive Remedies
The provisions in Sections 9-12 of this Ordinance are not exclusive remedies. The
CCRWTF reserves the right to take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a
Non-Compliant User. Enforcement of Pretreatment violations will generally be in
accordance with the CCRWTF's Enforcement Response Plan, (ERP). However, the
CCRWTF reserves the right to take other action against any User when the circumstances
warrant. Further, the CCRWTF is empowered to take more than one enforcement action
against any Non-Compliant User. These actions may be taken concurrently.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
51
SECTION 30a-12 - SUPPLEMENTAL ENFORCEMENT ACTION
30a-12.1 Performance Bonds
The General Manager may decline to reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any User
which has failed to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, any orders, or a previous
wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless such User first files a satisfactory
bond, payable to the CCRWTF, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the General
Manager to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance.
30a-12.2 Liability Insurance
The General Manager may decline to issue or reissue a wastewater discharge permit to any
User which has failed to comply with the provisions of this Ordinance, any order, or a
previous wastewater discharge permit issued hereunder, unless the User first submits proof
that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair damage to the POTW
caused by its discharge.
30a-12.3 Water Supply Severance
Whenever a User has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this Ordinance,
orders, or wastewater discharge permits issued hereunder, water service to the User may
be severed. Service will only recommence, at the User's expense, after it has satisfactorily
demonstrated its ability to comply.
30a-12.4 Public Nuisances
Any violation of this Ordinance, wastewater discharge permits, or orders issued hereunder,
is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the
General Manager or his designee. Any person(s) creating a public nuisance shall be subject
to the provisions of the Cedar City Ordinance, Chapter 25 governing such nuisances,
including reimbursing the City for any costs incurred in removing, abating or remedying
said nuisance.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
52
SECTION 30a-13 - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES
30a-13.1 Upset
A. For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in
which there is unintentional and temporary Non-Compliance with
Categorical Pretreatment Standards because of factors beyond the
reasonable control of the Industrial User. An upset does not include Non-
Compliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed
treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventive
maintenance, or careless or improper operation.
B. An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for
Non-Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards if the
requirements of paragraph C within Section 13.1 of this Ordinance are met.
C. An Industrial User who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset
shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating
logs, or other relevant evidence that:
1. An upset occurred and the Industrial User can identify the cause(s)
of the upset;
2. The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and
workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation
and maintenance procedures and
3. The Industrial User has submitted the following information to the
POTW and treatment plant operator within 24 hours of becoming
aware of the upset [if this information is provided orally, a written
submission must be provided within five, (5) days]:
(i) A description of the indirect discharge and cause of Non-
Compliance.
(ii) The period of Non-Compliance, including exact dates and
times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the Non-
Compliance is expected to continue and
(iii) Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate and
prevent recurrence of the Non-Compliance.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 11/25/2019
53
D. In any enforcement proceeding, the Industrial User seeking to establish the
occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof.
E. Industrial Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on
any claim of upset in an enforcement action brought for Non-Compliance
with Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
F. The Industrial User shall control production of all discharges to the extent
necessary to maintain compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standards
upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is
restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement
applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of
power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost or has failed.
30a-13.2 General/Specific Prohibitions
An Industrial User shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought
against it for Non-Compliance with the General Prohibitions in paragraph A of Section
2.1of this Ordinance or the Specific Prohibitions in Sections 2.1 B 3 through 7 and 9
through 18 of this Ordinance if it can prove that it did not know or have reason to know
that its discharge, along or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause
pass through or interference and that either:
A. A Local Limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the Industrial User was
in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or
interference, or
B. No Local Limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature
or constituents from the Industrial User’s prior discharge when the CCRWTF
was regularly in compliance with its UPDES permit, and in the case of
Interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal
requirements.
30a-13.3 Bypass
A. For the purposes of this Section,
(1) Bypass means the intentional diversion of waste-streams from any portion of
an Industrial User’s treatment facility.
(2) Severe property damage means substantial physical damage to property,
damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or
substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 8/01/2017
54
expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not
mean economic loss caused by delays in production.
B. An Industrial User may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause Pretreatment
Standards or Requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential
maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the
provision of paragraphs (C) and (D) of this Section.
C. Bypass Notifications
(1) If an Industrial User knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit
prior notice to the General Manager, at least ten, (10) days before the date of the
bypass, if possible.
(2) An Industrial User shall submit oral notice to the General Manager of an
unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable Pretreatment Standards or
Requirements within twenty-four, (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of
the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five, (5) days of
the time the Industrial User becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission
shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass,
including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the
anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce,
eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The General Manager may
waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been
received within twenty-four, (24) hours.
D. Bypass
(1) Bypass is prohibited, and the General Manager may take an enforcement
action against any Industrial User for a bypass, unless
(a) Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe
property damage;
(b) There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary
treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during
normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if
adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of
reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during
normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and
(c) The Industrial User submitted notices as required under paragraph (C) of this
Section.
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 8/01/2017
55
(2) The General Manager may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering
its adverse effects, if the General Manager determines that it will meet the three
conditions listed in paragraph (D)(1) of this Section.
SECTION 30a-14 - USER FEES
User fees should be assessed whenever there is a need to recover the cost of treating wastewater.
These fee calculations are found in Addendum A of this Ordinance.
SECTION 30a-15 - MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS
30a-15.1 Pretreatment Fees
The CCRWTF may impose fees that may include, but not limited to, the following:
(A) Fees for all costs, including maintenance and operation;
(B) Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the Pretreatment
Program;
(C) Fees for monitoring, inspections, and surveillance procedures to include, but
not limited to, laboratory analysis;
(D) Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction;
(E) Fees for permit applications;
(F) Fees for filing appeals;
(G) Fees for consistent removal, (by the POTW) of pollutants otherwise subject to
Federal Pretreatment Standards;
(H) Fees for connection;
(I) Fees for repairs and disconnection;
(J) Fees for inspections and surveys;
(K) Fees for development and expansion;
Other fees as the CCRWTF may deem necessary.
30a-15.2 Severability
CCRWTF Wastewater/Pretreatment Ordinance Index – 8/01/2017
56
If any provision of this Ordinance is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the
remaining provisions shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect.
30a-15.3 Conflicts
All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part
of this Ordinance, are hereby repealed to the extent of the inconsistency or conflict.
SECTION 30a-16 - EFFECTIVE DATE
This Ordinance shall be in full force and effect immediately following its passage, approval and
publication, as provided by law.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0123-19-5
CHAPTER 30
SEWER DEPARTMENT
SECTION 30-1 Office of Superintendent Created
SECTION 30-2 Duties of Superintendent
SECTION 30-3 Application and Permit to Connect
SECTION 30-4 Connection Prior to Occupancy
SECTION 30-5 Connection Agreement
SECTION 30-6 Sewer Service User Fee
SECTION 30-6(a) Notification
SECTION 30-6(b) Statement
SECTION 30-6( c) Un-billed sewer accounts.
SECTION 30-7 Special Rates and Procedures
SECTION 30-7(a) Out-of-City-Limits Fees
SECTION 30-7(b) Board of Equalization, Rates and Rebates
SECTION 30-8 Procedures for Discharge
SECTION 30-9 Mandatory Use of Sewer System
SECTION 30-9(a) Sewer Mains
SECTION 30-10 Termination of City Services
SECTION 30-11 Delinquency. Discontinuance of Service
SECTION 30-12 Charges
SECTION 30-13 Enforce Payment
SECTION 30-14 Pipes to be Kept in Good Repair
SECTION 30-15 Quality of Service Pipe
SECTION 30-16 Department to Have Free Access
SECTION 30-17 Qualified Plumbing Necessary
SECTION 30-18 Permits for Installation
SECTION 30-19 When Permits Shall Not Be Issued
SECTION 30-20 Revocation of Permits
SECTION 30-21 Inflammables--Breakage
SECTION 30-22 Obstructive Material
SECTION 30-23 Drainage Waters and Destructive Materials
SECTION 30-24 Regulations
SECTION 30-25 Ownership of Connecting Lines
SECTION 30-26 Sewer Man Holes
SECTION 30-27 Destruction
SECTION 30-28 Penalty
Ch. 30 Pg. 1
CHAPTER 30
SEWER DEPARTMENT
SECTION 30-1. Office of Superintendent Created.
There is created and established the office of Superintendent of Sewers, who shall also serve
as Superintendent of Water Works as is herein provided in the Chapter on water works. The Superintendent
of Sewers shall be appointed by the Mayor with the consent of the City Council.
SECTION 30-2. Duties of Superintendent.
The Superintendent of Sewers shall have the responsibility of the maintenance and operation
of the Cedar City sewage system, including the sewer mains and the disposal plant and such other
duties as may be assigned to him by the City Council.
SECTION 30-3. Application and Permit to Connect.
Any person desiring to connect onto the Cedar City Sewer System shall make written
application on the form as provided by the City Inspector. Such applicant shall pay into the City
Treasury such connection fee and/or charge as will be fixed by resolution of the City Council, which
fee and/or charge may be changed from time to time by resolution by the City Council.
The schedule of connection fees and/or changes shall be at all times on file in the office of the City
Recorder subject to public inspection. (Amended April 11, 1990)
SECTION 30-4. Connection Prior to Occupancy.
All sewer connections shall be made and all connection fees and/or charges shall be paid
prior to:
1. First time occupancy related to new construction.
2. Occupancy conditioned upon sewer connection being made or connection fees and/or
charges being paid.
SECTION 30-5. Connection Agreement.
Upon the application for a sewer permit and connection the following agreement shall be
printed, to be signed by the applicant:
Ch. 30 Pg. 2
SEWER AGREEMENT
Cedar City, Utah ,l9
The undersigned hereby acknowledges that his premises located at
hereby agrees that the only use of this connection shall be for , is about
to be connected with the Cedar City sewer system and hereby agrees to pay a service charge for the
use of said sewer as is established and revised from time to time by resolution, and in the event of
a failure to pay the said charge at the time and place provided for the payment, the City shall have
the right to shut off the water at its election, and agrees to be bound by the rules and regulations and
ordinances of Cedar City for the control of its sewer system.
(signature)
SECTION 30-6. Sewer Service User Fee.
For the purpose of defraying the cost of construction, reconstruction, maintenance, debt
service obligations and operation of the Cedar City Sewer System and Disposal Plant, each owner
or occupant of premises using the Cedar City Sewer System shall pay into the City Treasury the
monthly user fees upon connection onto the Cedar City Sewer System as adopted and updated by
resolution from time to time by the City Council.
SECTION 30-6 (a). Notification.
Each user will be notified, at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rate and
that portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services (O&M) vs
debt service.
SECTION 30-6 (b). Statement.
A statement for the service fee shall be included in the water statement rendered to each user
and in the case and event any person shall neglect or refuse to pay the amount due to the City for the
sewer service within thirty (30) days from the date on which the statement is mailed, there shall be
assessed and levied an account service charge in the amount of five per cent (5%) of the outstanding
balance due and owing and in the case and event total payment including delinquency and penalties
is not made on or within the next following thirty (30) day period, the Public Works Director, or a
person designated by him, shall immediately turn off the water from the premises owned or occupied
by such person and before such water shall be turned on again, all delinquent sewer service charges
and penalties must be paid in full, plus a turn-on fee and/or charge, fixed by resolution of the City
Council to cover the expense of turning on said water. The schedule of rates and method of payments
fixed by resolution shall be at all times on file in the office of the City Recorder and subject to public
inspection.
Ch. 30 Pg. 3
SECTION 30-6( c) Un-billed sewer accounts.
If upon examination of the customers bill staff determines that the customer was likely not
receiving a bill for sewer services staff is authorized to take one of the following actions:
1. If the period of time when the customer was not receiving a bill for this utility service
is longer than two (2) years staff shall bill the customer for two (2) years of service
at the rates applicable during the two (2) years immediately preceding the bill. Staff
is authorized to write off any amount that exceeds the bill for the preceding two (2)
years. If the period of time when the customer was not receiving a bill is anything
shorter than two (2) years staff shall collect the entire bill.
2. If when the customer is notified they request additional time to pay for up to two (2)
years of services for which they have not received a bill, then staff is authorized to
offer the customer an agreement whereby the customer shall make monthly payments
of the principle. The length of any such agreement shall not exceed two (2) years.
During the course of such an agreement the customer shall not be charged interest or
penalty on the initial principle amount. Interest may be charged if the customer is
late on a payment pursuant to the payment agreement. The Mayor is hereby
authorized to sign any such agreement on behalf of the City.
3. If staff can document that the customer has engaged in intentional fraud or deceit in
order to avoid paying for utility services received, then staff shall not be allowed to
offer the customer the benefit of a two year repayment and shall proceed with all
legal collection efforts to collect the entire amount of un-paid bills due to the
customer’s intentional fraud or deceit.
A. A customer may appeal staff’s decision that the customer engaged in
intentional fraud and/or deceit. The appeal is to the City Manager. A brief
written statement must be submitted by the customer. The City Manager is
required to receive staff’s input prior to making a decision. The City
Manager shall render a decision within ten (10) working days, and notify the
customer in writing. In cases where the City Manager does not agree with
staff’s finding of intentional fraud or deceit, the City Manager’s authority is
limited to allowing the customer to take advantage of the two (2) year
payback provisions contained in this ordinance.
4. Staff shall be able to rely on the City’s billing records in order to make a
determination if the customer has been receiving a bill for these services and
if the bill has been sent to the address requested by the property owner.
5. If the staff is not successful in collecting the bill pursuant to this section,
nothing in this section shall be construed to limit, restrict, or prohibit the City
Ch. 30 Pg. 4
from using its other collection remedies contained in the Cedar City
Ordinance including, but not limited to discontinuing the customer’s water
service, or collecting the debt as a civil debt.
Amended by ordinance No. 1214-11
SECTION 30-7. Special Rates and Procedures.
The City Council may from time to time fix by agreement or resolution special rates and
conditions for users of the sewer service discharging wastes of unusual characteristics or making use
thereof under exceptional circumstances upon such terms and conditions as may deem proper.
Commercial units, schools, other institutions, industries and all other non-residential users
will be required to pay a surcharge for above normal Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD) and Total
Suspended Solids (TSS) loadings. This surcharge will cover the operation and maintenance costs for
treating all above normal BOD and TSS loadings. Normal BOD and TSS loadings are considered
to be equal to the average domestic sewage strength; the BOD average estimated to be 200 ppm and
the TSS to be 250 ppm. All rates set forth by resolution are based pro-rata against the average
residential flow. Any non-residential user with greater than the average residential flow must pay a
pro-rata against the average residential flow.
The various categories of users of the City's sewer system will be required to pay a monthly
"user fee" based upon a pro-rata amount of the average residential sewage flow presently estimated
to be 400 gallons per day, predicated upon the average daily water consumption per four (4) member
family, two (2) bathroom residence during the months of November, December, and January.
SECTION 30-7 (a). Out-Of-City-Limits Fees.
When conditions justify more than the average residential cost to service connections outside
of the City limits and outside areas covered by established intergovernment agreements a surcharge
double the rate for the same service as is established in the City shall be charged.
SECTION 30-7 (b). Board of Equalization, Rates and Rebates.
The City Council is hereby constituted a Board of Equalization of sewer rates to hear
complaints and make corrections or any assessments or charges deemed to be illegal, unequal or
unjust.
SECTION 30-8. Procedures for Discharge.
If any waters or wastes are discharged or are proposed to be discharged to the public sewers,
which waters contain the substances or possess the characteristics enumerated in this chapter or in
the Wastewater Control Ordinance, and which in the judgment of the Public Works Director may
have a deleterious effect upon the sewage works, processes, equipment, or receiving waters, or which
Ch. 30 Pg. 5
otherwise create a hazard to life or constitute a public nuisance, the Public Works Director must be
informed immediately and the Public Works Director may:
(l) Reject the wastes;
(2) Require pre-treatment to an acceptable condition for discharge to the public sewers;
(3) Require control over the quantities and rates of discharge; and or,
(4) Require payment to cover the added cost of handling and treating the wastes not covered
by existing taxes or sewer charges under the provisions of this chapter.
If the Public Works Director permits the pre-treatment or equalization of waste flows, the
design and installation of the plants and equipment shall be subject to the review and approval of the
Public Works Director and subject to the requirements of all applicable codes, ordinances, and laws.
SECTION 30-9. Mandatory Use of Sewer System.
All homes, businesses, theaters, health resorts or other places where persons reside,
congregate or are employed are hereby required to have installed suitable toilet facilities therein and
to connect such facilities directly with the sewer system of the City in accordance with the provisions
of this ordinance.
The City Council may allow the installation of septic tanks in situations where the closest
sewer line is either located more than three hundred (300) feet from the applicant's property or the
sewer line is located more than 300 feet multiplied by the number of lots in a subdivision should the
lot be contained in a subdivision and provided further that the party enters into an agreement with
the City to extend the sewer line to and across the party's property when the City sewer line comes
within three hundred (300) feet of the applicant's property and by waiving protest to the establishment
of a special improvement district for the installation of the same. However, septic tanks may
not be maintained on a lot less than 1/2 acre in size. In addition to this ordinance, compliance with
all state and federal ordinances where applicable must be accomplished.
SECTION 30-9 (a). Sewer Mains
Except where otherwise provided in these ordinances, the following shall be the exclusive
method of extending sewer mains in Cedar City, Utah, on dedicated streets where sewer services are
not now available and outside of recognized subdivisions.
In the event the lot owner desires sewer service and there is not a sewer main in front of the
property for which owner desires said service, then for whatever extension is necessary to bring the
sewer main (8 inch minimum diameter) to the furthest developed property line, said property owner
shall sign an agreement with Cedar City providing that he/she shall be reimbursed for expenses
incurred to cover the actual cost of extending said sewer main. After said agreement is executed and
construction drawings have been submitted and approved by the City Engineer, the sewer line can
be installed. Thereafter, the installation reimbursement amounts, shall be collected along the specific
pipe line thus installed, and be paid by Cedar City Corporation to the individual that paid for the
extension until that individual has been completely reimbursed without interest for the money
expended for making said extension or for a ten year period whichever occurs first. In addition to
the cost of extension, said property owner shall pay the physical connection costs and impact fee
Ch. 30 Pg. 6
required by ordinance. Other property owners who thereafter connect to the extended line fronting
their property shall pay for the physical connection costs, impact fees and, for the ten year period
indicated above, the reimbursement amount of one half(½) the actual cost of the installation across
the front of their property. This method of reimbursement shall also apply to lines extended and paid
for by Cedar City.
This ordinance shall not be applicable in subdivisions wherein extensions have already been
made at the cost of the subdivider. Adopted 11/00
SECTION 30-10. Termination of City Services.
In addition to other available enforcement actions, the City may enforce the sewer hookup
requirements imposed by this section by turning off the culinary water serving the premises involved
until hookup has been made.
SECTION 30-11. Delinquency. Discontinuance of Service.
The City Recorder or such other person as the City may designate shall furnish to each user
or mail or leave at his place of residence or usual place of business, a written or printed statement
stating the sewer service charges assessed against him once each month or at such other regular
intervals. The statement shall specify the amount of the bill and the place of payment and due date. If
any person fails to pay his sewer charges within thirty (30) days of the date due the City Recorder
or the Public Works Director shall direct that all water service to the premises involved be shut off.
SECTION 30-12. Charges.
Before the water service to the premises shall again be provided all delinquent sewer charges
must have been paid to the City Treasurer together with such extra charges for delinquency that the
City Council may have established by resolution.
SECTION 30-13. Enforce Payment.
The City Recorder is hereby authorized and empowered to enforce the payment of all
delinquent sewer service charges by an action at law in the name of the City.
SECTION 30-14. Pipes to be Kept in Good Repair.
All users of the sewer services shall keep service pipes and connections and other apparatus
in good repair and protected from frost at their own expense beginning at the point at which their line
connects to the City sewer system main line. No person except under the direction of the Public
Works Director shall be allowed to dig into the street for the purpose of laying, removing, or
repairing any service pipe or main. However should this be in the public right-of-way the City must
be contacted prior to any repair.
Ch. 30 Pg. 7
SECTION 30-15. Quality of Service Pipe.
All service and other pipes used in conjunction with the sewer services of the City shall be
of such materials, quality and specifications as prepared by the City Engineer. Installation shall be
at such distances below ground as may be specified by regulations relating to the sewer
department. All work, alterations or extensions affecting sewer pipes shall be subject to the
acceptance of the Public Works Director nor shall any connections with sewer mains be made
without first obtaining a permit therefor from the City Recorder.
SECTION 30-16. Department to Have Free Access.
The Public Works Director and his agents shall at all ordinary hours have free access to
places supplied with sewer services from the City system for the purpose of examining the apparatus,
ascertaining the sewer services being used and the manner of its use.
SECTION 30-17. Qualified Plumbing Necessary.
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any drain or sewer pipe with the public sewer
system without a permit and unless the person is a duly licensed plumber or unless in the absence
of a duly licensed plumber any proposed connection or alteration or change of a connection to the
sewer system or of the pipes serving said connection be first submitted to the Public Works Director
for review and approval and after such approval the installation or work done shall be subject to the
inspection by the superintendent Public Works Director or his agent.
SECTION 30-18. Permits for Installation.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the laying, repairing, altering or connecting
of any drain or sewer pipe directly or indirectly with the City Sewer System without first having
received a permit from the office of the City Recorder or the Public Works Director.
SECTION 30-19. When Permits Shall Not Be Issued.
Permits to connect to the sewer system of the City shall not be issued unless the plumbing
in the house or building on the premises to be connected is in accordance with the provisions of the
building and plumbing codes of the City.
SECTION 30-20. Revocation of Permits.
All construction permits for sewer connections or installations shall be issued to the plumber
who is to do the work, or to the owner of the property, subject to supervision and inspection by the
Public Works Director or his agents, but the City Recorder or Public Works Director may at any time
revoke a permit because of defective work or because of undue delay in completing the permitted
work.
Ch. 30 Pg. 8
SECTION 30-21. Inflammables--Breakage.
It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, break or remove any part or portion of any sewer
appliance or appurtenance, or to discharge into the sewer any inflammable gas, gasoline, or oil, or
any calcium carbide or residue therefrom, or any liquid or material or substance which will evolve
an inflammable gas in contact with water, sewage or fire or perform any other act not in compliance
with the Cedar City Wastewater Control Ordinance. Oil separators installed in any building where
volatile fluids are used must not be connected directly or indirectly with a sewer.
SECTION 30-22. Obstructive Material.
It shall be unlawful for any person to empty or discharge into the public sanitary sewer any
garbage, refuse or other similar matter or any substance or thing likely to obstruct the sewer, or any
substance solid or liquid other than the water products for which said sewer is provided.
SECTION 30-23. Drainage Waters and Destructive Materials.
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect with a public sanitary sewer any drain or pipe
which discharges rain water, cellar or surface water, acids, alkalies, lye, or other injurious liquids or
the contents of any spring, flowing well, creek, or ditch or other surface or subsurface water
courses. No boiler or heating plant shall be directly connected to the sanitary system. The overflow
from boilers or heating plants when cooled to a temperature not to exceed l20 degrees Fahrenheit
will be allowed to run to a sump, said sump to be connected to the sewer. The discharge of the
contents of waste pipes from water filters, gas engines, air compressors, vacuum or dry cleaners,
garages, wash racks, stores, or warehouses containing inflammable substances buildings for the
stabling or keeping or horses, cows and other animals and all similar establishments shall not be
made into or connected with a sanitary sewer unless such contents are discharged into settling tanks
properly trapped and vested, said tanks to be of a construction approved by the superintendent and
to be at all times subject to his inspection and approval or condemnation. Upon condemnation by
the superintendent, the sewage from said tanks shall not be allowed to flow into the sewer system
until satisfactory alterations have been made and the construction approved by the Public Works
Director.
SECTION 30-24. Regulations.
The City Council shall have the power to and retains the right to adopt regulations controlling
the manner and circumstances under which the sewer system may be used in addition to the
regulatory provisions set forth expressly in this ordinance.
SECTION 30-25. Ownership of Connecting Lines.
Unless provision is expressly made for ownership of mains or lines by the owner of the
adjacent property by means of a written agreement, all lines and mains connecting the sewer system
Ch. 30 Pg. 9
to a land owner or resident's premises which are situated on the public way between the main and
the property line shall be deemed to be the property of the landowner and the maintenance of said
lines shall be made by said owner.
SECTION 30-26. Sewer Man Holes.
It shall be unlawful for any person to open any sewer man hole without permission from the
Public Works Director.
SECTION 30-27. Destruction.
It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface, injure or interfere with the operation
of any part or appurtenances of the sewer system.
SECTION 30-28. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed guilty of a class
"B" misdemeanor and any other penalties which may be applicable.
AMENDED 2/93
CHAPTER 31
STREETS AND SUPERVISOR OF STREETS
SECTION 31-1 Names of Streets
SECTION 31-2 Houses to be Numbered
SECTION 31-3 Supervisor. Appointment and Duties
SECTION 31-4 Defects in Streets to be Repaired
SECTION 31-5-1 Excavation Permit
SECTION 31-5-2 Excavation Permit Fee
SECTION 31-5-3 Excavation Conditions
SECTION 31-5-4 Emergency Excavation
SECTION 31-5-5 Fourteen Day Closure
SECTION 31-5-6 Fourteen Day Closure Variance
SECTION 31-5-7 Cash Bond
SECTION 31-5-7A Execution on Cash Bond
SECTION 31-5-8 Testing
SECTION 31-5-9 Restoration of Surfaces
SECTION 31-5-10 Insurance
SECTION 31-5-11 Surety Bond
SECTION 31-5-12 Bond Duration
SECTION 31-6 Excavations. Permit. Application
SECTION 31-7 Excavations Must Be Guarded With
Barricades and Light
SECTION 31-8 Mandatory Notice to City of Excavation and Filling of
Excavation
SECTION 31-9 Permit to Occupy Street With Building Material
SECTION 31-10 Gasoline Pumps, etc. Not to be Constructed Upon Streets or
Sidewalks
SECTION 31-11 Obstruction of Sidewalks and Streets Prohibited
SECTION 31-11-1 Special Events Street Closures
SECTION 31-11-2 Obstruction of Traffic Control Devises
SECTION 31-12 Riding Bicycles Upon Sidewalks Prohibited
SECTION 31-13 Unlawful to Conduct Business on Street. Exception
SECTION 31-14 Unlawful to Use Streets or Sidewalks for Display Purposes
SECTION 31-15 Obstruction of Ditch or Gutter Unlawful
SECTION 31-16 Public Highway Through City
SECTION 31-17 Repealed, March 2007
SECTION 31-18 Repealed, March 2007
SECTION 31-18-1 Repealed, March 2007
SECTION 31-19 Repealed, March 2007
SECTION 31-20 Repealed, March 2007
SECTION 31-21 Repealed, March 2007
SECTION 31-22 Penalty
CHAPTER 31
STREETS AND SUPERVISOR OF STREETS
SECTION 31-1. Names of Streets.
All streets situated within Cedar City shall be known by the names and numbers by which
they are designated in the official Street Naming and Numbering Plat of Cedar City filed in the office
of the City Recorder and in the office of the County Recorder of Iron County, unless such names
shall be changed by Ordinance.
SECTION 31-2. Houses to be Numbered.
All houses and buildings of Cedar City, Utah, shall be numbered. The initial point of
numbering of houses and buildings on streets running north and south shall be at Center Street, and
the initial point of all houses and buildings on streets running east and west shall be Main Street. The
numbers on any block shall range between the numbers of the streets at either end of the block in
proportion to the length of the block and in the proper direction of progression. The number of feet
along the block per number of house or building shall be as shown on the official house numbering
plat of Cedar City on file in the office of the City Recorder. All numbers on the left shall be odd
numbers as they progress away from the initial point., It shall be the duty of the City Engineer to
furnish each owner of any unnumbered house or building situated upon any street with written notice
of the correct number to which said house or building is entitled, and each owner or occupant is
hereby required within thirty days after such notice to place upon said house or building a suitable,
permanent and durable number. Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this section
shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and shall be punished by a fine in any sum not exceeding
$l00.00 or by imprisonment in the City Jail not exceeding three (3) months or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
SECTION 31-3. Supervisor. Appointment and Duties.
The Mayor, by and with the consent of the City Council, shall appoint a person to serve as
the Supervisor of Streets. It shall be the duty of the Supervisor of Streets to see that all ordinances,
resolutions and orders of the City Council, relating to the improvement of streets, alleys, sidewalks,
bridges, or culverts are carried into effect. He shall have charge of all tools, materials, and equipment
used for street purposes. The Supervisor of Streets shall perform such other duties as are or may
hereinafter be prescribed by law or ordinance.
SECTION 31-4. Defects in Streets to be Repaired.
All defects in public streets of Cedar City coming to the knowledge of any officer or person
in the employ of the City, shall be by him at once communicated to the Supervisor of Streets, who
Ch. 31 Pg. 2
shall cause adequate repairs to be made, and, until such repair is completed, he shall do whatever
shall be necessary to protect the public from injury by reason of the defect.
SECTION 31-5-1. Excavation Permit.
It shall be unlawful for any person or other entity to make or cause to be made any excavation
in any public street, sidewalk or right-of-way within the City, or to remove any gravel or other
similar material from any street or sidewalk, or to lay any gas pipe, water pipe, conduit, or utility of
any kind under any street, sidewalk or right-of-way, unless and until such person or entity has
obtained a valid permit from the Public Works Director, or the Public Works designee authorizing
such excavation.
SECTION 31-5-2. Excavation Permit Fee.
For all permits obtained under this section by the contractor, a non-refundable fee as per the
Cedar City Fee Schedule shall be paid prior to the receipt of a excavation permit.
SECTION 31-5-3. Excavation Conditions.
All applicants for an excavation permit must agree to comply with all permit conditions,
restrictions, regulations, requirements, and City specifications for such excavation, including but not
limited to all permit fees, bonding requirements and/or testing requirements. All such requirements
shall be complied with prior to receiving a permit unless conditions fall under Section 31-5-4.
SECTION 31-5-4. Emergency Excavation.
Except for emergencies, no excavation shall be made without agreement or authorization
from Cedar City by way of permit process. An emergency excavation may be made by a bonded
contractor without prior approval, if the excavation is to prevent loss of life, or damage to property
because the contractor or company cannot contact the Cedar City Public Works Director or his
designee in the permit process. In such emergency situations, the excavating party shall contact the
Cedar City Engineer or designee on the first working day following the excavation, and complete
a formal permit and all other requirements accompanying such permit process. Except for the prior
permit required, none of the provisions of the excavation requirements and permit process are
waived for emergency situations.
SECTION 31-5-5. Fourteen Day Closure.
All excavations opened shall be maintained in a safe manner according to all Federal, State and
Local regulations, and shall be closed no later than fourteen days after the opening of such
excavations. Such closures shall be in accordance with all regulations, specifications and standards
as outlined in the permit process, and the Cedar City Engineering Standards. (amended 12/04)
Ch. 31 Pg. 3
SECTION 31-5-6. Bond Variance.
A variance may be obtained by written application to the City Public Works Director or the
Director's approved designee. A variance may be obtained on the grounds of weather, special
conditions and/or circumstances. If curb, gutter or sidewalk is completed according to City
Engineering Standards no bond amount will be required.
SECTION 31-5-7. Fourteen Day Closure Bond
A cash bond shall be posted prior to issuance of a permit, with the Treasurer of Cedar City
in the minimum amount of $400.00 or $5.00 per square foot of excavation, which ever amount is
the greater. The cash bond posted shall be condition upon the faithful completion and closure of the
excavation within fourteen days of the opening of the excavation. In the event that the excavation
has not been closed prior to the expiration of the fourteen days, the designee shall contact the
contractor once and explain the repairs that are necessary. The contractor shall then have an
additional fourteen days to make the necessary repairs. If the repairs are not completed after the
additional fourteen day period, Cedar City shall have the absolute right to execute upon the cash
bond in order to complete and close the excavation. Said bond shall be deemed forfeited upon
execution of the same by the City. (amended 12/04)
SECTION 31-5-7A. Execution on Fourteen Day Closure Bond.
In the event that the contractor responsible for the excavation fails to fill and repair the excavation
within the time frame allotted pursuant to Section 31-5-7 or provide the necessary traffic control
devises pursuant to Section 31-7 and in compliance with the terms of the permit issued, the City may
execute on the bond posted. In the interest of health, safety and welfare of its citizens and upon
execution of the bond, the City shall have sole discretion in obtaining a qualified contractor as
expeditiously as practicable to fill, repair and/or barricade said excavation. (amended 12/04)
SECTION 31-5-8. Testing.
All excavation work shall be done in accordance with Cedar City Engineering Standards.
From time to time tests may be taken by the City to verify compliance with City Engineering
Standards. Should testing indicate non compliance with City Engineering Standards, the contractor
shall correct the excavation and bring it into conformance with the City Engineering Standards.
Initial costs of testing for compliance shall be borne by Cedar City. The permittee shall pay for all
other subsequent testing until compliance with Cedar City Engineering Standards has been met.
(amended 12/04)
SECTION 31-5-9. Restoration of Surfaces.
All street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways or other hard surfaces that must be
removed in the performance of the work shall be restored in kind by the contractor, in accordance
with the City Engineering Standards, including but not limited to saw-cutting and flush coating of
Ch. 31 Pg. 4
asphalt. Deviations from the City Engineering Standards shall be corrected. At the completion of
work, all equipment, barricades and other items shall be removed from the right-of-way. All excess
material shall be removed. Adjacent borrow pits and road shoulders used for storage of excavated
material shall be smoothed and graded to their original contour. (amended 12/04)
During the winter months, asphalt road repairs shall be filled with cold mix. Once the
warmer months arrive, the contractor is required to replace the cold mix with hot mix.
SECTION 31-5-10. Insurance.
Any individual or organization performing work within the Cedar City right-of-way shall
hold Cedar City, its elected and appointed officials, its employees and assigns and the owners and
employees of other utility companies lawfully within said right-of-way, free and harmless from all
damages caused through such operations. Any defective workmanship discovered within 18 months
of the completion of the job shall be immediately corrected. The permittee shall provide the City
with an insurance certificate covering any injuries to person or property arising out of or related to
the excavation and reparation of the Cedar City right-of-way. (amended 12/04)
SECTION 31-5-11. Eighteen Month Guarantee Bond
An additional cash bond shall be posted prior to issuance of a permit, with the Treasurer of
Cedar City in the minimum amount of $400 or $5 per square foot of excavation, whichever amount
is greater The cash bond posted shall guarantee the excavation site against any failure for up to and
including a period of 18 months from the date of final completion of the excavation. In the event of
any failure of the excavation site prior to the expiration of the 18 month guarantee period, Cedar City
will contact the excavator and require that all repairs be made within 30 days of notice. If the repairs
are not completed within those 30 days, Cedar City shall have the absolute right to execute upon the
cash bond in order to repair any failure of the excavation. Said bond shall be deemed forfeited upon
execution of the same by the City. In the event that the cost of closing an excavation normally paid
for with the Fourteen Day Closure Bond exceeds the amount of the bond, Cedar City shall also have
the right to execute upon the Eighteen Month Guarantee Bond amounts necessary to complete the
fourteen day closure of an excavation. (amended 12/04)
SECTION 31-5-12. Multiple Permits and Bonds.
Each and every excavation shall be permitted and bonded for as specified in this section. A
Fourteen Day Closure Bond and Eighteen Month Guarantee Bond in amounts sufficient to cover all
excavations by a single permittee may be posted once a year in an amount sufficient to cover all
excavations executed by the permittee. The bonds may be reviewed for adequacy any time during
the year period to determine if the amount is adequate to cover the number of excavations existing
and/or anticipated by such permittee. (amended 12/04)
SECTION 31-5-13. Bond Return
Ch. 31 Pg. 5
Upon the proper closure of the excavation within fourteen days, the permittee can request to
have their Fourteen Day Closure Bond returned. After inspection and approval of the closure the City
will return the Fourteen Day Closure bond. If the excavation repair has not failed at the conclusion
of the eighteen month guarantee period, the City will, without request, return the Eighteen Month
Guarantee Bond and any Fourteen Day Closure Bond that has not been returned. Bonds that the City
is unable to return after 3 years from the date of the excavation permit shall be forfeited. (amended
12/04)
SECTION 31-6. Excavations. Permits. Applications.
No permit for any excavation in a City street or sidewalk shall be issued until written
application has been made to the City Public Works Director signed by the party making the
excavation or by the party at whose instance it is to be made. Said application shall be made on
forms supplied by the City. Said forms shall provide that the signer of the application agrees that
the City is absolved from all liability for any injury whatsoever to any person or property caused by
said excavation and that the signer thereby accepts all liability for any such injury.
SECTION 31-7. Excavation is to be Guarded with Barricade and Light.
It shall be unlawful for any person or entity, by or for whom any excavation is made in a
public street for any purpose, to fail to cause a barricade, rail or other sufficient fence to be placed
so as to enclose such excavation, together with the dirt, gravel or other material thrown therefrom,
and to maintain such barricade during the whole time for which excavation continues. Further, it
shall be unlawful for any person to fail to have lighted lanterns or some other proper and sufficient
light fixed to parts of such barricades, and over the dirt, gravel or any other material taken therefrom,
and so capped from the beginning of twilight to the full of every night during all times such
excavation exists. It shall be unlawful for any person, maliciously or wantonly, and without legal
cause, to extinguish, remove or diminish such lights or tear down or remove any rail, fence, or
barricade fixed in accordance with the provisions of this section. (amended 12/87)
SECTION 31-8. Mandatory Notice to City of Excavation and Filling of Excavation.
Before any person or entity shall make or cause to be made any excavation in any public
street or sidewalk within the City for which a permit has been granted and bond posted, said person
or entity must notify the Street Supervisor or some other officer of the City twenty-four (24) hours
in advance of performing such excavation, said notice to include anticipated time of filling. In the
event of any emergency excavation work, notice shall be given to the City in advance by the best
notice practicable. Said filling shall be done by the person or entity making the excavation under
the direction of the Street Supervisor or other city officer. The contractor making the excavation
shall have responsibility of filling said excavation according to City Engineering Standards (pages
C3 and R4) and clearing the excavation site of all excess material and debris. (amended 12/04)
Ch. 31 Pg. 6
1. With sand or other like granular material, except for surfacing and clearing the sight of
surplus dirt; or
2. With other material in twelve (12) inch lifts, so as to bring about a compaction density of
ninety percent (90%), said density of compaction to be verified in writing by qualified expert at the
expense of excavator. (amended 12/87)
SECTION 31-9. Permit to Occupy Street with Building Material.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to occupy for use any portion of a
public street for the erection or repair of any building abutting thereon, without first making
application to and receiving from the Supervisor of Streets a permit authorizing the same. Any such
permit may be revoked by the Supervisor of Streets, at any time, when the holder thereof fails to
comply with any rule or regulation under which it is granted, or when in the opinion of the
Supervisor of Streets, the public good requires such revocation.
SECTION 31-10. Gasoline Pumps, etc. Not To Be Constructed Upon Streets or Sidewalks.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to construct or install upon any street
of Cedar City, or up any sidewalk adjacent thereto, any gasoline pump or machine of the vending
of inflammable petroleum products, or any underground storage tanks for such gasoline or other
inflammable petroleum products. Any person, firm, or corporation violating the provisions of this
section shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine in any sum not
exceeding One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding three (3) months,
or by both such fine and imprisonment. (amended 10/86)
SECTION 31-11. Obstruction of Sidewalks and Streets Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person, without consent of the City Council as hereinafter
provided for, to cause any encroachment or obstruction upon any street, alley, or sidewalk of this
City, which shall hinder the free travel of pedestrians, automobiles or other traffic along said streets
or sidewalks or which shall obstruct the view along the same.
SECTION 31-11-1. Special Events Street Closures
It shall be unlawful for any person, without consent of the City Manager or his designee, to
close any street of this City to vehicular or pedestrian traffic. A street closure authorized under this
section does not include closures or obstructions that are caused by excavations and permitted
elsewhere in this ordinance.
A. Authority.
The City Manager or his designee shall have authority to issue a permit
Ch. 31 Pg. 7
allowing the closure of city streets for parades, block parties, road races, fund
raisers, festivals, or all other special events that do not endanger the health
and welfare of the public.
B. Procedure.
(1) Prior to closing a street, the City Manager or his designee shall
coordinate with the appropriate Cedar City department heads to insure the
public health and safety is protected. The department heads must also be
consulted to evaluate the department’s ability to provide manpower and
equipment to facilitate the street closure, and the anticipated cost to each
individual department.
(2) If the proposed road closure shall totally prohibit the flow of traffic in a
residential neighborhood, the City Manager or his designee shall require the
party requesting the closure to notify the real property owners within the
residential neighborhood of the proposed road closure. Notice to the real
property owners shall be adequate if it is sent by mail, or personal service,
at least ten (10) days in advance of the closure, to each of the property
owners notifying them of the date, starting time, and ending time of the road
closure. A sworn statement shall be obtained from the party requesting the
closure certifying compliance with this section.
C. Liability and Insurance.
The City Manager or his designee shall require the sponsor of any requested
street closure to either:
1. post an insurance bond naming Cedar City, its elected and
appointed officials, its employees and assigns as additional insured,
and having one million dollars per incident and aggregate coverage,
or;
2. If the sponsor requires a waiver of liability by all of the
participants of the event that includes a waiver of the City’s liability,
then Insurance for the spectators may be available to the sponsor
through Utah Risk Management Mutual’s
(URMMA) special events policy.
D. Safety.
The City manager or his designee shall require the proponent of the street
closure to use such safety equipment, barricades, and street signs as are
reasonably necessary to notify the public of the street closure and provide for
the public safety.
E. Fees. If City employees or equipment are to be used to close the
street and/or provide for the public safety, or for related traffic control, a fee
shall be charged to reimburse the City for the cost of the City employees
Ch. 31 Pg. 8
and/or equipment. This cost shall be determined and disclosed to the
requesting party prior to issuing the permit. The City Council may, by
passing a resolution, require the payment of a non-refundable administration
fee. All fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the permit.
(Amended 5/05)
SECTION 31-11-2. Obstruction of Traffic Control Devises
In addition to Section 26-27-11, Cedar City Ordinance, governing clear view of intersecting
streets, and further in addition to Section 31-11, Cedar City Ordinance, governing obstruction of
sidewalks and streets, it shall be unlawful for any person or legal entity, without consent of the City
Council as hereinafter provided for, to cause any encroachment or obstruction upon any street, alley,
or sidewalk of this City, which obscures the view of traffic control devices in any manner whatsoever
to pedestrians, automobile drivers or other traffic along streets or sidewalks for a distance of
seventy-five (75) feet back from said traffic control device along said street and/or sidewalk. Any
such obstruction shall further be cleared to a minimum height of nine (9) feet measured from the
ground up.
This section intends to impose upon the owners of property an absolute burden of keeping
traffic control devices free of such obstructions under their direction or control. Violation of the
provisions of this section is hereby declared to be a nuisance. (Adopted 12/87)
SECTION 31-12. Riding Bicycles Upon Sidewalks Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to ride any bicycle upon any sidewalk within Cedar City.
SECTION 31-13. Unlawful to Conduct Business on Street. Exception.
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in and/or carry on any business, soliciting,
profession, trade, vocation, or avocation on any street, or sidewalk or in or from any automobile,
vehicle, stand, or structure located in or upon the streets or sidewalks of Cedar City, except upon
permission from the Cedar City Council.
SECTION 31-14. Unlawful To Use Streets or Sidewalks for Display Purposes.
It shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to use any part of the streets or
sidewalks within Cedar City for the purpose of displaying advertising signs, goods, wares or
merchandise for sale, or to park any motor vehicle thereon for the purpose of exhibiting or displaying
the same for sale, except upon permission from the City Council.
Ch. 31 Pg. 9
SECTION 31-15. Obstruction of Ditch or Gutter Unlawful.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make or place any obstruction of any kind or nature in
or upon or over any irrigation ditch or any canal or any waste ditch or in or upon any gutter situated
in or upon any street or sidewalk within the City limits of Cedar City, utah. No bridge or flume of
any kind shall be placed or installed in or upon any ditch, canal, or gutter within Cedar City, Utah,
without permission from the City Engineer being first had and obtained, and every such structure
shall be installed in accordance with the instructions of and to the satisfaction of the City Engineer.
Any obstruction or installation made in violation of the provisions of this section, may be
immediately removed by the Supervisor of Streets and any person who violates the provisions of this
section shall be subject to the general penalty hereafter and in this chapter provided for.
SECTION 31-16. Public Highway Through City.
Where public highways extend through Cedar City, they shall conform to the directions and
grade, and be subject to all regulations, of other streets within this City.
SECTION 31-17. Signs.
Repealed, by Ordinance No. 0228-07
SECTION 31-18. Kind, Size, and Location.
Repealed, by Ordinance No. 0228-07
SECTION 31-18-1. Signs, Nuisances.
Repealed, by Ordinance No. 0228-07
SECTION 31-19. Permit and Construction Standards.
Repealed, by Ordinance No. 0228-07
SECTION 31-20. Annual Inspections.
Repealed, by Ordinance No. 0228-07
SECTION 31-21. Dangerous Signs.
Repealed, by Ordinance No. 0228-07
Ch. 31 Pg. 10
SECTION 31-22. Penalty.
Any person violating any provisions of this Chapter, shall, upon conviction, be punished by
a fine in any sum not exceeding One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment not exceeding
six (6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. (amended 10/86)
AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE No. 1001-08-2
Chapter 32
Page 1 of 46
CHAPTER 32
SUBDIVISIONS
SECTION TITLE PAGE NO.
SECTION 32-1 Purpose of Ordinance 3
SECTION 32-2 Definitions 3
SECTION 32-3 Staff Sketch Review 4
SECTION 32-4 Subdivision and PUD Plats Required 5
SECTION 32-5 Lot Line Adjustments Approval Procedure 5
SECTION 32-6 Minor Lot Subdivisions Approval Procedure
(Less than 10 lots including the remainder parcel
not requiring a Plat). 8
SECTION 32-7 Platted Subdivision Approval Procedure 15
(10 Lots or More)
SECTION 32-8 Planned Unit Developments (PUD) 23
1. Purpose 23
2. Uses 23
3. Approval Procedure 23
4. PUD Development Standards and Requirements 33
SECTION 32-9 Subdivision and PUD General Requirements 36
1. General Requirements 36
A. Soils Report Compliance 36
B. Standards and Specifications 37
C. Required Subdivision Improvements 38
D. Engineering Drawings 39
E. Parks, School Sites, Other Public Space 40
F. Water Pressure 40
G. Access 40
H. Minimum Public Utility Easements on
Residential Lots 40
I. Cost Sharing of Improvements 41
J. Guarantee of Performance 43
K. City Fees 45
L. Inspection of Improvements 45
M. Improvement Schedule 45
N. As-built Drawings 46
O. Improvement Completion and Acceptance 46
P. Warrantee Period Acceptance 46
Q. Special Improvement Contracts 46
R. Amended Plats 46
S. Water Right Conveyance to the City 47
T. Enforcement and Permits 47
Chapter 32
Page 2 of 46
U. Penalty 47
V. Validity 47
Chapter 32
Page 3 of 46
SECTION 32-1. Purpose of Ordinance.
1. The underlying purpose and intent of this Ordinance is to promote the health, safety,
convenience, and general welfare of the inhabitants of Cedar City, in the matter of
subdivision of land and related matters affected by such subdivision. This Ordinance is
enacted for the further purpose of facilitating the orderly growth and development of the
City; lessening congestion in the streets; preventing the over-crowding of land; avoiding
undue concentration of population; securing economy in municipal expenditures;
facilitating adequate provisions for transportation, water, sewage, schools, parks, and
other public requirements; and stabilizing the value of property; increasing the security of
home life; and in furtherance of the Municipal Land Use, Development and Management
Act UCA §10-9a-101 et. sec.
2. Condominiums are required to comply herewith and the Condominium Ownership Act
UCA § 57-8-1, et. sec. In the event of a Planned Unit Development, compliance
herewith is mandated.
SECTION 32-2. Definitions.
1. For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
A. Arterial Street. A street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended to
serve as an arterial traffic-way and is so designated on the Master Street Plan and further
described in the Cedar City Engineering Standards.
B. Available Sewer. An existing City sewer main into which sewage from a
proposed subdivision can drain.
C. Collector Street. A street, existing or proposed, of considerable continuity which
serves or is intended to serve as the principle traffic-way between large and
separated areas or districts and which is the main means of access to an arterial
street system. As shown on Cedar City’s Streets Master Plan and further
described in the Cedar City Engineering Standards.
D. Easement. A quantity of land set aside or over which a liberty, privilege or
advantage in land without profit, existing distinct from the ownership of land, is
granted to the public or some particular person or part of the public.
E. Final Plat. A recorded plat of the land division, which has been accurately
surveyed and such survey marked on the ground so that streets, alleys, blocks, lots
and other divisions thereof can be identified. The Final Plat shall contain all
information required by State Law and City ordinance.
Chapter 32
Page 4 of 46
F. Intervening Property. Property located between the existing City utilities and
public service facilities, and the property under development.
G. Local Street. A street as defined by the Cedar City Engineering Standards,
existing or proposed which is supplementary to a collector street and of limited
continuity which serves or is intended to serve needs of a neighborhood.
H. Lot Line Adjustment. The relocation of the lot line in a platted subdivision or a
property line in an un-platted area that can be approved by the City Engineer if the
proposed lot line adjustment complies with Section 32-5 (1).
I. Meets & Bounds. The description of a lot or parcel of land by courses and
distances.
J. On-Site Facilities. Facilities installed in, under, or upon the public streets, or
rights-of-way within or on the perimeter of the subdivision or development site.
K. Off-Site Facilities. Facilities designed or located so as to serve other property
outside the boundaries of the subdivision.
L. Oversize Facility. Facilities with added capacity designed to serve other property
outside the boundaries of the subdivision or development site.
M. Preliminary Plat. A map of a proposed land division which has been prepared in
accordance with regulations herein prescribed.
N. Subdivider/Developer. A “Subdivider or Developer” is any person laying out or
making a subdivision or Planned Unit Development (PUD) respectively as set
forth above.
O. Subdivision. A subdivision and what is included and not included in a
subdivision is described in Title 10, Chapter 9a, Section 103 (52) of the Utah
Code.
SECTION 32-3. Staff Sketch Review.
1. All types of Subdivisions, PUD’s or lot line adjustment proposals shall be presented to the
City’s Staff Sketch Review Committee at the appropriate time before any City Council,
City Planning Commission or City Staff approvals are obtained.
SECTION 32-4. Subdivision and PUD Plats Required.
Chapter 32
Page 5 of 46
1. The owner or agent of the owner of any land in a subdivision or PUD, except for land
located in a recorded subdivision, shall not transfer or sell any lots or lands without first
preparing a Final Subdivision or PUD Plat, and having such Plat approved by the City
Council, and recorded in the Office of the County Recorder, for each lot so transferred or
sold. The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other
document used in the process of selling or transferring shall not exempt the transaction
from penalties outlined in Title 10, Chapter 9a, Section 611 of the Utah Code; provided,
however, that in subdivisions of less than ten lots, land may be sold by metes and bounds
without the necessity of recording a final plat, if all of the following conditions contained
herein are met:
A. The subdivision layout shall have first been approved by the Planning
Commission;
B. The subdivision is not traversed by the mapped lines of a proposed street as
shown on the Master Plan of Cedar City streets and does not require the
dedication of any land for street or other public purposes; and
C. Each lot in the subdivision meets the frontage, width and area requirements of the
Zoning Ordinance, or has been granted a variance from such requirements by the
Board of Adjustments.
SECTION 32-5. Lot Line Adjustment Approval Procedure.
1. Lot line adjustments may be approved by the City Planning Commission if they comply
with items (A) through (F) below. Lot line adjustments may be approved by the City
Engineer if they comply with all items (A) through (G) below:
A. No more than three (3) lots are affected by the lot line adjustment;
B. No City streets or easements are affected by the lot line adjustment;
C. No City street dedications or easement dedications are required by the lot line
adjustment;
D. No public infrastructure or improvements are required to be constructed and/or
dedicated to the City;
E. No land area is being added to the original total land area of the combined parcels
or the total area of the combined platted lots affected by the lot line adjustment;
F. All City zoning ordinances are complied with; and
Chapter 32
Page 6 of 46
G. The proposed lot line adjustment is not contested by any property owner included
in the proposed lot line adjustment or any property owner who was required to
receive a notice according to this section.
2. Prior to the City approving a lot line adjustment the City Engineer shall receive the
following:
A. a record of survey showing:
1. Proper scale;
2. Title block depicting the survey name, location, name of the engineer/
surveyor, the date, the scale, and the sheet number;
3. A north arrow;
4. Certificates, legal description, etc.:
a. The surveyor’s certification and stamp;
b. The property legal description depicting boundaries, lots, parcels,
easements, etc.;
c. Survey narrative;
d. Basis of bearings/elevations;
e. City zone;
f. FEMA flood zone;
g. Soils area;
h. Legend with survey monuments, signs, fire hydrants, and other
relevant data;
i. City Engineer’s approval certificate;
j. When deemed necessary by the City Engineer approvals from
utilities;
k. Vicinity map;
Chapter 32
Page 7 of 46
l. A map showing an existing layout of the affected area showing lot
lines, lot numbers, lot or parcel addresses, street lines, street
numbers, and the location and types of existing easements, and;
m. A map showing the proposed lot modifications showing lot lines, lot
line distances, line bearings, legal description, closure, lot areas, lot
frontages, lot numbers, and the identity of adjacent owners.
B. Final signed deeds showing:
1. Grantor’s name and address;
2. Grantor’s notarized signature;
3. Grantee’s name and address;
4. Parcel/lot legal description with reference to the plat being amended;
5. Parcel/lot legal description matching the record of survey;
6. Closure of the legal description; and
7. Deed restriction, if any.
3. At least 14 days prior to the City making the decision to approve a lot line adjustment a
public notice shall be provided as follows:
A. Notice shall state the following:
A lot line adjustment is being proposed on a property within 300-feet of your
property. The exact location and details of the proposed lot line adjustment are
shown on the enclosed drawing(s). (Include 11" X 17" copies of the required record
of survey maps). Objections to the proposed lot line adjustment will be received
by the City Engineer until 5:00 p.m. on / / (specify date). If no
objections are received by the specified date and time the matter will be approved
by the City Engineer without further public process. If an objection is received by
set date the City Engineer will schedule the matter for the public meeting of the
Cedar City Planning Commission for their review and possible approval.
B. Notice shall be delivered as follows:
The notice by the Applicant shall be given to all property owners of record within
a 300-foot radius from the boundary of the proposed lot line adjustment. Notice
shall be sent certified mail by the Applicant to said property owners, or handdelivered
to the property owners (certificate of hand-delivery to be filed with City
Engineer) in accordance with the most current Iron County Assessment Roll.
Chapter 32
Page 8 of 46
4. Prior to the City Planning Commission Chair or City Engineer signing the approved record
of survey, and stamping and signing the deeds, the City Engineer shall collect the filing fee
and plat checking fee at a rate to be set by the City’s consolidated fee schedule.
5. Once the Planning Commission Chair or City Engineer has signed the record of survey and
stamped and signed the deeds, the lot line adjustment shall be deemed approved. The
approval shall be valid as provided by the provisions of this ordinance. The deeds and
record of survey shall be returned to either the title company or the applicant for recording
with the Iron County Surveyor and Iron County Recorder.
6. A lot line adjustment shall not require compliance with the following provisions of this
ordinance; bonding, submission of as-built and/or construction drawings, inspections, soils
testing, water pressure minimums, and required improvements.
SECTION 32-6. Minor Lot Subdivision Approval Procedure (Less than 10 lots including
the remainder parcel, not requiring a Plat).
Step 1. Discuss Proposed Subdivision with City Engineer. Any person wishing to
subdivide within Cedar City, Utah, shall secure from the City Engineer
information pertaining to the City's plan of streets, sewer, water, drainage, parks,
trails, zoning, subdivision of lands, other master plan requirements affecting the
land to be subdivided, and the required water conveyance to the City according to
Section 32-9-19. Subdivider shall also be informed that multiple, contiguous
minor lot subdivisions shall not be allowed.
Step 2. Determine the type of minor lot subdivision and requirements. There are two (2)
types of minor lot subdivision, a simple minor lot subdivision and a detailed
minor lot subdivision as defined below:
1. Simple minor lot subdivisions shall consist of the minor lot subdivisions
where the minor lot subdivision meets one or more of the following
criteria:
a. The subdivision is in a residential zone and all lots front a
dedicated public street that is completely improved with curb,
gutter, sidewalk, asphalt, water mains, sewer mains, and storm
drains, but may not have sewer and water service laterals, and
there are less than (10) lots including the remainder parcel:
b. The subdivision is in an industrial or commercial zone and all lots
that front a dedicated public street, the street is completely
improved with curb, gutter, sidewalk, asphalt, water mains, sewer
mains, and storm drains, but may not have sewer and water service
Chapter 32
Page 9 of 46
laterals, and there are less than (10) lots including the remainder
parcel:
c. The subdivision is in an industrial or commercial zone and all lot
frontages along unimproved dedicated public streets are more than
two hundred (200) feet and there are less than (10) lots including
the remainder parcel.
2. Detailed minor lot subdivisions shall consist of those minor lot
subdivisions where:
a. The subdivision is in a residential zone and one or more of the lot
frontages is not completely improved with required curb, gutter,
sidewalk, asphalt, water mains, sewer mains, and storm drains, and
there are less than (10) lots including the remainder parcel:
b. The subdivision is in an industrial or commercial zone and one or
more of the lots that front a dedicated public street that is not
completely improved with required curb, gutter, sidewalk, asphalt,
water mains, sewer mains, and storm drains and there are less than
(10) lots including the remainder parcel:
c. The subdivision is in an industrial or commercial zone and one or
more of the lot frontages along unimproved dedicated public
streets are less than two hundred (200) feet and there are less than
(10) lots including the remainder parcel.
Step 3. Vicinity Plan. (Only required for detailed minor lot subdivisions) The
subdivider shall then prepare a Vicinity Plan at a scale of not
smaller than 1 inch = 100 feet, and shall submit a copy of the same to
the City Engineers. The Vicinity Plan shall show:
1. A small map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to existing
City roads and recognizable landmarks;
2. The general layout and numbering of the lots and remaining parcel within
the area to be subdivided and how the lots connect with existing adjoining
streets and lots;
3. The lot frontages (in lineal feet) and areas (in square feet) of the lots
within the subdivision;
Chapter 32
Page 10 of 46
4. The location of existing and proposed main water lines, main sewer lines,
and storm drain facilities within the land to be subdivided and the adjoined
existing streets;
5. The locations of existing building(s) on the property being subdivided:
6. A title block containing the subdivision name, subdivider’s name and the
name, address, and phone number of the subdivider’s engineer;
7. City zoning designation and boundaries within the subdivision;
8. FEMA flood zone designation and boundaries within the subdivision;
9. Soils area designation;
10. Survey monuments, and;
11. Names of the adjacent property owners.
Step 4. Vicinity Plan City Engineer Approval. (Only required for detailed minor lot
subdivisions) The City Engineering Staff shall Review and Approve the Vicinity
Plan before submitting to the Planning Commission for review.
Step 5. File Planning Commission Application and Fees. For both simple and detailed
minor lot subdivisions the subdivider shall submit an application to the City
Engineer and pay the applicable Planning Commission and filing fees according
to the City’s adopted fee schedule. Pursuant to the provisions of Title 10, Chapter
9a, Section 509, of the Utah Code, upon submission of a complete application and
payment of filing fees the Subdivider or Developer is entitled to substantive
review of their application under the land use laws currently in effect.
Step 6. Vicinity Plan Planning Commission Approval. (Only required for detailed minor
lot subdivisions) The Planning Commission shall review and approve the vicinity
plan or approve it subject to changes or alterations. Whenever final approval has
been obtained from the Planning Commission the Vicinity Plan approval shall
remain effective for a period of Two (2) years.
Step 7. Soil Report Approval and Compliance. (only required for detailed minor lots
subdivision), See Section 32-9(1).
Step 8. Engineering Drawings. (Only required for detailed minor lots subdivision). See
Section 32-9(4)
Chapter 32
Page 11 of 46
Step 9. Improvement Cost Estimate. (Only required for detailed minor lots subdivision.)
The subdivider shall prepare and submit to the City Engineer an improvement
cost estimate for all improvements shown on the engineering drawings including
a 3% markup for Construction Management and a 0.5% markup for testing.
Step 10. City Engineer’s Approval of the Engineering Drawings and Cost Estimate. (Only
required for detailed minor lots subdivision.) The City Engineer shall review and
approve, or recommend changes consistent with City ordinances and adopted
standards, to the proposed detailed minor lot subdivision’s engineering drawings,
soils report, design study reports and improvement cost estimate.
Step 11. Minor Lot Subdivision Final Plan and Deeds. Upon receiving the Planning
Commission’s approval of the Vicinity Plan for a detailed minor lot subdivision
and the City Engineer’s approval of the engineering drawings, soils report, design
study reports and improvement cost estimate for a detailed minor lot subdivision,
for both simple and detailed minor lot subdivisions the subdivider shall prepare
and submit to the City Engineer one copy of the Final Plan and Deeds both in
hard copy and electronic PDF format. Failure to submit a Final Plan of a detailed
minor lot subdivision within two (2) years of the date of approval of the Vicinity
Plan shall terminate all proceedings and render all approval of the Vicinity Plan
and Engineering drawings null and void.
The following information shall be submitted as part of the Final Plan:
1. A Final Plan shall be in the form of a Record of Survey that shall contain
the following information:
a. The location of the subdivision in relation to existing City streets
and recognizable landmarks;
b. The layout of streets and lots within the area to be subdivided and
how those streets and lots connect with existing streets within the
subdivision including;
1. Centerline bearings;
2. Curve data;
3. Widths;
4. Street names and/or street numbers;
5. Section corner tie;
Chapter 32
Page 12 of 46
6. Right-of-way markers on state roads;
7. Centerline monuments;
8. Set and/or found corners, and;
9. Other such information that may be necessary to fully and
fairly describe the road;
c. Parcel information for both new and remaining parcels including,
but not limited to the following:
1. Distances;
2. Bearings;
3. Legal description;
4. Closure of the parcels;
5. The square footage of each parcel;
6. The frontage length of each lot along a dedicated City
Street;
7. Parcel numbers;
8. Other similar information related to the subdivision of the
parcel, and;
9. Parcel addresses.
d. Detailed information including distances, monument tie, parcel
line tie, bearings, and boundaries for the airport overlay zone;
e. The relationship of existing and planned streets within 200 feet
from the outside boundaries of the entire subdivision;
f. The locations and sizes of the main water lines, main sewer lines,
and storm drain facilities within the subdivision and within 200
feet of the boundary of the subdivision;
g. The location of any proposed and existing parks, open space, and
trails within the land to be subdivided;
Chapter 32
Page 13 of 46
h. A title block containing the subdivider’s name and the name,
address, and phone number of the subdivider’s engineer;
i. Surveyor’s stamp and certification;
j. Legal descriptions of the boundary and each parcel;
k. Survey narrative;
l. Basis of bearings, monuments, and elevations;
m. City zoning designation and boundaries within the subdivision;
n. FEMA flood zone designation and boundaries within the
subdivision;
o. Soils area designation;
p. Survey monuments;
q. If required, a certificate showing the acknowledgment and
approval of the Electric Company, Gas Company, Telephone
Company, Cable Company, and other private providers of public
utilities;
r. City Engineer’s approval certificate;
s. City Attorney’s approval certificate (Detailed Minor Lot
Subdivisions only);
t. A certificate for the Planning Commission’s approval;
u. Show the building(s) existing on the property, and describe how
these buildings(s) meet the following:
1. Structural independence;
2. Separate water service;
3. Separate sewer service;
4. Required setbacks;
Chapter 32
Page 14 of 46
5. Required parking;
6. Fencing;
7. Landscape, curb, gutter, and sidewalk; and
8. Any other requirement that may apply to the subdivision.
v. List the names of the adjacent property owners;
2. Signed and notarized recordable deeds necessary to transfer title to all lots
and any easements associated with the minor lot subdivision.
Step 12. Final Plan and Deeds City Surveyor’s Review. For both simple and detailed
minor lot subdivisions the City Surveyor shall check the final plan and deeds for
accuracy and completeness. The corrected final plan shall then be a plotted
original on 24" X 36" mylar signed and stamped by the Surveyor and signed by
all utilities if required, and then given to the City Engineer for his/her approval
and signature.
Step 13. Performance Bonding and Fees. (Only required for detailed minor lot
subdivisions), See Section 32-9(10 &11).
Step 14. Filing Fee Collection by the City Engineer. (Only required for simple minor lot
subdivisions.) Upon receiving the filing fees and approving the final plan and
signed and notarized deeds the City Engineer shall schedule simple minor lot
subdivisions for review and approval by the Planning Commission.
Step 15. Bonding and Fee Collection by the City Attorney. (Only required for detailed
minor lots subdivision.) Upon receiving the final plan, signed and notarized
deeds, bond estimate and accrued review fees from the City Engineer for detailed
minor lot subdivisions only, the City Attorney shall collect the required bonding
amount, signed bond agreement and required fees and schedule the detailed minor
lot subdivision for review and approval by the Planning Commission.
Step 16. Minor Lot Subdivision Planning Commission Approval. Upon reviewing the
final plan and deeds for a simple or detailed minor lot subdivision, the Planning
Commission shall review and approve or disapprove the layout of the subdivision,
or approve it subject to change or alteration. If the minor lot subdivision is
approved, the record of survey shall be signed by the Planning Commission
chairperson. Any deeds for the minor lot subdivision shall be stamped and signed
by the Planning Commission Chair. The record of survey shall be filed with the
Iron County Engineering and Surveying Office. The deeds shall be recorded with
the Iron County Recorder. All recording shall be completed by the Subdivider.
Chapter 32
Page 15 of 46
This section amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 1014-15.
Section 32-7 Platted Subdivision Approval Procedure (10 Lots or More).
Step 1. Discuss Proposed Subdivision with City Staff. Any person wishing to subdivide
land within Cedar City, which requires the submission of a Final Plat, the
subdivider shall secure from the City Engineer information pertaining to the City's
plan of streets, sewer, water, drainage, parks, trails, zoning, subdivision of land,
and other Master Plan requirements and the required water right conveyance to
the City according to 32-9-19.
Step 2. Vicinity Plan. The subdivider shall then prepare a Vicinity Plan at a scale of not
smaller than 1 inch = 100 feet, and shall submit one (1) copy of the same to the
City Engineer. The vicinity Plan shall show:
1. A small map showing the location of the subdivision in relation to existing City roads
and recognizable landmarks;
2. The general layout of streets and lots within the area to be subdivided and how the
streets and lots connect with existing or proposed streets and lots within all phases of
the subdivision;
3. The lot frontages (in lineal feet) and areas (in square feet) of the lots within the
subdivision;
4. The relationship of existing and master planned streets within 500 feet from the
outside boundaries of the entire subdivision;
5. The location of existing and proposed main water lines, main sewer lines, and storm
drain facilities within the land to be subdivided;
6. The relationship of the main water lines, main sewer lines, and storm drain facilities
to those existing or proposed main water lines, main sewer lines, and storm drain
facilities within all phases of the subdivision;
7. The location of existing or proposed master planned main water lines, main sewer
lines, and storm drain facilities within 500 feet from the outside boundaries of the
entire subdivision;
8. The location of any existing and proposed and master planned parks, open space, and
trails within the land to be subdivided;
Chapter 32
Page 16 of 46
9. Elevation contours at 2-foot intervals on NGVD 1929 Datum.
10. A title block containing the subdivision name, subdivider’s name and the name,
address, and phone number of the subdivider’s engineer;
11. City zoning designation and boundaries within the subdivision;
12. FEMA flood zone designation and boundaries within the subdivision;
13. Soils area designation;
14. Survey monuments;
15. List of names of the adjacent property owners on their property.
Step 3. Vicinity Plan City Engineer Approval. The City Engineering Staff shall review or
recommend changes consistent with adopted City ordinances, engineering standards
and City master plans; and approve the Vicinity Plan before submitting to the
Planning Commission for review.
Step 4. File Planning Commission Application and Fees. Submit application to the City
Engineer and pay the applicable Planning Commission and filing fees according to
the City’s adopted fee schedule. Pursuant to the provisions of Title 10, Chapter 9a,
Section 509, of the Utah Code, upon submission of a complete application and
payment of filing fees the Subdivider or Developer is entitled to substantive review of
their application under the land use laws currently in effect.
Step 5. Vicinity Plan Planning Commission Approval. The Planning Commission shall
review and give a positive or negative recommendation of the vicinity plan or
recommend it to the City Council subject to changes or alterations. Where a
subdivider owns or controls more land than is desired to be developed immediately,
the Planning Commission or City Council may require that a Vicinity Plan of the
whole area or a portion thereof be submitted, in which case the subdivider shall
indicate on the Vicinity Plan the portion to be developed immediately, and the portion
to be held for future development.
Step 6. Vicinity Plan City Council Approval. Upon receiving the Planning Commission’s
recommendation, the Vicinity Plan shall be submitted to the City Council. The City
Council may approve or disapprove the Vicinity Plan, or approve it subject to
changes and alterations. Failure to submit a Final Plat within two (2) years of the
Chapter 32
Page 17 of 46
date of approval of the Vicinity Plan shall terminate all proceedings and render all
approval of the Vicinity Plan null and void.
Step 7. Preliminary Plan. Upon approval of the Vicinity Plan by the City Council, the
subdivider shall prepare a Preliminary Plan of the subdivision and shall submit one
(1) copy of the same for review and approval to the City Engineer. The preliminary
plan shall include the following information;
1. A title block containing:
a. The name of the subdivision;
b. The location of the subdivision;
c. The date;
d. The scale;
e. The name of the engineer and/or surveyor;
f. Sheet number;
2. A north arrow;
3. The subdivision boundary with length and bearings;
4. Section tie including;
a. Monuments;
b. Line bearing/lengths;
c. Basis of bearings;
5. Adjacent owner names;
6. Names and widths of existing streets within 200 feet of the subdivision;
7. Existing culverts, channels, and basins;
8. City zoning designation and boundaries within the subdivision;
9. FEMA flood zones including zone designations, zone boundaries within the
subdivision and flood elevations in NAVD 1929 datum;
Chapter 32
Page 18 of 46
10. Existing contours at 2 foot intervals;
11. Existing waterlines, valves, hydrants, and sizes within 200 feet;
12. Existing sewer lines, sizes, flow direction, and manholes within 200 feet;
13. Existing buildings within the subdivision;
14. Existing easements;
15. Proposed streets inside and outside the subdivision including;
a. Name and/or number (no duplicates with streets within Iron County);
b. Length and bearings;
c. Widths;
d. Intersection fillets;
16. Proposed water mains, locations, sizes, valving, and fire hydrants inside and
outside the subdivision;
17. Proposed sewer lines, location, sizes, manholes inside and outside the
subdivision;
18. Proposed drainage system, line location, line sizes, manholes, curb inlets/outlets,
channels and basins within or adjacent to the subdivision;
19. Property easements for gas, water, sewer, phone, fiber, avigation, off-site utilities,
and trails within the subdivision;
20. Lot information including border lines (lengths and bearings), lot numbers,
lot areas in square footage and lot frontage lengths;
21. Location map;
Step 8. Soil Testing and Report Approval. See Section 32-9(1).
Step 9. Engineering Drawings. See Section 32-9(4).
Step 10. Improvement Costs Estimate. The subdivider shall prepare and submit to the City
Engineer an improvement cost estimate for all improvements shown on the
Chapter 32
Page 19 of 46
engineering drawings including a 3% markup for Construction Management and a
0.5% markup for testing.
Step 11. Preliminary Plan and Engineering Drawings City Engineer Approval. The City
Engineer shall review or recommend changes consistent with adopted City
ordinances, engineering standards and City master plans; and approve the
proposed Subdivision’s Preliminary plan, Engineering drawing, soils report,
design study reports and improvement cost estimate.
Step 12. Final Plat. Once a submitted preliminary plan, engineering drawings, soils
reports, design study reports and the improvement cost estimate have been
checked and approved by the City Engineer the subdivision can proceed with the
Final Plat process. The subdivider shall then prepare and submit a copy of the
final plat of the subdivision to the City Engineer. Failure to submit a Final Plat
within two (2) years of the date of approval of the Vicinity Plan, and/or
Engineering drawings, whichever is later, shall terminate all proceedings and
render all approval of the Vicinity Plan, preliminary plan and Engineering
drawings null and void.
The following information shall be submitted with the final plat:
1. A title report showing all water rights within the last 3 years that show the
property as the point of use.
2. The final plat shall contain the following information:
a. Title block including the subdivision name, subdivision location, date, scale,
the identity and contact information for the engineer/ surveyor, and sheet
numbering;
b. A north arrow;
c. Boundary legal description matching the preliminary plan that closes, and the
total subdivision area expressed in terms of acres;
d. Section ties including monuments, line bearing/length, and basis of bearing;
e. Existing and platted streets including street names, street widths, and center
line monuments;
f. Existing and proposed occupation (fence) lines;
g. Existing easements;
Chapter 32
Page 20 of 46
h. Proposed street information including names and/or numbers, length/bearings,
width, curve numbers and data table;
i. Proposed easement information including location of all utility easements
(utility easements include but are not limited to gas, water, sewer, phone,
cable, fiber), location of mail boxes, size of easements, and all off-site
easements;
j. Lot information including border lines, lengths/bearings, numbers, areas
expressed in both acres and square feet, addresses;
k. A vicinity map;
l. The airport overlay zone;
m. Airport avigation easements in any approach zone including the boundary of
the easement, the bearings/distance of the easement, monument ties, and lot
line ties;
n. If applicable, twin home lot division line;
o. FEMA flood zones including zone designations, zone boundaries and flood
elevations in NAVD 1929 datum;
p. A soils notice stating words to the effect that a soils report has been required
for the subdivision and that a copy of the report is available for review and
inspection at the offices of the City Engineer;
q. Insufficient sewer depth note;
r. Other such information that is reasonable in the City Engineer’s opinion based
on adopted City ordinances, engineering standards and City master plans and
the unique aspects of the subdivision.
s. Approval certificates for the following:
1. All utility companies (utility companies include but are not limited to
gas, electric, telephone, cable television, post office, and fiber);
2. Surveyor;
3. Notarized owner’s signature and dedication;
Chapter 32
Page 21 of 46
4. City Engineer;
5. City Attorney;
6. Planning Commission Chairperson (referencing the Planning
Commission’s approval of the vicinity plan);
7. Mayor;
8. City Recorder; and
9. County Recorder.
Step 13. Engineer’s Approval. The City Surveyor and Engineer shall check the final plat
copies for accuracy and completeness, and shall determine the amount of bond or
other performance guarantee, which shall be based upon the estimate of the cost
of supplying and installing the required improvements as provided by the
subdivider’s Engineer. The City Engineer shall calculate the City fees to be paid,
and the required amount of water that needs to be conveyed to the City necessary
to comply with the City’s Water Acquisition Ordinance prior to final plat
approval. The corrected Final Plat shall then be a plotted inked original on 24" X
36" mylar signed and stamped by the Surveyor and signed and notarized by the
owners, and signed by all utilities and then given to the City Engineer for his/her
approval and signature. Upon calculation and/or approval of the bond amount,
required City fees and water conveyance quantity the City Engineer shall forward
all information to the City Attorney for collection and the scheduling of the matter
for City Council review.
Step 14. Performance Bond, Fees, Title Report, Bond Agreement, Reimbursement
Agreement, CC&R’s, Water Conveyance, and other matters. Upon the City
Attorney receiving the Final Plat and other information from the City Engineer
the subdivider shall provide the following to the City Attorney for review and
approval prior to the City Attorney scheduling the matter for Final Plat approval
by the City Council:
1. Performance bonding as described in Section 32-9(10) guaranteeing the required
improvements will be installed and paid for without cost to the City;
2. A title report. The title report is to be reviewed to verify ownership, taxes, including
green belt roll back taxes, and special improvement district assessments are current, and
to examine the liens that are on the property. All ownership in the title report must match
Chapter 32
Page 22 of 46
the ownership on the plat. All taxes, including green belt roll back taxes, and special
improvement assessments must be current;
3. Payment of all fees owed to the City pursuant to the City’s adopted fee schedule. The
fees shall include but not be limited to Planning Commission filing fee, plat and plan
checking fees, pre-plat approval construction fees, utility line reimbursement fees, lift
station up-grade fees, recording fees, inspection fees and water assessment fees;
4. If requested by the subdivider, an off-site utility extension reimbursement agreement
shall be prepared by the City Attorney and signed by the subdivider;
5. Documentation of all conveyances of water rights to the City according to Section 32-9-
19;
6. Original CC&R’s ready for recording as deemed necessary by the City;
7. All outstanding matters must be completed prior to scheduling for City Council approval.
These matters include but are not limited to the matters described above, Attorney letters
certifying compliance with the Utah Condominium Act, verification of original deeds for
easements, and any other matter that is required by the subdivision of the land.
Step 15. Final Plat Must Be Approved or Disapproved by City Council. After approved by
the City Engineer and City Attorney, whichever approval is later, the Final Plat
must be approved or disapproved by the City Council within 60 days of such
approval. Upon approval of the Final Plat by the City Council, the City shall
submit the Final Plat Mylar to the County Recorder for recording. All Final Plats
must be recorded in the office of the Iron County Recorder not more than 30 days
from the date of approval of the Final Plat by the City Council. A Final Plat of
any subdivision which is not recorded within 30 days from the date of approval of
the City Council shall be null and void unless a longer period of time is approved
by the City Council. Recordation of the Final Plat shall be deemed as acceptance
of the dedication of any street, public way or ground.
Section 32-8 Planned Unit Developments (PUD).
1. Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Unit Development (PUD) is to allow for flexible
and efficient utilization of land in residential, industrial and commercial developments
(consolidation of open spaces, clustering of dwelling units and efficient use of public
facilities). It is intended that a PUD create attractive and desirable environments.
2. Uses.
Chapter 32
Page 23 of 46
A. PUD’s shall be utilized in the process of annexing developed property where said
development does not meet City Engineering Standards; in such case, the City
reserves the right to require conversion of such developed property to a PUD as a
condition of annexation.
B. PUD’s may be allowed in residential, commercial and industrial zones, and the
PUD development plan shall become supplementary to the provisions of the zone
in which the PUD is located.
C. PUD’s shall only be developed as residential attached town home and
condominium developments, gated single and multi-unit residential communities
and commercial and industrial developments. Un-gated single unit housing
developments shall not be allowed to develop as a PUD except for additional
phases that are contiguous with and part of an existing PUD or to facilitate the
annexation of developed property where the City owned and maintained
improvements do not meet Cedar City Engineering Standards.
D. Uses permitted in the PUD shall be limited to those uses permitted in the zone in
which the PUD is allowed.
E. Conversion of existing buildings to a PUD shall conform to existing building
codes and the provisions of this chapter.
3. Approval Procedure. The following is the procedure for PUD approval with specifics for
each step set forth:
Step 1. Discuss Proposed PUD with City Engineer. Any person wishing to develop a
PUD within Cedar City shall secure from the City Engineer information
pertaining to the City’s plan of streets, parks, drainage, zoning, subdivision of
land, and other Master Plan requirements affecting the land to be subdivided.
Step 2. File Planning Commission Application and Fees. The filing fee required for a
PUD is per the City’s adopted fee schedule and shall be submitted with the
Planning Commission application. Pursuant to the provisions of Title 10, Chapter
9a, Section 509, of the Utah Code, upon submission of a complete application and
payment of filing fees the City will consider the Subdivider or Developer entitled
to substantive review of their application under the land use laws currently in
effect.
Step 3. Vicinity Plan. The developer shall then prepare a Vicinity Plan of the PUD and
present the same to the City Engineer. The Vicinity Plan shall be drawn to a scale
not smaller than 60 feet to the inch, and be on standard 24" X 36" paper. Each
sheet of the Plan shall contain the scale of the drawing, the sheet number and an
Chapter 32
Page 24 of 46
arrow indicating north. The Vicinity Plan shall also contain the following
information:
1. The proposed name of the development;
2. Where the submitted plan covers only a part of the development’s tract, or
is part of a larger vacant area, the plan shall show the location of the
development as it forms part of a larger tract. In such case, a sketch of the
prospective street system of the remaining area shall be submitted;
3. A vicinity map containing sufficient information to accurately locate the
property shown on the vicinity map;
4. The names and addresses of the owner(s), the developer, the engineer and
surveyor of the development;
5. The boundary lines of the tract to be developed;
6. City zoning designation and boundaries within the PUD;
7. FEMA flood zone designation and boundaries within the PUD;
8. The unit or lot dimensions and square footage of each unit or lot;
9. Existing curbs, gutters, sidewalks, sanitary sewers and manholes, storm
drains and manholes, water supply main valves, culverts, and fire hydrants
within the tract or within 200 feet of the proposed PUD (the dimensions of
all such improvements shall also be indicated);
10. The location, width and other dimensions of proposed curbs, gutters,
sidewalks, streets, easements, parks, and other open spaces, and
designation of any land to be dedicated to the City;
11. The location of all existing or recorded streets, alleys and easements,
water courses, ditches, public utilities and other important features, and
existing structures within the development or within 200 feet thereof, and
the location and distance to the nearest existing bench mark or monument
and section line;
12. Boundary lines of adjacent tracts of land, showing ownership and property
monuments;
13. A tabulation of each proposed use by acreage and its percentage of the
total acreage;
Chapter 32
Page 25 of 46
14. Parks, playgrounds, common areas and facilities, and other appurtenances
within the PUD;
15. Location of all dwellings and other structures within the development, the
common areas, and other areas of private ownership;
16. The following shall also be submitted with the Vicinity Plan:
a. Any request for proposed zone change if necessary;
b. An overall Project Analysis describing the concepts the developer
proposes to implement with the project development, including but
not limited to:
1. An expected buyer profile, including selling price range of
units.
2. Project description indicating the general configuration for
the project (i.e., single family, townhouses, condominiums,
etc.) with the proposed plan for landscaping, mailboxes,
street lighting, and walkways.
3. Proposed budget for common area amenities and
landscaping, and infrastructure, including construction, as
well as operations and maintenance projections; and
4. Project construction phasing and time schedule, for
infrastructure; landscaping, buildings, amenities, etc.
c. Identification of all variations to the development standards of the
underlying zone, including, but not limited to:
1. Road widths and street setbacks, according to City
Standards;
2. Location of buildings and structure or front, side, and rear
yard setback requirements;
3. Lot area requirement (lot size and width);
4. Building sizes (minimum and/or maximum ground floor
and multi-level); and,
Chapter 32
Page 26 of 46
5. Building heights (maximum); and
6. Supplementary regulations or special provisions.
Step 4. Public Notification. Any application for a PUD must comply with the following
notice requirements five (5) business days prior to the Planning Commission
Work Meeting for the Vicinity Plan:
1. Notice by the Petitioner shall be given to all property owners of record
within a 300-foot radius from the boundary of the proposed PUD. Said
notice shall be sent certified mail by the Petitioner to said property
owners, or hand-delivered to the property owners (certificate of handdelivery
to be filed with City Engineer) in accordance with the most
current Iron County Assessment Roll;
2. The posting of a sign(s) by the City on the proposed PUD site. The sign(s)
shall be posted in a conspicuous place at all points where City Streets
intersect, within 10-feet of the street right-of-way line. The sign(s) shall
be at least 24 inches square and be labeled with 2-inch high letters reading
“PROPOSED PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT” with the PUD notice
stapled below, and;
3. When reviewing the Vicinity Plan of a PUD the Planning Commission
shall hold a public hearing (requiring appropriate notice and advertising)
before submitting recommendations to the City Council.
Step 5. Vicinity Plan Planning Commission Recommendation. After approval by the City
Engineer, the Planning Commission shall review and recommend or not
recommend the PUD Vicinity Plan to the City Council, or recommend it subject
to changes or alterations. The Planning Commission may recommend in concept
the Vicinity Plan provided they find:
1. That the proposed development will provide an environment at least as
attractive as would be provided by a conventional development
established under the application of the provisions of the underlying zone;
2. That the PUD project will provide efficient use of the land and useable
open space as outlined in this chapter;
3. Before the Planning Commission meeting the developer shall also present
the Vicinity Plan of the PUD to the City Sketch Review Board for their
comments, with said comments reported to the Planning Commission;
Chapter 32
Page 27 of 46
4. That any variation allowed from the development standards of the
underlying zones are clearly identified and do not create unreasonable
hazards to the health, safety and general welfare of the residents of the
proposed PUD and adjacent areas.
Step 6. Vicinity Plan City Council Approval. Upon receiving the Planning Commission’s
recommendation the Vicinity Plan shall be submitted to the City Council. The
City Council may approve or disapprove the Vicinity Plan, or approve it subject to
changes and alterations. Failure to submit a Final Plat of the PUD within two (2)
years of the date of approval of the Vicinity Plan shall terminate all proceedings
and render all approval of the Vicinity Plan null and void. Where a developer
owns or controls more land than is desired to be developed immediately, the
Planning Commission or City Council may require that a Vicinity Plan of the
whole area or a portion thereof be submitted, in which case the developer shall
indicate on the Vicinity Plan the portion to be developed immediately, and the
portion to be held for future development.
Step 7. Preliminary Plan. Upon approval of the Vicinity Plan by the City Council, the
Developer shall prepare a Preliminary Plan of the PUD and shall submit two (2)
copies of the same for review and approval to the City Engineer. The preliminary
plan shall include the following information;
1. A title block containing:
a. The name of the PUD;
b. The location of the PUD;
c. The date;
d. The scale;
e. The name of the engineer and/or surveyor;
f. Sheet number;
2. A north arrow;
3 The PUD boundary with length and bearings.
4. Section tie including;
a. Monuments;
Chapter 32
Page 28 of 46
b. Line bearing/lengths;
c. Basis of bearings;
5. Adjacent owner names;
6. Names and widths of existing streets within 200 feet of the PUD;
7. Existing culverts, channels, and basins;
8. City zoning designation and boundaries within the PUD;
9. FEMA flood zone designation and boundaries within the PUD;
10. Existing contours at 2 foot intervals;
11. Existing waterlines, valves, hydrants, and sizes within 200 feet;
12. Existing sewer lines, sizes, flow direction, and manholes within 200 feet;
13. Existing buildings within the PUD;
14. Existing easements within the PUD;
15. Proposed streets including;
a. Name and/or number (no duplicates with streets within Iron
County);
b. Length and bearings;
c. Widths;
d. Intersection fillets;
16. Proposed water mains, locations, sizes, valving, and fire hydrants;
17. Proposed sewer lines, location, sizes, manholes;
18. Proposed drainage system, line location, line sizes, manholes, curb inlets/outlets,
channels and basins;
19. Property easements for gas, water, sewer, phone, fiber, avigation, off-site utilities,
and trails;
Chapter 32
Page 29 of 46
20. Lot and unit information including border lines (lengths and bearings), lot or unit
numbers, area in square footage;
21. Location map;
Step 8. Soil Testing and Report Approval. See Section 32-9(1).
Step 9. Engineering Drawings. See Section 32-9(4).
Step 10. Improvement Costs Estimate. The Developer shall prepare and submit to the City
Engineer separate improvement cost estimates for the private and City owned and
maintained improvements as shown on the engineering drawings including a 3%
markup for Construction Management and a 0.5% markup for testing.
Step 11. Preliminary Plan and Engineer Drawings City Engineer Approval. The City
Engineer shall review and approve the proposed PUD’s Preliminary plan,
Engineering drawing, soils report, design study reports and improvement cost
estimate.
Step 12. Final Plat. Once a submitted preliminary plan, engineering drawings, soils
reports, design study reports and the improvement cost estimate have been
checked and approved by the City Engineer the PUD can proceed with the Final
Plat process. The developer shall then prepare and submit a copy of the Final Plat
of the subdivision to the City Engineer. The Final Plat shall contain the following
information:
1. The name of the development;
2. A north arrow, the scale of the drawing and the date of preparation of the plat;
3. All lot or unit sizes, which shall be indicated by square feet;
4. Accurately drawn boundaries showing the proper bearings and dimensions of all
boundary lines of the PUD, (properly tied by reference to a public survey monument -
these lines shall be heavier than street and lot lines);
5. The names, widths, lengths, bearings and curve data of said streets, public utility and
irrigation easements, and the boundaries, bearings and dimensions of all portions
within the subdivisions intended to be dedicated to the use of the public, and the lines,
dimensions, bearings and numbers of all units, lots, blocks and parts reserved within
the PUD (all lot, blocks and streets shall be numbered in accordance with the street
numbering system adopted by the City);
Chapter 32
Page 30 of 46
6. A licensed land surveyor’s “Certificate of Survey”;
7. The description of the boundaries of the development together with a certification by
the Subdivider’s engineer or land surveyor stating that the lots and units described
fully comply with the requirements of this ordinance;
8. The owner’s Certificate of Public and Private Dedications as required by Cedar City;
9. The signature of every person who owns property within the development and a
notary public’s acknowledgment of all signatures;
10. A signature line of the Planning Commission Chair;
11. A signature line for the Mayor and City Recorder;
12. A signature line for the City Engineer and City Attorney;
13. A signature line for all utility companies and the postal service;
14. A notice of all covenants, conditions and other restrictions which may be relevant and
applicable to the property contained in the plat;
15. Designation of common areas and private ownership areas;
16. Identification of common landscaped areas, parking areas, driveways and other
features required by this section;
17. Footprint drawings of all buildings and building elevations where required;
18. City zoning designation and boundaries within the PUD;
19. FEMA flood zone designation and boundaries within the PUD;
20. Plat restrictions, lot restrictions and other information required by the Planning
Commission and/or City Council;
21. Other such information that is reasonable in the City Engineer’s opinion based on
adopted City ordinances, engineering standards and City master plans and the unique
aspects of the subdivision; and
Chapter 32
Page 31 of 46
22. In the case of a PUD/Condominium project, the preliminary plat shall so indicate and
comply with step 15 at final plat.
Step 13. City Engineer’s Approval. The City Surveyor and Engineer shall check the final
plat copies for accuracy and completeness, and shall determine the amount of
bond or other performance guarantee, which shall be based upon the estimate of
the cost of installing the required improvements as provided by the Developer’s
Engineer. The City Engineer shall calculate the City fees to be paid, and the
required amount of water that needs to be conveyed to the City necessary to
comply with the City’s water acquisition ordinance prior to final plat approval.
The corrected Final Plat shall then be a plotted original on 24" X 36" mylar signed
and stamped by the Surveyor, and signed and notarized by the owners, and signed
by all utilities and then given to the City Engineer for his/her approval and
signature. Upon calculation and/or approval of the bond amount, required City
fees and water conveyance quantity the City Engineer shall forward all
information to the City Attorney for collection and the scheduling of the matter
for City Council review.
Step 14. Performance Bond, Fees, Title Report, Bond Agreement, Reimbursement
Agreement, CC&R’s, Water Conveyance, and other matters. Upon the City
Attorney receiving the Final Plat and other information from the City Engineer the
developer shall provide the following to the City Attorney for review and approval prior
to the City Attorney scheduling the matter for Final Plat approval by the City Council:
1. Performance bonding as described in Section 32-9(10) guaranteeing the required
improvements will be installed and paid for without cost to the City;
2. A Title Report. The Title Report is to be reviewed to verify ownership, taxes,
including green belt roll back taxes, and special improvement district assessments are
current, and to examine the liens that are on the property. All ownership in the Title
Report must match the ownership on the plat. All taxes, including green belt roll
back taxes, and special improvement assessments must be current;
3. Verification of payment of all fees owed to the City pursuant to the City’s adopted fee
schedule. The fees shall include but not be limited to Planning Commission filing
fee, plat and plan checking fees, pre-plat approval construction fees, utility line
reimbursement fees, lift station up-grade fees, recording fees, inspection fees and
water assessment fees;
4. If requested by the subdivider, an off-site utility extension reimbursement agreement
shall be prepared by the City Attorney and signed by the subdivider;
5. Documentation of all conveyances of water rights to the City according to Section 32-
9-19;
Chapter 32
Page 32 of 46
6. Original CC&Rs ready for recording as deemed necessary by the City;
7. All outstanding matters must be completed prior to scheduling for City Council
approval. These matters include but are not limited to the matters described above,
Attorney letters certifying compliance with the Utah Condominium Act, verification
of original deeds for easements, and any other matter that is required by the
subdivision of the land.
Step 15. City Attorney Approval. A current Title Report or copy of a Title Insurance Policy
indicating ownership of the property, Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions,
required bonding, bond agreement, receipt verifying payment of fees and Final Plat shall be
presented to the City Attorney for review and approval. Where covenants, conditions and
restrictions are imposed upon a PUD, two copies of the Declaration of Covenants, Conditions
and Restrictions shall be submitted to the City, signed and prepared for recording at the Iron
County Recorder’s Office prior to approval of the Final Plat. In the case of a PUD condominium
project, the developer shall submit to the City Attorney a written statement by an attorney who is
licensed to practice in the State of Utah. This written opinion shall state that the Condominium
Declaration, the Record of Survey Map, and other supporting documentation comply in all
respects with the Utah Condominium Ownership Act, as well as all applicable federal, state and
local laws and ordinances, and that when the Condominium Declaration and Survey Map have
been recorded in the office of the Iron County Recorder that the proposed project will be a
validly existing and lawful condominium project in all respects.
Step 16. City Council Approval of Final Plat. After approval of the Final Plat by the City
Engineer and City Attorney, the City Council shall approve or disapprove the
same. The City Council shall consider approving the Final Plat of the PUD in a
manner consistent with state law provided it finds:
1. That all requirements of the Planning Commission have been incorporated into the
Final Plat;
2. That all Engineering drawings of the PUD have been approved by the City Engineer,
and;
3. In authorizing any PUD, the City Council may impose conditions reasonably
connected and necessary to mitigate adverse impacts.
Step 17. Recordation of Final Plat. The Final Plat shall be recorded by the City after all
signatures are obtained, all approvals are given, and all bonds and fees are posted
with the City.
4. PUD Development Standards and Requirements.
Chapter 32
Page 33 of 46
A. Variations from the development standards of the underlying zone in which the
PUD is located may be permitted by the City Council provided the variations are
specifically adopted by the City Council as part of the approved development plan
or approved supporting documents. Variations shall not include changes in the
permitted uses allowed except to the extent set forth herein. The development
standards set forth herein are not subject to variations permitted by the City
Council.
B. The maximum residential density as defined below in lots and/or units per net
acre for a PUD shall be as follows:
R-1 Same as the underlying zone
R-2-1 Same as the underlying zone
R-2-2 Same as the underlying zone
R-3-1 Same as the underlying zone
R-3-multi Same as the underlying zone
RE Same as the underlying zone
Commercial Same as the underlying zone
Industrial N/A
C. Structure Setbacks.
1. Residential - No structures shall be set back less than 20 feet from the
right-of-way line of a dedicated street;
2. Commercial/Industrial - all setbacks shall be as required in the underlying
zone, subject to required utility easements;
3. Building setbacks along the perimeter property lines of a residential PUD
located in R-2-2, R-3 and MU zones shall be 10 feet. Building setbacks
along the perimeter property lines of a residential PUD located in an R-1
or RE zone shall be 10 feet, except within 100 feet of where the perimeter
property lines of the PUD intersect the public right-of-way, where the
minimum setback from the perimeter property line of the PUD line shall
be 20 feet. Building setbacks in Industrial and Commercial PUDs shall be
according to the requirements of the underlying zone, and;
AMENDED BY ORDINANCE NUMBER 0426-17-3.
4. When an existing building is converted to a PUD and the building is
nonconforming because of setback requirements and utility easements, the
building shall be allowed to continue as a nonconforming PUD relative to
Chapter 32
Page 34 of 46
the same setback and utility easement requirements/deficiencies. All
utilities shall be placed underground, where practical, as determined by the
Project Review Board.
D. All PUD developments shall be served by the public sewer system and public
water supply. All newly constructed utilities shall be placed underground. City
utilities shall be metered as determined in Project Review Board. Each building
shall be served by a separate sewer lateral, sized according to applicable code.
Back-flow prevention valves shall be required in accordance with the applicable
code.
E. All PUD common street, drainage, water and sewer improvements shall be
designed and installed and inspected according to applicable codes and standards.
F. Fences. A six-foot high sight obscuring masonry or composite fence shall be
erected on the perimeter of condominium, townhome, attached multi-family and
attached single family residential PUD projects. Fences shall be setback a
minimum of 10 feet from the right-of-way line of a dedicated street. The fence
setback area shall be landscaped.
For residential PUD developments requiring a perimeter fence with units that
front on a dedicated street the perimeter fence within the front setback area may
be reduced or eliminated under the following conditions:
1. The units fronting the street must be served by individual access
driveways leading directly to an enclosed garage attached to and
designed to serve an individual unit.
2. A driveway serving a single unit with a two-car garage shall not
exceed an on-site width of 20 feet. Driveways serving a single unit
with a one-car garage shall not exceed 12 feet. Individual driveways
shall be separated by a minimum of 6 feet.
3. Driveway separation areas and all other areas fronting a dedicated
street must be landscaped.
4. Driveway widths and sidewalk separation at the property line shall
comply with engineering standards.
G. Landscaping. In commercial or industrial PUDs, and residential PUDs,
permanent landscaping requirements shall be satisfied by the landscaping
requirements of the underlying zone.
H. Parking. The parking of any PUD shall be the same as the parking requirements
of the underlying zone.
I. Private (non-dedicated) Streets.
Chapter 32
Page 35 of 46
1. All streets within a PUD shall have a minimum paved width according to City
Engineering Standards. Streets do not include parking lot driveways;
2. A private street will not extend to or provide service to another property not
included in a phase of the PUD;
3. Private streets are entered from the public streets by a drive-way type entrance
and are posted as private streets. Entrances shall be designed in accordance
with City Engineering Standards;
4. Private streets are not maintained by the City;
5. When a PUD entrance occurs at the end of a City Street the developer shall
provide for a dedicated, City Standard Cul-de-sac or equivalent turn-around,
and;
6. As part of the PUD approval process and in order to provide legal public
access to adjoining properties or to conform with the City’s Street Master
Plan, the City can require any street in the PUD to be a dedicated City street
with widths and improvements according to City Engineering Standards.
J. All storage and solid waste receptacles which serve multiple units and which are not
located within a building shall be enclosed within a site obscuring fence or fence
compatible with the design of the development.
K. A PUD may restrict the storage of recreational vehicles within the PUD in the restrictions
and covenants of the project. Combined recreational vehicle storage areas in excess of
560 square feet shall be enclosed in a 6-foot-high site obscuring fence.
L. PUD plats prepared for filing shall be required to show the following minimum
utility easements and required dedications to the public:
1. All private streets;
2. Minimum ten-foot utility easement on each side of all streets;
3. Minimum seven and one-half foot utility easement around the perimeter of the PUD.
In a Commercial or Industrial Zone, the City Council may grant an exception to said
easement requirement, after a recommendation by the Project Review Board and the
Planning Commission, and each City franchised utility has waived in writing their
need for the easement; and,
Chapter 32
Page 36 of 46
4. All public dedications for streets, trails, drainage, utilities, parks, etc. Said utility
easements shall be for the purpose of installing and maintaining utility lines as
required by the utility owners. Prior to filing of a Planned Unit Development plat, all
utilities currently operating in Cedar City, Utah under a franchise agreement with the
City, shall acknowledge by signature on the plat that they have approved said utility
easements, and guarantee their utility improvements will be installed and maintained.
M. The declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions (CC&R’s) shall include:
1. A statement of maintenance responsibilities and estimated maintenance budget for all
private common improvements, i.e. streets, drainage, sewer, water, landscaping,
parks, trails, recreational facilities, club houses, parking areas, fencing, solid waste
and other storage areas, etc.
Amended by City Ordinance 1113-19-7 and 0501-19
SECTION 32-9 Subdivision and PUD General Requirements.
1. The following are the General Requirements for the development of subdivisions and/or
PUDs as indicated:
A. Soils Report Compliance. The City Council requires that all proposed detailed minor
lot subdivisions, platted subdivisions and PUDs undergo soils testing to determine the
susceptibility of the soil in said subdivisions or PUDs to soils problems, including but
not limited to: subsidence, enlargement, hydro-compaction, settling, slippage, and
sinking of soil in relation to construction thereon or any other soil related condition
that may pose a present or future threat to buildings or infrastructure constructed
thereon. The subdivider or developer shall retain a Geotechnical Engineering
Consultant to drill sufficient test pits and bore holes and make analysis and
recommendations concerning the requirements to use the soil as the supporting
structure for City streets, curb, gutter, sidewalk, utilities and other right-of-way
improvements and for public and private buildings. Any such consultant so retained
must first be approved by the City Engineer of Cedar City. The following details how
the soils report will be reviewed by the City and used by the subdivider or developer
in designing the subdivision or PUD:
1. Upon approval of the Vicinity Plan of a detailed minor lot subdivision or platted
subdivision or a PUD, the subdivider or developer shall provide the City Engineer
with two (2) copies of the proposed subdivision’s soils report containing the
testing, analysis and recommendations of the Geotechnical Engineer. The Soils
Report may be submitted to a second geotechnical engineering firm retained by
Cedar City for its comments and recommendations regarding the findings and
recommendations of the original soils report. The cost of all engineering analysis
Chapter 32
Page 37 of 46
shall be borne by the subdivider or developer and payment for the second
engineering opinion shall be prepaid by the subdivider to the City;
2. After reviewing the original soils report and the second opinion of a detailed
minor lot subdivision, the City Engineer may present the findings of the reports to
the Planning Commission and/or City Council. The Planning Commission and
City Council may either approve or disapprove the application for a subdivision
or PUD in which a soils report has been required after considering the findings
and recommendations of the original soils report and any required second
opinion;
3. In all subdivisions and PUDs, all right-of-way improvements, all public utilities,
other public improvements and private structures erected within a subdivision or
PUD in which a soils report has been required and approved by the City must be
built in accordance with the findings of the approved soils report. This shall be in
addition to all other building code requirements. The Building Inspector shall
have the authority to deny a building permit to a builder proposing to erect a
structure within a subdivision or PUD that does not comply with the approved
soils report. The City Engineer shall assist the Building Inspector in determining
the compliance of buildings with the engineering report. The City Building
Inspector shall maintain a complete copy of the soils report for inspection and
review by the general public and for the City’s use in performing the duties of the
City Building Inspector, and;
4. Violations of this section shall constitute a Class B Misdemeanor.
B. Standards and Specifications. Engineering standards containing specifications for
materials and installation of the required improvements to be owned and maintained
by the City in subdivisions and PUDs shall be prepared by the City Engineer. Such
engineering standards shall be approved by the Planning Commission and City
Council and shall be adopted by resolution of the City Council. Said standards shall
be considered minimum and shall apply under all ordinary circumstances; provided,
however, that where the subdivider can show that a provision of these general
requirements and design standards would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly
adhered to and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the
site, in the opinion of the City Council, a departure may be made without destroying
the intent of such provisions, the City Council may authorize a variance. Any
variance so authorized shall be stated on the Final Plat and the reasons for such
departure shall be entered in writing in the minutes of the City Council. Otherwise, all
improvements shall be installed in accordance with City Engineering Standards.
C. Required Subdivision Improvements. The following improvements shall be required
in all subdivisions and also PUDs where specifically indicated herein:
Chapter 32
Page 38 of 46
1. All streets shall have sub-base, and minimum two and one half (2 ½) inch oil mat
from curb to curb in accordance with Cedar City's engineering standards;
2. Signs in accordance with Cedar City's engineering standards;
3. Street drainage and drainage structures shall be provided in accordance with
Cedar City's engineering standards and City storm drain system master plans;
4. The subdivider shall install sanitary sewers as approved by the City Engineer in
accordance with Cedar City's engineering standards and City sewer system master
plans;
5. Water mains having a diameter of not less than eight (8) inches shall be installed
in accordance with Cedar City's engineering standards and City water system
master plans;
6. Easements shall be provided, and fire hydrants and water meters installed to City
specifications;
7. Curbs and gutters shall be installed in accordance with Cedar City's engineering
standards;
8. Underground utilities shall be installed within the subdivision (these utilities shall
include electricity, natural gas, telephone, cable T.V. and street lights; a
subdivider may have the option of installing appropriate overhead utilities in any
portion of the subdivision in which overhead utilities existed at the time of the
presentation of the vicinity plat where such utilities could serve that portion of the
subdivision);
9. Sidewalks for the entire subdivision where streets front lots in the subdivision
shall be installed in accordance with Cedar City's engineering standards. Where a
street does not front lots on both sides, the sidewalks along the side of the street
not fronting lots can be omitted;
10. For Subdivisions and PUDs neighborhood delivery and collection box units
(NDCBU) shall be installed (the location of the NDCBU'S shall be designated on
the Final Plat after consultation by subdivider with the United States Postal
Service and an appropriate easement provided therefore);
11. Street lights in accordance with Cedar City's engineering standards unless
prohibited by recorded CC&Rs for the subdivision;
Chapter 32
Page 39 of 46
12. Six-foot-high site obscuring fences on lot lines of back yards of double fronted
lots where the back yard is boarded by a City street;
13. Subdivisions and PUDs will be required to leave in place any existing and
required un-paved, 20-foot minimum width, wild land accesses to any public
property. Subdivisions and PUDs will be required to design streets to connect to
the existing and required wild land accesses. The wild land accesses shall not be
included as part of a lot.
14. For Subdivisions and PUDs off-site access streets are as follows:
a. Where off-site access streets to the subdivision or PUD extend through the
subdivider’s or developer’s property the street shall be fully improved with
pavement and curb and gutter, not including sidewalk;
b. Where off-site access streets to the subdivision or PUD extend through
property not owned by the subdivider or developer the street shall be paved 13
feet on each side of the street centerline and be dedicated the required full
width with the required public utility easements on both sides of the street.
D. Engineering Drawings. Upon receiving the Planning Commission’s approval of
the Vicinity Plan and soils report for detailed minor lot subdivisions, platted
subdivisions and PUDs the subdivider or developer shall have an engineer
licensed in the State of Utah prepare and stamp one (1) copy of engineering
drawings showing a detailed design of all the required subdivision or PUD City
and common improvements as listed in Section 32-9(3). The engineering
drawings shall be reviewed and initialed by the design engineers’ internal checker
and shall conform to all City Ordinances, City Engineering Standards, City
Master Plans, sound engineering practices, other local, state and federal
regulations, soils report recommendations and other requirements of the City
Engineer that are based on adopted Cedar City land use regulations. Design study
reports for drainage, water, sewer, and traffic may also need to be submitted when
requested by the City Engineer. Whenever final approval has been obtained from
the City Engineer on the Engineering Drawings the approval shall remain in effect
for a period of two (2) years. If construction has not begun before the 2 year
period elapses, the City Engineer has the right to have the drawings updated to the
current Cedar City Engineer Standards in effect at that time.
E. Parks, School Sites, Other Public Space. In subdividing property, consideration
shall be given to sites for schools, parks, playgrounds, and other areas for public
use, as shown on the Master Plan. Any provisions for such open spaces should be
indicated on the Vicinity Plan in order that the City may determine when and in
Chapter 32
Page 40 of 46
what manner such areas will be dedicated to, or required by, the appropriate
agency.
F. Water Pressure. No subdivision shall be approved in an area in which the water
pressure at the highest spot in said subdivision has less than 40 p.s.i. with the
water tank serving said area containing the amount of one (l) foot of water in said
tank, unless said subdivision installs a water system consisting of either additional
storage, booster pumps, or other requirements as determined to be necessary by
the City Engineer to provide service to areas within said subdivision not meeting
the 40 p.s.i. requirement.
G. Access. All subdivisions shall have access to a dedicated, paved street. If these
conditions do not exist, the subdivider will be required to obtain such access
before Final Plat approval and make improvements before the subdivision is
accepted.
Amended by City Ordinance No. 1009-19
H. Minimum Public Utility Easements on Residential Lots. Residential subdivision
plats prepared for filing shall be required to show the following minimum width
utility easements:
1. Residential Lots:
a. Minimum ten-foot utility easement on the front lot line;
b. Minimum five-foot utility easement on the side lot line of subdivision
perimeter lots; and
c. Minimum seven and one-half foot utility easement on the rear lot line.
2. Commercial and Industrial Lots- Minimum twenty-foot easement on front lot
line.
3. Said utility easements shall be for the purpose of installing and maintaining
utility lines as required. Prior to filing of any residential subdivision plat, all
utilities currently operating in Cedar City, Utah, shall acknowledge by
signature on the plat that they have reviewed said utility easements, and
guarantee their utility improvements will be installed.
I. Cost Sharing of Improvements. Cost of on-site and off-site improvements, which
are covered under the provisions of this section, as well as the cost of other
improvements, which the subdivider is required to install, shall be shared between
the subdivider and the City, according to the following schedule:
Chapter 32
Page 41 of 46
FACILITY SUBDIVIDER CITY
Easements and rights-of-ways 100% 0%
Grading and drainage of streets 100% 0%
Bridges 100% for all local and collector
streets
0% (on-site and off-site)
Street and paving 100% for minor collector widths in
residential areas and for collector
widths in industrial and commercial
areas
100% for widths above minor
collector widths in residential
areas and for collector widths in
industrial and commercial areas
are eligible for impact fee
reimbursement
Curb, gutter, curb cuts,
driveways and cross gutters
100% 0%
Sidewalk 100% 0%
Street signs 100% 0%
Electric utilities, Natural Gas,
Telephone/Communications,
Cable TV and Street light wiring
100% 0%
Street Light system 100% 0%
Water system 100% up to and including the
diameter required for subdivision,
8” minimum
All required oversize in excess of
the diameter required for
subdivision that is eligible for
the impact fee reimbursement
Fire Hydrants
100% 0%
FACILITY SUBDIVIDER CITY
Sanitary Sewer System 100% up to and including the
diameter required for subdivision,
8” minimum
All required oversize in excess of
the diameter required for
subdivision that is eligible for
the impact fee reimbursement
Storm drains, canals and Flood
Channel Systems
100% up to and including the size
required for subdivision, 24”
minimum
All required oversize in excess of
the diameter required for
subdivision that is eligible for
the impact fee reimbursement
Parks Special negotiations with City
Council
Special negotiations with City
Council
Fences 100% for rear yard lot line fences on
double fronted lots
0%
Wildland Access 100% 0%
Inspection and Materials
testing
100% 0%
Chapter 32
Page 42 of 46
1. Exception is made when street is Federal or State Highway where City will not
participate.
2. Whenever any off-site property is benefitted by the installation of any of the
required improvements, the subdivider or developer, prior to recording the Final
Plat, may sign an agreement with Cedar City providing that they shall be
reimbursed for the expenses incurred for installing the improvements. After the
improvements are installed and accepted by Cedar City, the subdivider or
developer can begin receiving reimbursement amounts according to the
agreement. These reimbursement amounts shall be collected and be paid by
Cedar City to the subdivider that paid for the installation of the improvements.
Such reimbursement shall extend until the subdivider or developer has been
completely reimbursed without interest for the money expended for installing the
improvements, or for a ten-year period from the time the reimbursement
agreement is executed, whichever occurs first. Reimbursement shall only be
collected from off-site property owners whose property fronts the installed
improvements. The reimbursement for the fronting off-site property shall be
calculated on a front foot basis and shall be 50% of the installation costs for street
light, water, sewer and storm drain improvements that front the off-site property
and 100% of the installation costs for bridge, street, curb, gutter, sidewalk and
sign improvements that are on the off-site fronting property’s side of the road
centerline. This reimbursement shall not eliminate the requirement to pay impact
or other required City fees.
3. Improvements eligible to be paid for with impact fees shall be reimbursed by the
City to the subdivider or developer. This impact fee reimbursement shall be
based on the actual cost of installation including engineering and be subject to
availability of impact fee funds.
J. Guarantee of Performance. For all required City owned and maintained
improvements in detailed minor lot subdivisions, City owned and maintained
platted subdivisions and PUDs and common improvements in residential PUDs
the subdivider or developer will be required to post a bond with the City
guaranteeing the required improvements will be installed and paid for without
cost to the City. Such bonds shall be posted and administered as follows:
1. Type and Amount of Guarantees. The type of guarantee for the
subdivision or PUD improvements may be in the form of a cash bond or
letter of credit from an acceptable financial institution in an amount equal
to the cost of the required utilities and improvements as approved by the
City Engineer. All letters of credit shall be in a form acceptable to the
City Attorney;
Chapter 32
Page 43 of 46
2. Bond Amount. The cash bond or letter of credit in an amount sufficient to
cover the approved engineer’s estimate plus an additional ten percent
(10%) warrantee bond to cover the warranty period for the City owned and
maintained improvements in detailed minor lot and platted subdivisions
and residential PUDs;
3. Duration. Unless otherwise provided by a contract entered into according
to this Chapter, the duration of the cash bond or letter of credit for the
improvement bond and warrantee bonds shall continue until all
improvement and warrantee work has been completed by the subdivider or
developer;
4. Default. Unless otherwise provided by a contract entered into according
to this Chapter, in the event the subdivider is in default or fails or neglects
to satisfactorily install the required utilities and improvements within two
years from the date of approval of the Final Plat by the City Council, or to
pay all liens in connection thereto, the City may declare the bond or other
assurance forfeited, and the City may install or cause the required
improvements to be installed, using the proceeds from the collection of the
bond or other assurance to defray the expense thereof;
5. Bond Agreement. A signed bond agreement with the City is required.
The bond agreement shall be in a form approved for use by the City
Attorney. These agreements are deemed necessary and proper to insure
the improvements are constructed and the Mayor is authorized to sign
them without prior approval from the City Council, and;
6. Release of Bonds:
a. A maximum of 90% of the cash bond or letter of credit shall be
eligible for release as the improvements are completed according
to the approved engineering drawings. 10% of the bond shall be
retained until the City improvements in a subdivision or PUD are
accepted by the City Engineer. The improvements shall not be
accepted by the City Engineer until as-built drawings and grading
reports are received, and the final inspection by the City Engineer
and resulting punch list items are completed by the subdivider;
b. The additional ten percent (10%) cash bond posted to cover the
warranty period shall remain in effect for one (1) year from the
date the subdivision or PUD with City improvements is accepted
by the City. The purpose of the bond is to pay for items that are
not repaired by the subdivider or developer during the warranty
period. Once this year has passed and the improvements have been
Chapter 32
Page 44 of 46
accepted by the City this bond will be eligible for release to the
subdivider or developer, and;
c. When the warranty bond is released the City will be deemed to
have accepted all City improvements and shall assume
responsibility for ongoing maintenance of the subdivision’s or
PUD’s City improvements.
K. City Fees. City fees for subdivisions and PUDs will be assessed according to the
City’s fee schedule and paid for before Final Plan or Plat approval by the City
Council. The fees shall include but not be limited to Planning Commission filing
fee, plan checking fees, pre-plat approval construction fees, utility line
reimbursement fees, lift station up-grade fees, construction inspection fees, water
acquisition fees, etc.
L. Inspection of Improvements. The City Engineer shall inspect the work during
construction for quality of materials and workmanship, but the subdivider or
developer shall be responsible for the quality of all materials and workmanship.
M. Improvement Schedule.
1. After the completed application and filing fees have been submitted to the
City no improvement construction shall begin in a platted subdivision,
detailed minor lot subdivision or residential PUD, including clearing and
grubbing, before the Final Plat or Plan is approved by the City. If the
subdivider or developer begins construction on the subdivision or PUD
improvements before Final Plat approval by the City Council a pre-plat
construction fee as set in the City’s Fee Schedule will also be assessed and
collected before Final Plat approval by the City Council.
2. The City owned and maintained improvements in a platted subdivision,
detailed minor lot subdivision and PUD, and common improvements in a
residential PUD, shall be constructed within two (2) years of the Final Plat
or Plan approval by the City. If the improvements are not installed within
two (2) years of Final Plat or Plan approval by the City, the City shall use
the subdivider’s or developer’s performance bond to install the
improvements.
3. In simple minor lot subdivisions included in Section 32-6 Step 2(1)( C) the
required City owned and maintained improvements fronting the lot shall
be completed before an occupancy permit is issued for any building on the
lot.
Chapter 32
Page 45 of 46
4. In commercial or industrial PUDs the common PUD improvements
serving any lot in the PUD shall be completed before an occupancy permit
is issued for the building on that lot.
5. No building permits will be issued in a platted subdivision or a detail
minor lot subdivision (not including PUDs) until all fronting streets
improvements are installed and accepted by the City.
N. As-built Drawings. No bond retainage will be released on a platted subdivision,
PUD or a detail minor lot subdivision until final as-built drawings of any City
owned and maintained improvements are prepared and submitted to the City
Engineer.
O. Improvement Completion and Acceptance. At the completion of the installation
of the City owned and maintained improvements the City Engineer shall make a
final inspection of the subdivision or PUD. If "as-built” plans are filed and other
conditions thereof are found to be satisfactory, the City shall release the bond, not
including the 10% cash warrantee bond, or other assurance and accept the
responsibility for the dedicated right-of-ways, easements and City owned and
maintained facilities. If "as constructed" plans have not been submitted to the
City Engineer or the required improvements are not completed within the required
time period, the City may declare the subdivider in default.
P. Warrantee Period Acceptance. If the condition of material or workmanship shows
unusual depreciation or does not comply with acceptable standards of durability at
any time during the one-year warranty period it will be the responsibility of the
subdivider or developer to make the necessary repairs. If the subdivider or
developer does not complete the necessary repairs within 30 days after receiving
written notice from the City, the City will declare the subdivider or developer in
default and use the 10% warranty bond to complete the repairs.
Q. Special Improvement Contracts. In the event that the improvements are installed
under "special improvement contracts" the planning and execution of the work
shall be carried out as prescribed by laws pertaining thereto.
R. Amended Plats. Amended plats must be filed. When major changes, not
including lot line adjustments, in a plat of a subdivision which has been recorded
are made, approval of said subdivision shall be vacated and an amended plat
thereof approved and filed in accordance within the requirements of this
Ordinance and applicable state laws.
S. Water Right Conveyance to the City.
Chapter 32
Page 46 of 46
1. Before Final Plat approval subdividers and developers of platted
subdivisions and residential PUDs are required to convey water rights to
the City according to the City’s water acquisition ordinance.
2. Minor lot subdivisions and commercial and industrial PUDs shall convey
water rights to the City according to the City’s water acquisition ordinance
when a building permit is obtained on each lot.
T. Enforcement and Permits. No officer of Cedar City shall grant any permit or
license for the use of any building or land if such use would be in violation of this
Ordinance.
U. Penalty. Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this Ordinance
shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished by a fine not exceeding One Thousand
Dollars ($1,000.00) or imprisonment in the County Jail for six (6) months, or by
both fine and imprisonment.
V. Validity. If any section, sub-section, sentence, clause, or phrase of this Ordinance
is for any reason held to be invalid, such holding shall not affect the validity of
the remaining portion of this Ordinance.
ENTIRE CHAPTER AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 0211-15
CHAPTER 33
SPECIAL TAXES
SECTION 33-1 Power of Council
SECTION 33-2 Costs and Expenses
SECTION 33-3 Exemptions for Corner Lots
 
  Ch. Pg. 0
CHAPTER 33
SPECIAL TAXES
SECTION 33-1. Power of Council.
When the City Council shall deem it expedient to lay out, establish, open, extend, or widen
any street or alley, and improve, repair, light, grade, pave, curb and gutter, sewer, drain, park or
beautify the same; or to establish grades, construct bridges, sidewalks, crosswalks, driveways from
curbs to property lines, culverts, lighting equipment, sewers and drains; plant or cause to be planted,
cultivated and maintained lawns, grass and shade trees in the parking spaces therein; or to maintain,
replace or renew any of such improvements they shall first personally inspect such proposed
improvements and the same or any part thereof may be done in the manner provided in this Chapter,
and pursuant to appropriate state law regarding the same including but not limited to l0-16-1
et. seq. Utah Code Annotated, l953 as amended.
SECTION 33-2. Costs and Expenses.
To defray the cost and expense of such improvements, or any of them, the City Council may
proceed, after acquiring jurisdiction as provided by law, to levy by ordinance special taxes and
assessments upon the block, lots, or parts thereof and pieces of ground fronting or abutting upon or
adjacent to the street or alley, thus in whole or in part opened, widened, or improved, or which may
be affected or especially benefitted by any of such improvements, to the full depth of such lots, parts
of lots, or pieces of ground; provided, that where any lot, or piece of ground is of greater depth than
l98 feet back from the street such assessment shall be levied upon such lots, or pieces of ground to a
depth of l98 feet only.
SECTION 33-3. Exemptions for Corner Lots.
All corner lots in a special improvement district improved on both sides by any one special
improvement shall be granted an exemption from full assessment as follows:
The longer side shall be assessed at full rate, plus all frontage over 75 feet on the shorter side.
CHAPTER 34
TAXICABS
SECTION 34-1 Business License Required
SECTION 34-2 Indemnity Bond or Liability Insurance Required
SECTION 34-3 License Fees
SECTION 34-4 Transfer of Licenses and Permits
SECTION 34-5 Suspension and Revocation of Licenses and Permits
SECTION 34-6 Taxicab Driver's Permit
SECTION 34-7 Application for Driver's Permit
SECTION 34-8 Consideration of Application
SECTION 34-9 Failure to Comply with City, State and Federal Laws
SECTION 34-10 Vehicles, Equipment and Maintenance
SECTION 34-11 Severability
SECTION 34-12 Penalty
Ch. 34 Pg. 1
CHAPTER 34
TAXICABS
SECTION 34-1. Business License Required.
No person shall operate or permit a taxicab owned or controlled by him to be operated as
a vehicle for hire upon the streets of Cedar City without having obtained a business license for
the company and a Taxicab Driver’s Permit for each driver. The provisions of this chapter shall
not be deemed to be in conflict with Chapter 23 of these ordinances but as requirements
applicable to taxicabs in addition to Chapter 23.
SECTION 34-2. Indemnity Bond or Liability Insurance Required.
a) No business license for a Taxicab business shall be issued or continued in operation
unless there is in full force and effect a commercial insurance policy, which is issued by an
insurance company authorized to do business in the State of Utah, for each vehicle authorized in
the amount of One Hundred Thousand Dollars ($l00,000.00) for bodily injury to any one person;
in the amount of Two Hundred Thousand Dollars ($200,000.00) for injuries to more than one
person which are sustained in the same accident and Fifteen Thousand Dollars ($15,000) for
property damage resulting from one accident. Said bond or bonds shall inure to the benefit of any
person who shall be injured or who shall sustain damage to property proximately caused by the
negligence of a holder, his servants, or agents. Said bond or bonds shall be filed in the office of
the City Recorder and shall have as surety thereon a surety company authorized to do business in
the State of Utah.
b) Before an employee can lawfully operate a taxicab, the employee must be added to the
businesses insurance policy and the business must provide proof of said coverage to the office of
the City Recorder.
SECTION 34-3. License Fees.
License and permit fees shall be in accordance with the Business License Ordinance and
Consolidated Fee Schedule. A separate fee shall be charged for the business license and the
taxicab drivers permit(s). All employees holding a current taxicab drivers permit shall not be
counted as an employee for determination of the license fee for the Taxicab business.
SECTION 34-4. Transfer of Licenses and Permits
No license or permit may be sold, assigned, mortgaged or otherwise transferred.
Ch. 34 Pg. 2
SECTION 34-5. Suspension and Revocation of License or Permit.
A license or permit issued under the provisions of this ordinance may be revoked or
suspended only in accordance with Chapter 23, Business License Ordinance. In addition to the
reasons to revoke or suspend given under Chapter 23, Business License Ordinance, a license or
permit issued under this Chapter may be revoked or suspended if the holder thereof has (a)
violated any provision of this ordinance; (b) discontinued operations for more than seven (7)
days; (c) has violated any ordinance of Cedar City, or the law of the United States or the State of
Utah, the violations of which reflects unfavorably on the fitness of the holder to offer public
transportation.
SECTION 34-6. Taxicab Driver's Permit.
No person shall operate a taxicab for hire upon the streets of Cedar City, and no person
who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be driven, and no taxicab licensed by Cedar
City shall be so driven at any time for hire, unless the driver of said taxicab shall have first
obtained and shall have then in force a taxicab drivers permit issued under the provisions of this
ordinance.
SECTION 34-7. Application for Driver's Permit
An application for a taxi driver's permit shall be filed with the Recorder and such
application shall be verified under oath and shall contain the following information:
(a) The names and addresses of four references who have known the applicant for a
period of one year who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty and general good character of the
applicant.
(b) A certificate from a reputable physician of the City, certifying that, in his opinion, the
applicant is not inflicted with any disease or infirmity, which might make him an unsafe or an
unsatisfactory driver.
(c) An original Utah Bureau of Investigation background check dated no older than 180
days prior to the date of the Application.
(d) The applicant’s certified driving record from any state in which the applicant has been
licensed to drive in the last five (5) years.
(e) Proof of a driver’s license.
If 34-7(a)(b)(d) and (e) are submitted, a temporary driver’s permit will be issued for a 30-
day period. If the Recorder has not issued a license to the applicant by the end of the 30-day
period or the Recorder informs the taxicab business owner or applicant at any time that the
application has been denied, the taxicab business owner or applicant must immediately cease to
operate a taxi cab for hire upon the streets of Cedar City.
Ch. 34 Pg. 3
SECTION 34-8. Consideration of Application.
The License Officer, upon consideration of the application shall approve or reject the
application.
Disqualifying Status: No taxicab drivers permit shall be issued and any permit already
issued shall be suspended or revoked upon determination that the applicant has been convicted of
any criminal offense involving a class A misdemeanor or felony theft, robbery, burglary, crimes
of violence, sex crimes, class A misdemeanor or felony drugs, prostitution, driving under the
influence, homicide or any related offense within the last twelve (12) months, has an outstanding
warrant from any jurisdiction or is required to register as a sex offender in any jurisdiction.
SECTION 34-9. Failure to Comply with City, State and Federal Laws.
Every driver licensed under this ordinance shall comply with all City, State, and Federal
laws. Failure to do so will justify the License Officer in suspending or revoking a license or
permit.
SECTION 34-10. Vehicles, Equipment and Maintenance.
Upon application and at the time of annual license renewal, every Taxicab business
licensed under this Chapter shall provide a copy of a State safety inspection conducted within the
last sixty (60) days on every vehicle included under the business license. No vehicle shall be
used as a taxicab unless it is listed under a taxicab business license.
SECTION 34-11. Severability.
Each of the provisions of this ordinance is severable, and if any provision shall be
declared to be invalid, the remaining provisions shall not be affected but shall remain in full
force and effect.
SECTION 34-12. Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed
guilty of a misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be fined an amount not exceeding
One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six months, or by both
such fine and imprisonment.
AMENDED BY ORDINANCE NUMBER 0311-09, 1214-16-2 and 0123-19-3.
Ch. 34 Pg. 4
CHAPTER 35
TRAFFIC AND TRAVEL ON STREETS
SECTION 35-1 Adoption of Traffic Code
SECTION 35-2 Speeding and Establishing Speed Limits
SECTION 35-3 Reckless Driving
SECTION 35-4 Traffic Control Devices
SECTION 35-4-1 Purpose of Traffic Control Devices
SECTION 35-4-2 Placement Authority
SECTION 35-4-3 Engineering Study Required
SECTION 35-4-4 Temporary Placement of Traffic Control Devices
SECTION 35-4-5 Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
SECTION 35-5 Parked Cars
SECTION 35-6 Prohibited Long Vehicle Parking and Travel
SECTION 35-7 Taking Hold of Vehicles
SECTION 35-8 Impounding of Vehicles
SECTION 35-8-1 Towing and Impounding Vehicles Parking In Violation of Law
SECTION 35-9 Improper Lookout
SECTION 35-10 Parking Restrictions
SECTION 35-11 On Street Perpendicular or Angle Parking Provisions
SECTION 35-12 Prohibited Parking in Fire Lanes (Red Zones) of Private Parking Lots
SECTION 35-13 Prohibited Sale of Automobile on Public Streets
SECTION 35-14 Penalty
CHAPTER 35
TRAFFIC AND TRAVEL ON STREETS
SECTION 35-1. Adoption of Traffic Code.
The traffic code of the State of Utah set forth as Title 41 of the State of Utah Traffic
Rules and Regulations, l983, and amendments thereto, is hereby approved and adopted, except as
hereinafter specified and except for provisions relating to Driving Under the Influence of
Alcohol and/or Drugs as found in Sections 4l-6-44, 4l-6-44.2, 4l-6-44.3, 4l-6-44.5, 4l-6-44.8, and
4l-6-44.l0, 41-2-30 (2) as a traffic code for Cedar City, Utah, except as hereinafter specified and
by this reference is made a part of this Ordinance as though set forth verbatim herein. Amended
11/86.
Whenever any amendment, revision, or supplement is made to the Traffic Code of the
State of Utah, the same shall become a revision, supplemental and amendment to this Ordinance,
providing at least three copies of said revision, supplement, and amendment are kept on file in
the office of the City Recorder. Amended 7/5/84.
The provisions of this chapter may be enforced on property within Cedar City owned or
controlled by the Iron County School District.
AMENDED BY ORDINANCE NO. 0128-09
The following shall be exceptions to Section 35-1 hereinabove:
SECTION 35-2. Speeding and Establishing Speed Limits.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a vehicle upon any street in the City at a
speed greater than is safe, reasonable and prudent, having due regard to the traffic, surface and
width of the highway and the hazard at intersections and any other conditions then existing.
b. Nor shall any person drive at a speed which is greater than will permit the driver to
exercise proper control of the vehicle and to decrease speed or to stop as may be necessary, to
avoid colliding with any person, vehicle or other conveyance upon or entering the highway in
compliance with legal requirements and with the duty of drivers and other persons using the
highways to exercise due care.
c. Where no special hazard exists and a speed limit is not clearly posted, any speed in
excess of twenty-five (25) miles per hour in a residential zone and all arterial streets in Cedar
City, shall be prima facie evidence that the speed is not reasonable or prudent and that it is
unlawful.
d. Upon posting speed limit signs in the following areas, the below listed speeds shall be
the maximum speeds:
1. 45 miles per hour on 2400 North and the 2400 North Parkway, between
State Road 130 and 2100 West;
2. 40 miles per hour on Airport Road between 200 North and 2000 North;
3. 50 miles per hour on Bulldog Road between Kitty Hawk Drive and 3000
North;
4. 35 miles per hour on Industrial Road between 400 West and Airport Road;
5. 50 miles per hour on Lund Highway between State Road 56 and 1600
North;
6. 35 miles per hour on Sage Drive between 600 South and Royal Hunte
Drive; (amended 12/04)
7. 40 miles per hour on Aviation Way between Highway 56 and Aviation
Way Circle;
8. 45 miles per hour on Cross Hollows Road from 2052 West to Highway
fifty six (56);
9. 45 miles per hour on Providence Center Drive between 1600 South and
2400 South;
10. 40 miles per hour on Kitty Hawk from Airport Road to Bulldog Road.
11. 35 miles per hour on Providence Center Drive from Cross Hollows Road
to 1600 South;
12. 40 miles per hour on Old Highway 91 from Green’s Lake Drive to 1600
South, and;
13. 50 miles per hour on Old Highway 91 from 1600 South to 3300 West.
14. 45 miles per hour on Westview Drive from State Highway - 56 to 900
South.
15. 45 miles per hour on South Mountain Drive from 3000 W to West View
Drive.
16. 40 miles per hour on Coal Creek Road between Main Street and Kitty
Hawk Drive.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 1015-08.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0609-10.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0623-10.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0114-15.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0422-15-2
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 1030-16-1
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0208-17-1
SECTION 35-3. Reckless Driving.
Any person who drives any vehicle in this City carelessly and heedlessly in willful or wanton
disregard of the rights or safety of others, or without due caution and circumstances and at such
speed or in such a manner as to endanger any person or property, shall be deemed guilty of
reckless driving.
SECTION 35-4. Traffic Control Devices.
SECTION 35-4-1. Purpose of Traffic Control Devices.
The purpose of Traffic Control Devices is to help insure highway safety by providing for
the orderly and predictable movement of all traffic, motorized and non-motorized, throughout the
City's transportation system, and to provide such guidance and warnings as are needed to insure
the safe and informed operation of individual elements of traffic.
SECTION 35-4-2. Placement Authority.
Traffic Control Devices shall be placed only by the authority of the governing body or
the Chief of Police, so far as such authority is delegated, for the purpose of regulating, warning,
or guiding traffic. No traffic control device or its support shall bear any advertising or
commercial message, or any other message that is not essential to traffic control.
Any unauthorized sign placed on the highway right-of-way by a private organization or
individual constitutes a public nuisance. All unofficial and nonessential signs shall be removed.
With proper authority being given, construction contractors and public utility companies
are permitted to erect construction and maintenance signs at work sites to protect the public,
equipment and workers, provided that such signs conform to the standards of the Manual on
Uniform Traffic Control Devices, 1988 edition as amended.
SECTION 35-4-3. Engineering Study Required.
The decision to use a particular traffic control device at a particular location should be
made on the basis of an engineering study of the location. Upon determination by the Chief of
Police that an engineering study is warranted, the Chief of Police will coordinate an engineering
study with the Utah Department of Transportation.
Upon completion of an engineering study, the Chief of Police shall report any and all
findings to the City Council with recommendation. The City Council shall take such action as it
deems appropriate based upon the findings of the engineering study and the recommendation of
the Chief of Police.
SECTION 35-4-4. Temporary Placement of Traffic Control Devices.
In the event the Chief of Police considers an emergency to exist, authorization is hereby
given to the Chief to post traffic control devices and enforce the same on a temporary basis
without council action. In the event this is done, the Chief of Police shall report to the next
regular council meeting, at which time the Council may either ratify or revoke such action.
SECTION 35-4-5. Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices.
Traffic Control Devices placed and maintained within the Municipal limits shall be in
substantial conformance with the latest edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control
Devices. (Amended 7/03)
SECTION 35-5. Parked Cars.
It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a motor vehicle to park or leave a motor
vehicle in any restricted area for a longer time or in a manner which is contrary to rules and
regulations which may be passed by resolution of the City Council from time to time.
SECTION 35-6. Prohibited Long and Heavy Vehicle Parking and Travel.
A. Except as provided herein, it shall be unlawful to park on a public street in any
residential zone in the City, any vehicle or trailer having an overall length of thirty-five (35) feet
or more; or any combination of vehicle and trailer having an overall length of thirty-five (35) feet
or more.
This Section shall not apply, however, under the following circumstances:
1. When the vehicle is a school bus and is parked solely for the loading and
unloading of passengers;
2. When the vehicle is being used to deliver or remove household furniture or
accessories to or from a specific residence or building;
3. When a vehicle is actively involved in permitted construction, landscaping, or
other work on a specific residence or building;
4. When a vehicle is a camper, boat, trailer, or recreational vehicle being loaded or
unloaded within a twenty-four (24) hour period of time; or
5. When there is an emergency requiring the parking of a vehicle in a particular
location.
B. Prohibited Parking. No long vehicle shall be parked at any place on Main Street
between Monterey Drive and 200 North; on Main Street from the south side of the Coal Creek
Bridge to 600 North; between Main Street and l00 West on the north side of 200 North; nor l000
West to ll50 West on the south side of 200 North; nor on 1225 West, ll50 West and l050 West,
north side of Cross Hollows Road from Royal Hunte Drive to the end of the street, and the west
side of 100 East from 200 North to the north end of the Library parking lot or in any area of the
City zoned residential pursuant to Chapter 26 of these ordinances.
C. Prohibited Travel. No long vehicle or heavy vehicle shall be allowed to travel upon
City streets posted by Cedar City indicating that such travel and use is prohibited except for
vehicles making deliveries or servicing the posted streets. These vehicles may include, but not be
limited to public works, public safety, utility, or other vehicles making deliveries or providing
services to destinations on said posted streets.
1. For purposes of this ordinance heavy vehicles shall be defined as any vehicle
having a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of 20,000 pounds or greater. The
GVWR shall be measured by the manufactures placard located on the vehicle.
Amended by ordinance No. 0827-08-1
SECTION 35-7. Taking Hold of Vehicles.
No pedestrian, sleigh or bicycle rider or other person, or rider, driver or occupant, of any
vehicle shall lay hold of any part of any vehicle while the same is in motion.
It shall be unlawful for the driver or any person in charge of any vehicle to knowingly
drive or operate such vehicle upon any street of Cedar City, Utah, while a sled, toboggan or
sleigh, or similar conveyance is attached, or connected with said vehicle upon any street of this
City.
SECTION 35-8. Impounding of Vehicles.
SECTION 3-8-1. Towing and Impounding Vehicles Parking In Violation of Law.
The following together with, or in addition to any other vehicles parked in violation of
any ordinance of Cedar City, or the laws of the State of Utah are hereby declared to be nuisances
(1). Any unattended vehicle stopped, standing or parked in violation of any of the
provisions of this code;
(2). A vehicle found upon the streets or alleys of this City with faulty or defective
equipment;
(3). Any vehicle left unattended upon any bridge, viaduct or at any subway where such
vehicle constitutes an obstruction to traffic;
(4). Any vehicle upon a street so disabled as to constitute an obstruction to traffic and the
person or persons in charge of the vehicle are by reason of physical injury incapacitated to such
an extent as to be unable to provide for its custody or removal;
(5). Any vehicle left unattended upon a street or alley and so parked illegally as to
constitute a definite hazard or obstruction to the normal movement of traffic;
(6). Any vehicle left parked in the same place on any street or alley continuously for 72
hours;
(7). Any vehicle the driver of which has been taken into custody by the Police
Department under such circumstances as would leave such vehicle unattended in a street, alley,
or restricted parking area;
(8). Any vehicle found being driven on the streets not in a proper condition to be driven;
or
(9). Any vehicle found so parked as to constitute a fire hazard or an obstruction to fire
fighting apparatus; and the same may be summarily abated by removing any such vehicle by or
under the directions or at the request of a Police Officer of Cedar City to a place of storage
within the City by means of towing or otherwise.
(a). As soon as is reasonable under the circumstances a written notice that said
vehicle has been impounded shall be mailed to the owner and recorded lien
holder, if there shall be one, of the said vehicle at their last known address as
shown by the records of the motor vehicle division of the Utah State Tax
Commission. If the license plates on said vehicle are from another state, written
notice shall be mailed to the department of motor vehicles in such state,
requesting such department to notify the registered owner of such vehicle that the
same has been impounded by the Police Department of Cedar City and that the
same will be sold at public auction as is provided by the ordinances of Cedar City
if not claimed by the owner or his proper representative, as provided by said City
Ordinances
(b). The impounding of a vehicle shall not prevent or preclude the institution and
prosecution of criminal proceedings in the Circuit Court or elsewhere against the
owner or operator of such impounded vehicle.
(c). Before the owner or his agent shall be permitted to remove a vehicle which
has been impounded, he shall:
l. Furnish satisfactory evidence to the Police Department of his identity
and his ownership of said vehicle.
2. Request and obtain from the Police Department a written order directed
to the place of storage in which said vehicle is impounded, authorizing the
release of said vehicle to said owner or his agent upon the payment to said
place of storage of towing and storage charges reasonably incurred in the
towing and storage of said vehicle from the date of said impounding to the
time of presenting the order of release from the Police Department
therefor.
3. Sign a written receipt of said vehicle and deliver the same to the place
of storage upon receiving said impounded vehicle.
(d). If, at the expiration of fifteen days after mailing the notice provided for in
paragraph (a) hereof, such vehicle is not redeemed by the owner or his proper
representative, the Chief of Police or his authorized agent may proceed to sell the
same at public auction to the highest bidder after first giving at least ten days’
notice of said sale by publishing said notice at least once in a newspaper
published in Cedar City, stating the time and place of such sale. Such notice shall
also describe the vehicle to be sold with reasonable certainty and shall state to
whom, if anyone, the records of the Office of the Motor Vehicle Division of the
State Tax Commission show the same to belong, and if the name of the owner be
unknown, said fact shall be stated. If the owner or recorded lien holder, if any, be
know, the Police Department shall send such owner or recorded lienholder a copy
of such notice as published immediately after the publication of same, which
notice shall be mailed to the last known address or their address as shown on the
records of the Motor Vehicle Division of the Utah State Tax Commission. A copy
of this notice as published shall immediately, after publication, be mailed to the
owner of the place of storage. The money received by the Chief of Police, or his
authorized agent, from the sale of any such vehicle shall be applied first to the
actual cost of towing and storage of such impounded vehicle, then to pay the cost
of advertising the notice of sale for each vehicle so impounded and the balance, if
any, shall then be transferred into the City Treasury of Cedar City, to be used as
hereinafter provided.
(e). At any time within one year from and after such sale, the former owner of the
vehicle sold, upon application to the City Council of Cedar City and upon
presentation of satisfactory proof that he was the owner of the vehicle sold, shall
be paid the proceeds of such sale less the necessary expense thereof and less the
towing, impounding, and storage charges provided for in paragraph (d) of this
Ordinance.
(f). The Police Department shall keep a record of all vehicles impounded by
manufacturer's trade name or make, body type, motor, and license number and
names and addresses of all persons claiming the same, and such other descriptive
matter as may identify such vehicles, the nature and circumstances of the
impounding thereof, and the impounding violation, and the violation on account
of which such vehicles were impounded, the date of such impounding, and the
name and address of any person to whom such vehicle is released.
(g). The Police Department of Cedar City shall immediately impound in a proper
place of storage in Cedar City, all vehicles found within said City that are
improperly registered, stolen, or bear defaced motor numbers and shall within
ninety-six hours thereafter notify in writing the Motor Vehicle Division of the
Utah State Tax Commission of such impounding, setting forth in such notice the
date found, the address where found, the make, registration number and date and
place where stored.
SECTION 35-9. Improper Lookout.
No person shall drive a vehicle on the streets of Cedar City without keeping a reasonable
and proper lookout for other traffic, objects, fixtures, or property thereon or adjacent thereto.
SECTION 35-10. Parking Restrictions.
(1) The parking restrictions contained herein shall be marked with upright signs complying with
standards set forth in the Uniform Manual on Traffic Control Devices and where appropriate
painting the curb in a color as designated in the Uniform Manual on Traffic Control Devices.
(2) No parking shall be allowed in the following areas:
A. from 1000 West to Interstate 15 Freeway on the north side of 200 North in Cedar
City, Utah;
B. sixteen feet south of the 200 North right of way on the West side of 100 West;
C. along 4050 West extending from the crosswalk in front of Iron Springs
Elementary in the following manner: on the east side of the street 85 feet to the
south of the crosswalk and 50 feet north of the crosswalk; and on the west side of
the street 50 feet south of the crosswalk and 85 feet north of the crosswalk;
D. on the north side of 1045 North Street extending east 56 feet from the point of
curvature of the east curb return on the intersection of Country Side Terrace Drive
(250 West);
E. an approximate 16-foot-long area on the north side of Center Street at
approximately 46 West, the center of which is located 179 feet west of the
southeast corner of lot 1, Block 36, Plat B, Cedar City Town Survey;
F. the south side of 200 North from Main Street to 100 East;
G. the south side of College Avenue from 100 West to 300 West;
H. along Royal Hunte Drive:
i. extending from the crosswalk in front of Cedar Middle School in the
following manner: on the North Side of the street 150 feet to the east of
the crosswalk and 50 feet west of the crosswalk;
ii. on the south side of the street 50 feet east of the crosswalk and 150 feet
west of the crosswalk;
iii. from the east entrance of the Aquatic Center parking lot extending 220
feet to the east; and
iv. on the south side of the street extending from 1850 West to 2200 West.
I. on the south side of Cross Hollow Road extending 150 feet west from the main
entrance and exit to Walmart (said entrance/exit is the second entrance/exit on the
south side of Cross Hollow Road located west of the Royal Hunte Drive and
Cross Hollow Road intersection);
J. beginning at the intersection of Main Street and 1925 North and extending west
along the north and south side of 1925 North for 1300 lineal feet;
K. along 1895 West Cross Hollow Drive, beginning at the Walmart Northeast
entrance and running west to the CATS bus stop; and
L. on the east side of Cove Drive from the centerline of the LDS Temple entrance
extending south to the north side of the intersection of Cove Drive and Silver
Crest Circle; and on the west side of Cove Drive from the centerline of the LDS
Temple entrance extending 250 feet to the north.
(3) The following areas shall have the following restrictions on parking, stopping, and standing:
A. on the east side of the street in front of the County office building located at 82
North and 100 East fifteen (15) minute parking only;
B. student pick up and drop off only between 8:30 a.m. and 4 p.m. along 400 South
adjacent to South Elementary; and
C. from 1pm to 4pm Monday through Friday on the north side of 200 North
extending from 600 West to 500 West; and the east side of 600 West extending
185 feet north from the intersection of 200 North and 600 West.
AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 0112-11, 0209-11,1023-13, 1211-13,
0611-14, 0813-14-1, 0708-15, 0921-16-1, 0208-17-1, 0913-17, 0927-17-1 and 0124-18-1.
SECTION 35-11. On Street Perpendicular or Angle Parking Ordinance.
1. Purpose. On street perpendicular or angle parking in areas designated in compliance
with the terms and conditions contained in this ordinance may be beneficial to the safety,
convenience, economy, and general welfare of Cedar City. The procedures established in this
ordinance are intended to promote the efficient use of perpendicular or angle parking, minimize
conflicts with existing neighborhood land uses, avoid conflicts with Cedar City’s master planned
bicycle lanes and pedestrian trails, allow for designated areas to provide adequate sight distances,
and to protect the safety of the general public.
2. Administration. The on street perpendicular or angle parking ordinance shall be
administered cooperatively between the Chief of Police, City Engineer, and the Director of
Public Works. The Chief of Police, City Engineer and Director of Public Works may delegate
such authority as is required for the effective administration of this ordinance.
3. Designation of perpendicular or angle parking.
a. General Criteria. In order for an area to be designated as perpendicular or
angle parking, the area must meet the following criteria:
i. All sides of the street that are proposed to have perpendicular or angle
parking must abut property zoned commercial, industrial, or mixed use;
ii. The posted speed limit for the area must not exceed twenty-five (25)
miles per hour;
iii. If perpendicular or angle parking is requested on both sides of the
street the street must measure a minimum of sixty-seven (67) feet from
curb face to opposite curb face;
iv. If perpendicular or angle parking is requested on one side of the street
and the other side of the street is restricted to parallel or no parking the
street must measure a minimum of fifty-eight (58) feet from curb face to
opposite curb face;
v. If perpendicular or angle parking is requested on a one-way street, the
perpendicular or angle parking is only allowed on the side of the street
aligned with the permitted traffic flow and the other side of the street must
be restricted to no parking or parallel parking. At a minimum the street
must measure thirty-six feet (36') from curb face to opposite curb face
with no parking on the opposite side of the street from angle or
perpendicular parking and forty-five feet (45') from curb face to opposite
curb face with parallel parking on the opposite side of the street from the
angle or perpendicular parking; and
vi. Perpendicular or angle parking will only be allowed in compliance with
this ordinance on a street where the proposed perpendicular or angle
parking will extend in a straight line for a minimum of 300 feet. The 300-
foot measurement shall be in a continuous distance and include distances
within the 300-feet that are not striped for parking such as drive
approaches, intersections, and fire hydrants. Angle or perpendicular onstreet
parking areas on the same side of a street shall be separated from
each other by a minimum of a 100-foot distance;
vii. All property involved in the petition to create angle parking shall be in
compliance with Cedar City’s on-site parking requirements. If property is
not in compliance with Cedar City’s on-site parking requirements the
entire street will be disqualified until the property not in compliance with
Cedar City’s on-site parking requirements comes into compliance.
b. Petition requirements. Cedar City will consider allowing perpendicular or
angle parking in accordance with this ordinance on a street that extends from one
intersection to at least one additional intersection, and only upon receipt of a
petition meeting the following requirements:
i. The petition is signed by sixty percent (60%) of the property owners
abutting both sides of the street defined by the petition;
ii. The petition shall include a physical description of the street requesting
perpendicular or angle parking;
iii. The petition shall specify the type of parking requested (i.e. angle,
perpendicular, back in only angle);
iv. The petition shall contain the signature and printed names of each
property owner signing the petition;
v. The petition shall contain the address or other description of the
property claimed to be owned by each property owner signing the petition;
vi. The petition shall contain a calculation with the total number of
property owners within the area defined by the petition and a calculation
showing the signatures gathered actually constitute sixty percent (60%) of
the owners;
vii. The petition shall contain the phone number and mailing address for
each property owner signing the petition;
viii. The petition shall contain the name, address, phone number, and
email contact for a petition sponsor that will be a point of contact between
the neighborhood and Cedar City, and;
ix. The petition must contain a notice located in a conspicuous location in
large type telling the petitioner that if angle or perpendicular parking is
permitted the properties fronting the street will be financially responsible
to install and maintain all required signs, striping, and painting.
c. Petition verification. Upon receipt of the final petition City Staff shall have
thirty (30) days to make sure all required information is present in the petition and
verify the signatures of those listed on the petition. If the petition is not complete
or Cedar City staff is not able to verify the signatures the petition will be returned
to the petition sponsor with a written explanation of the reasons for rejecting the
petition. Once the petition is complete and verified City staff shall send the
petition sponsor written notice telling them the petition is complete and verified
and requesting required engineering.
d. Required engineering. The petition sponsor shall provide the City a drawing
that is signed and stamped by a licensed professional engineer showing the
following:
i. The entire street that is the subject of the petition;
ii. The proposed type of parking (angle, perpendicular, or back in only
angle parking);
iii. The proposed parking layout;
iv. The length and width of each parking spot in conformance with
applicable Cedar City ordinance and/or Engineering standards;
v. The proposed no parking and angle parking sign locations and text,
proposed curb painting, and stall striping in accordance with the most
current edition of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices
(MUTCD), or Cedar City Engineering Standards, whichever is more
descriptive. This shall include a requirement that the striping be done with
paint only. The type of paint used shall comply with the MUTCD
recommendations for pavement markings, or Cedar City Engineering
Standards, whichever is more descriptive;
vi. All distances between any portion of a parking stall to the point of
intersection of the street right of way lines (minimum of 30 feet);
vii. All distances between any portion of a parking stall and the bottom of
the curb taper when the parking spot is next to a driveway (minimum of 20
feet);
viii. All curbs painted red and no parking/angle parking signs in
compliance with the MUTCD, or the Cedar City Engineering Standards,
whichever is more descriptive, on those areas between parking stall and an
intersection or the bottom of a curb taper;
ix. Showing how the proposed angle or perpendicular parking will not
obstruct all existing or master planned bicycle lanes and pedestrian trails
within the street proposed for angle or perpendicular parking;
x. That the proposed parking stalls do not obstruct access to fire hydrants
or fire department connection caps within the public right of way. All of
the proposed stalls must be a minimum of fifteen feet (15') from a fire
hydrant or fire department connection cap within the public right of way;
xi. The proposed parking stalls shall not interfere with bus stops or cross
walks. All of the proposed stalls must be a minimum of twenty feet (20')
from cross walks and bus stops.
If there is a conflict with an existing or proposed bike lane or pedestrian trail, the
petitioner shall make recommendations to accommodate the bicycle or pedestrian traffic so as to
avoid conflicts with on-street parking. Once all of the engineering has been reviewed and
approved, City staff shall notify the petition sponsor of the date and time for a public hearing.
e. Public Hearing. Once the petition sponsor has confirmation of the time and
date for the public hearing the petition sponsor shall provide written notice fo the
time, date, and location of the public hearing to all property owners within 300
feet of the street proposed to be designated as perpendicular or angle parking.
The written notice shall also include a brief narrative of the proposed parking and
a map showing the proposed parking layout.
4. Approval, Painting, Signage, and Maintenance.
a. After holding the public hearing and considering the input received therein, the
City Council may approve, deny, or modify the submitted petition. Nothing in
this ordinance is intended to provide a guarantee to a petitioner that the proposed
parking will be approved. When petitioning the City, the petitioner shall be
responsible for all costs associated with the proposal.
b. If the proposal is approved it shall be the financial responsibility of the
property owners adjoining the street to install and maintain all required signs,
paint, and striping. This maintenance obligation shall be a continuing obligation
of the property owners. If the City inspects the signs, paint, or striping and finds
that maintenance or repair is needed, anywhere along the street, the City may
provide written notice to all property owners along the street requiring the
maintenance be completed within thirty (30) days. If the maintenance, along the
entire street, is not completed within the thirty (30) day period and there is no
communication from the property owners providing a reasonable request for
additional time the City shall remove and dispose of the upright signs, obliterate
any remaining striping or painted areas, and commence any necessary internal
process to revert the parking along the entire street to parallel only. This
obligation to maintain the signs, paint, and striping includes maintenance caused
by City authorized maintenance activities in the public right of way. Although the
property owners shall have the financial responsibility to install and maintain the
signs, painting, and striping, the parking shall be public parking under control of
City and the signs, striping and painting shall be public improvements under the
control of City.
5. Grand fathered on Street Parking Areas. The following areas of the City were
approved prior to the adoption of the provisions in sub-paragraphs one (1) through four (4) above
and are hereby grand fathered in their present configurations for purposes of the authorization to
have angle parking or perpendicular parking. For purposes of maintaining the signage, painting,
and striping the following areas must comply with applicable provisions of paragraphs one (1)
through four (4) above.
a. The following areas are designated as angle parking areas:
i. Along 200 West in front of the Southwest Plumbing offices located at
506 North and 200 West.
ii. Along the East side of 100 West between Center Street (University
Boulevard) and Hoover Avenue.
iii. On the West side of 100 East +/- 810 feet to the North of the
intersection of 200 North (Freedom Boulevard) and 100 East.
iv. On the East side of 100 West +/- 122 feet to the North of the
intersection of 100 West and Hoover Ave. And leaving approximately the
first +/- 20 feet to the North of Hoover Ave. free of angle parking spaces
so as to increase the line of sight for turning vehicles.
v. On the West side of 200 East beginning 30 feet South of the intersection
with 200 North and extending +/- 118 feet to the South. On the South side
of 200 North beginning 30 feet West of the intersection with 200 East and
extending 305 feet to the West. Additionally, the angle parking along 200
North shall be configured so that no angle parking is allowed within 20
feet of the bottom of any curb taper on both sides of all driveways within
the area.
vi. On the North side of College Avenue between 100 West and 300 West.
The angle parking area shall begin 30 feet from the intersection of College
Avenue and 100 West. No angle parking is allowed within 20 feet of the
bottom of any curb taper on both sides of driveways. Up to six (6) parallel
handicap parking stalls shall be allowed at the West end of the angle
parking as College Avenue approaches 300 West.
b. The following areas are designated for perpendicular parking areas:
i. On the North side of 200 South along the frontage of the Iron County
Senior Citizens Center located at 461 East and 200 South.
Enacted by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0211-15-1.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0311-15, 1216-15-3, 1216-15-4, 0210-16, 0622-16,
and 0810-16.
SECTION 35-12. Prohibited Parking in Fire Lanes (Red Zones) of Private Parking Lots.
Parking within any fire lane (red zone) of a private parking lot is hereby specifically
prohibited. Any violation thereof shall be enforced in accordance with this Chapter. (Amended
12/94)
SECTION 35-13. Prohibited Sale of Automobile on Public Streets.
A. For the use of this Section “Highway” or “Street” means the entire width between
property lines of every way or place; or place of whatever nature when any part of
it is open to the public, as a matter of right, for purpose of vehicle travel;
B. As used in this section “shoulder area” means that area of the hard surfaced
highway separated from the roadway by pavement edge line as established in the
current approved “manual on uniform traffic control devices”, or that portion of
the road contiguous to the roadway for accommodation of stopped vehicles, for
emergency use, and lateral support.
C. As used in this section “displaying as if for sale” shall be defined as:
1. Parking or leaving a motor vehicle or trailer in one location, with a for sale
sign or similar device displayed on the vehicle for more than twelve hours;
2. Parking or leaving a motor vehicle or trailer in a publicly owned area, with
a “for sale” sign or similar device displayed on the vehicle for more than
twelve hours;
3. Any violation of Section 27-25 of the Cedar City Ordinance.
D. It shall be unlawful for the owner or operator of a motor vehicle or trailer to park
it or allow it to be parked on any highway, street, or shoulder area for the purpose
of displaying it for sale. This section shall not apply under the following
circumstances:
1. a vehicle may be parked incidental to actual operation and immediate use
of the vehicle by the owner;
2. a vehicle or trailer may be displayed on a public street that is adjacent to
the real property in which the person offering the vehicle for sale has a
legal interest or is temporarily visiting;
3. A vehicle or trailer may be outside the seller’s place of employment while
the seller is engaged in said employment. (Amended 10/03)
SECTION 35-14. Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of an
infraction
and unless otherwise provided, shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than Five
Hundred Dollars ($500.00).
CHAPTER 35A
RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING
ARTICLE I. INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
Section 35A-1. Purpose
Section 35A-2. Definitions
Section 35A-3. Administration
ARTICLE II. DESIGNATION OF RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING AREAS
Section 35A-4. Designation Criteria
Section 35A-5. Designation Process
ARTICLE III. IMPLEMENTATION OF RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING AREA
Section 35A-6. Posting of Residential Permit Parking Area
Section 35A-7. Issuance of Permits
Section 35A-8. Permittee Classifications
Section 35A-9. Rights of Permittee
Section 35A-10. Display of Permits
Section 35A-11. Visitor Permits
Section 35A-12. Application for Permit
Section 35A-13. Duration of Permits
Section 35A-14. Fees
Section 35A-15. Amendment of Permit Area; Notice and Hearing
ARTICLE IV. PENALTY PROVISIONS
Section 35A-16. Violations
Section 35A-17. Revocation of Permit
Ch. 35 Pg. 0
CHAPTER 35A
RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING
ARTICLE I. INTRODUCTORY PROVISIONS
SECTION 35A-1. Purpose.
This Chapter is declared to be enacted for the purpose of promoting the safety,
convenience and general welfare of the inhabitants of Cedar City, Utah, and authorizes a
program by which property owners and residents in qualifying residential areas can receive
preferential treatment when competing with commuter vehicles for available street parking in
highly congested areas.
It has been determined that such congestion creates adverse impacts to the general health, safety
and welfare of citizens within such areas. Through a residential permit program, the integrity of
such neighborhoods may be preserved and enhanced. In addition, specific safety concerns may
be resolved through this program.
SECTION 35A-2. Definitions.
(1) Commuter Vehicle: A motor vehicle parked in a residential permit parking area
which does not qualify as a resident vehicle.
(2) Dwelling: A building or portion thereof designated for residential purposes.
(3) Lease: Consideration received for use of a parcel of real property as a residence or
place of business.
(4) Motor Vehicle: Automobile, truck, motorcycle, or other motor-driven vehicle not in
excess of 10,000 pounds’ gross weight.
(5) Non-Resident Permit: A permit issued pursuant to this Chapter for use on a
commuter vehicle in those residential permit parking areas where such permit is formally
authorized.
(6) Resident: A person who resides in a residential area on a regular basis.
(7) Resident Permit: A permit issued for use on a resident vehicle while parked in a
residential permit parking area.
(8) Residential Permit Parking Area (permit area): A residential area designated as
herein provided wherein motor vehicles displaying valid permits shall be exempt from parking
regulations applicable to commuter vehicles.
(9) Resident Vehicle: A motor vehicle owned or under the control of a resident or
property owner within the permit parking area.
SECTION 35A-3. Administration.
Ch. 35 Pg. 1
The residential permit parking program shall be administered in cooperation by the Chief
of Police and City Engineer. The Chief of Police and City Engineer shall delegate such authority
as required for effective administration of this Chapter.
ARTICLE II. DESIGNATION OF RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING AREAS
SECTION 35A-4. Designation Criteria.
(1) General Criteria. A residential area shall be deemed eligible for consideration as a
residential permit parking area if it is determined that the residential area is adversely affected by
commuter vehicles for any extended period.
(2) Specific Factors. In determining alleged adverse effects upon an area, the following
factors shall be included for evaluation:
(a) The extent of need by the residents for residential permit parking as evidenced by
receipt of verified petitions as required herein;
(b) The extent to which on-street parking spaces are occupied by motor vehicles during
the period proposed for parking regulations;
(c) The extent to which vehicles parked in the area proposed for parking regulations are
commuter vehicles rather than resident vehicles; and
(d) The extent to which resident vehicles in the residential area cannot be accommodated
by the number of off-street parking spaces.
(3) Threshold Technical Criteria. The following technical threshold criteria must be
satisfied within a proposed area:
(a) 70% or more of the parking capacity is generally occupied;
(b) Such occupancy shall continue for any consecutive 4-hour period; and
(c) An unusual portion of the on-street parking shall be by commuter vehicles, such that
the presence of commuter vehicles adversely affects the ability of residents to obtain onstreet
parking.
SECTION 35A-5. Designation Process.
(1) Petition. Upon receipt of a petition signed by 67% of residents and property owners
in the residential area proposed for designation, calculated in accordance with 35A-5(4)(b), the
Chief of Police and City Engineer shall undertake or cause to be undertaken such surveys or
studies as deemed necessary to determine whether the residential area satisfies the threshold
criteria.
(2) Filing Fee. An application fee of $2.00 per tax parcel shall be submitted with said
petition.
(3) Surveys and Studies. Within 30 days of receipt of the petition, surveys and studies
for general designation and criteria shall be completed. The boundaries of the proposed area
may be modified at the discretion of the Chief of Police and City Engineer to conform to
findings of such studies.
(4) Public Hearing. Within 30 days of the completion of the survey(s) and study, the
petitioner shall request a public hearing before the City Council for the purpose of receiving
Ch. 35 Pg. 2
public comment relative to the petition, and to determine boundaries as well as appropriate
regulations on parking fees, issuance of permits and other impacts of approval and
implementation.
(5) Notice of Public Hearing. At least 10 days prior to the hearing date, it is hereby
mandated that petitioner provide notice of public hearing as follows:
(a) Published notice in a newspaper of general circulation, one time only;
(b) Posted notice not more than 400 feet apart along the streets proposed to be included
in the permit area; and
(c) Mailed or hand-delivered notice to the listed residents, property owners and those
institutions known to generate a significant volume of commuter parking in the proposed
area. The notice shall state the purpose of the hearing, the location, the proposed
boundaries of the permit area, the proposed fee schedules and formulas for issuance, and
the location of all information on file and available for public review. Petitioner shall
provide the City Recorder with an Affidavit of Publication from the newspaper verifying
publication. In addition, petitioner shall sign an affidavit verifying performance of all
other notice requirements required herein.
(6) Ordinance Designating Residential Permit Parking Area. After review of all factors
at the public hearing, and in the event that the City Council approves the residential permit
parking area, the permit area shall be established by Ordinance only. The Ordinance shall set
forth the proposed boundaries of the residential permit parking area and the proposed parking
regulations, including administrative provisions for issuing permits and an implementation
schedule.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0725-18-1
Ch. 35 Pg. 3
ARTICLE III. IMPLEMENTATION OF RESIDENTIAL PERMIT PARKING AREA
SECTION 35A-6. Posting of Residential Permit Parking Area.
Upon passage of the Ordinance designating a residential permit parking area, the Chief of
Police and City Engineer shall cause appropriate signs to be posted in the area indicating thereon
parking regulations and conditions under which permit parking shall be exempt therefrom.
SECTION 35A-7. Issuance of Permits.
Parking permits shall be issued by the City Office. Each permit shall set forth the
particular residential permit parking area as well as the license number of the motor vehicle for
which it is issued. No more than two permits shall be available to any one dwelling unit.
SECTION 35A-8. Permittee Classifications.
The following classifications of persons or entities may be issued parking permits for
motor vehicles under their control pursuant to the provisions set forth above: (a) residents of the
permit area; (b) non-residents who own or lease property in the permit area for business
purposes; and (c) non-residents employed within the permit area. (A non-residential permit may
be issued upon payment of non-residential fee if so authorized in the Ordinance.)
SECTION 35A-9. Rights of Permittee.
Issuance of a permit shall not guarantee to the holder thereof an on-street parking space
within the designated residential permit parking area.
A motor vehicle bearing a valid parking permit displayed as provided for shall be
permitted to park in the permit area for which the permit has been issued without being limited
by parking regulations or prohibitions applicable to commuter vehicles. The permit does not
exempt drivers and owners from complying with general parking regulations. Motor vehicles
not displaying a permit but parking within a residential parking permit area shall be subject to the
commuter vehicle parking regulations and the penalties imposed by law.
SECTION 35A-10. Display of Permits.
Permits shall be displayed on an authorized vehicle so as to be clearly visible in the rear
windshield.
SECTION 35A-11. Visitor Permits.
Visitor permits shall be issued on a temporary basis to residents and property owners
located in a designated residential permit parking area for use by their bona fide transient visitors
Ch. 35 Pg. 4
for a limited duration not to exceed 14 days. A resident and/or property owner will not be issued
more than 5 visitor permits at any given time. Prior to expiration, the vehicle bearing a visitor
permit shall have all the parking rights held by permanent permittees. Appropriate requirements
or limitations on visitor permits and accompanying fees shall be recommended for each area by
Ordinance.
Amended by City Ordinance 0812-20-2.
SECTION 35A-12. Application for Permit.
Each application for a parking permit shall contain identity of applicant, claim for permit
eligibility, authorized residence or property ownership within the permit area, the license number
of the subject motor vehicle, and such other information as may be deemed relevant by the City.
Applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as established in the Ordinance.
SECTION 35A-13. Duration of Permits.
Each parking permit shall be valid for a period not to exceed the term of residency and/or
existence of the permit area, whichever is less. Permits are not transferrable.
SECTION 35A-14. Fees.
Fees to cover administration costs of the permit program, including fees for permits and
applications, shall be established by the Ordinance establishing the permit area.
SECTION 35A-15. Amendment of Permit Areas; Notice and Hearing.
The Chief of Police and/or City Engineer may initiate a proceeding to remove a
residential permit parking area or any portion thereof from designation under the program upon
notice and hearing. Said notice shall contain:
(a) A description of the intention to remove, amend or delete a permit area or any portion
thereof;
(b) A description of any amended regulations, or the area or streets to be deleted; and
(c) The date, time and place of a public hearing before the City Council to consider
proposed changes.
At least 10 days before the hearing, notice shall be given by the entity requesting such
amendment in accordance of Section 35A-5 (5). After review of all factors at the public hearing,
and in the event that the City Council approves such amendment or deletion, the same shall be
established by Ordinance.
Ch. 35 Pg. 5
ARTICLE IV. PENALTY PROVISIONS
SECTION 35A-16. Violations.
(1) It shall be unlawful for any person to stand or park a motor vehicle or to cause the
same to be done contrary to parking regulations established pursuant to this Chapter.
(2) It shall be unlawful for any person to falsely represent themselves as eligible for a
parking permit or to furnish false information in an application.
(3) It shall be unlawful for a person holding a valid parking permit to use or display such
permit on a motor vehicle other than that for which the permit was issued. Such conduct shall
constitute an unlawful act by the person holding the valid parking permit and the person who so
uses or displays the permit on a motor vehicle other than that for which it was issued.
(4) It shall be unlawful for a person to copy, produce or otherwise create a facsimile or
counterfeit parking permit.
SECTION 35A-17. Revocation of Permit.
Violation of the terms of the residential permit parking program shall be deemed a
forfeiture of any and all privileges granted through the permit.
(a) Any permit holder convicted of a violation of this Chapter may be required to
surrender such permit as a part of sentencing.
(b) The Chief of Police and City Engineer are authorized to revoke the permit of any
person found to be in violation of this Chapter. Upon written notification, the person shall
surrender such permit. Failure to do so shall constitute a violation of this Chapter.
(c) In the event the Chief of Police or City Engineer have good cause to believe that any
person or entity is abusing the visitor permit system, the permit holder shall be notified. Any
further application for a visitor permit by such person or entity may be denied for a period of not
more than one year.
-1-
Chapter 35B
OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES
Section 35B-1 Purpose
Section 35B-2 Definitions
Section 35B-3 Roads Designated for OHV Travel
Section 35B-4 Provisions for Use of OHV
Section 35B-5 Prohibited Operation
Section 35B-6 Exceptions
Section 35B-7 Insurance
Section 35B-8 Snow Removal
Section 35B-9 Enforcement
Section 35B-10 Penalty
ARTICLE I
GENERAL
SECTION 35B-1 Purpose
This Ordinance is for the purpose of adopting in part the Utah Off-Highway Vehicle Act Title 41
Chapter 22, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended, and designating Cedar City roads, streets or
highways open for off-highway vehicles and establishing regulations related thereto.
SECTION 35B-2 Definitions
“Off-Highway Vehicle (OHV)” means: All Terrain Type 1 Vehicles, and All Terrain
Type II Vehicles, as defined by Title 41, Chapter 22, Section 2, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as
amended.
“Cedar City Roads, Streets or Highways and Trails Designated as Being Open for
Public Travel for OHV’s” shall be defined and designated by an “Off-Highway Vehicle Travel
Map.” This map shall be maintained by the Cedar City Engineering Department and may be
changed, modified or amended by a resolution of the Cedar City Council. These maps will be
made available to the public and will be posted in public places.
“Direct Supervision” means oversight at a distance:
(1) of no more than 300 feet; and
(2) within which:
(A) visual contact is maintained; and
(B) advice and assistance can be given and received.
-2-
“Operate” means to ride in or on and control the operation of an off-highway vehicle.
“Operator” means an individual who operates or is in actual physical control of an
off-highway vehicle.
“Owner” means a person, other than a lien holder, having the property in or title to an
off-highway vehicle and entitled to its use or possession.
“Register” means the act of assigning a registration number to an off-highway vehicle in
accordance with Title 41, Chapter 22, Section 3, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended.
SECTION 35B-3 Roads Designated for OHV Travel
Unless designated as being open for public travel for OHV’s, either by the “Off-Highway
Vehicle Travel Map, or by signage on the ground, all Cedar City roads remain closed to travel for
OHV’s except
for:
1. Off-highway implements of husbandry used in accordance with Title 41, Chapter
22, Section 5.5, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended; and
2. A person may operate an OHV on any Cedar City road or highway, other than
State Roads, to gain access to or from a private or public area open for OHVs, by
the most direct route from their residence or motel. The State highways on which
OHV use is prohibited are:
a. SR 56 (200 N. from west city limits to Main Street);
b. SR 130 (Main Street) from south city limits beginning at the intersection
of Royale Hunte Drive and Cross Hollows Drive to the north City limits;
c. SR 14 (Center Street) from Main Street to east city limits;
d. SR 289 (Center Street, 1150 W., 200 S., 300 W.) from Main Street west
on Center to 1150 West, south to 200 South, east to 300 West, and north
to Center Street.
SECTION 35B-4 Provisions for Use of OHV
Any person operating an OHV is subject to all of the provisions of Title 41 Chapter 6,
Utah Code Annotated (1953), as amended (Traffic Code), which includes, but is not limited to:
1. Unless otherwise provided for herein, no person under 12 years of age will be
allowed to operate an OHV on a Cedar City road, street or highway designated for
OHV use.
2. No person between the ages of 12 and 16 may operate and no owner may give
-3-
permission to a person between the ages of 12 and 16 to operate an OHV on the
designated roads, streets and highways of Cedar City unless such person is
accompanied on another OHV and under the direct visual supervision of an adult
18 years of age or older holding a valid driver’s license (UCA 41-22-1.5 and 41-
22-18). OHV operators between the ages of 12 and 16 must possess an OHV
education certificate as issued by the Utah Division of Parks and Recreation
(UCA 41-22-30).
3. All operators 16 years of age and older must possess either a valid operator’s
license as provided in Title 53, Chapter 3, Uniform Driver License Act or an OHV
education certificate as issued by the Utah Division of Parks and Recreation
(UCA 41-22-29 and UCA 41-22-30).
4. All riders under the age of 18 may not operate or ride an all terrain type I vehicle
on the system unless the person is wearing a properly-fitted Snell or DOT
approved protective headgear designated for motorized use (UCA 41-2-10.8).
5. All users of roads, streets and highways designated for use by OHV’s must obey
all traffic and other safety laws and rules as designated (UCA 41-6-44).
6. All users of the Cedar City designated off-highway roads, streets and highways
may not operate a vehicle at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under
the existing conditions, giving regard to the actual and potential hazards then
existing, including when:
a. approaching and crossing an intersection or railroad grade crossing;
b. approaching and going around a curve;
c. approaching a hill crest;
d. traveling upon any narrow or winding roadway;
e. special hazards exist due to pedestrians, other traffic, weather or road
conditions.
7. Unless otherwise stated herein, even when no special hazard exist, an operator of
an OHV will not travel at a speed in excess of 25 mph at any time, upon any
residential street, alley, highway, or other public ground or place in the city. An
OHV may be operated at a speed no greater than 45 mph along non-residential
City street or no faster than the posted speed limit, whichever is more restrictive.
SECTION 35B-5 Prohibited Operation
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or operate any off-highway vehicle in the
following ways or under the following circumstances, which are hereby declared to be unsafe and
a public nuisance:
-4-
1. On a roadway, shoulder or inside bank or slope of any road, street or highway, except
as provided in this Article.
2. On direct crossing of a street or highway, unless:
a. The crossing is made at an angle of approximately ninety degrees to the
direction of the highway and at a place where no obstruction prevents a quick
and safe crossing;
b. The off-highway vehicle is brought to a complete stop before crossing the
shoulder or main traveled way of the highway;
c. The operator yields the right-of-way to all oncoming traffic which constitutes
an immediate hazard; and
d. In crossing a divided highway or a street of more than two lanes, the crossing
is made only at an intersection of the highway with another public street or
highway controlled by a traffic signal (UCA 41-22-10.3).
3. Without being equipped with at least one headlamp, one tail lamp and brakes, all in
working order, which conform to standards as prescribed in UCA 41-22-10.7.
4. In a careless, reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the person or property of
another or to cause injury or damage to such person or property.
5. While under the influence of intoxicating liquor or a controlled substance.
6. Without a manufacturer-installed or equivalent muffler in good working order and
connected to the off-highway vehicle's exhaust system. Mufflers must have a
federally approved spark arrestor. Overall noise emission may not exceed 99 decibels
at a distance of 20 inches. Mufflers may not be altered to increase motor noise, or
have a cutout, bypass, or similar device (UCA 41-22-10.7).
7. In a direction other than the same direction as other motor vehicles.
8. Within the right-of-way of any road, street or highway while towing a sled, skid or
other vehicle, unless the object towed is connected to the off-highway vehicle by a
hinged swivel and secure hitch.
9. In any municipal park or recreation area, except when posted as "open" to
off-highway vehicles, and only along established paths and trails and within the hours
permitted.
-5-
10. Upon private property, other than that of the off-highway vehicle owner or operator,
without express written permission of the owner.
a. It shall be unlawful for any person operating or accompanying a person
operating an OHV to refuse to immediately leave private land upon the
request of the owner or person in charge of such land.
b. No person operating or accompanying a person operating an OHV shall
obstruct any entrance or exit to private property with an OHV, trailer or other
vehicle without the owner’s permission.
c. It shall be unlawful for any person to tear down, mutilate, or destroy any sign,
signboards, or other notice which regulates trespassing for purposes of
operating an OHV on land; or, to tear down, deface, or destroy any fence or
other enclosure or any gate or bars belonging to any such fence or enclosure.
11. Possessing weapons such as firearms and archery equipment in violation of State
Law.
SECTION 35B-6 Exceptions
No person may operate an off-highway vehicle on Cedar City roads, streets or highways not
designated as open to OHV use, except:
1. When crossing a highway, trail, or road and the operator comes to a complete stop
before crossing; proceeds only after yielding the right-of-way to oncoming traffic; and
crosses at a right angle. Must also be in compliance with Section 35B-5 (3). (UCA
41-22-10.3)
2. When loading or unloading an OHV from a vehicle or trailer which shall be done
with due regard for safety and at the nearest practical point of operation. (UCA 41-
22-10.3)
3. When an emergency exists during any period of time and at those locations when the
operation of conventional motor vehicles is impractical or when the operation is
directed by a peace officer or public authority (UCA 41-22-10.3)
SECTION 35B-7 Insurance
Utah Code Annotated 41-12a-301 (5) specifically states that owner’s or operator’s security is
not required on off-highway vehicles registered under Section 41-22-3 when operated either:
(i) on a highway designated as open for off-highway vehicle use; or
(ii) in the manner prescribed by Section 35B-7 above (UCA 41-22-10.3)
-6-
SECTION 35B-8 Snow Removal
When using Type I and Type II off-highway vehicles for snow removal, the off-highway
vehicle must have a mounted blade on the off-highway vehicle The off-highway vehicle may go
from job site to another job site on city streets provided the operator obeys all other sections of
the off-highway vehicle ordinance.
SECTION 35B-9 Enforcement
Only peace officers of the state and their respective duly authorized representatives may
enforce this section.
SECTION 35B-10 Penalty
Unless otherwise specified, penalties for violation of this Ordinance shall be punishable as a
Class C Misdemeanor (UCA 41-22-17) with a minimum fine of $82.00.
(AMENDED BY ORDINANCE 0813-08-1 and 0921-11-1)
-7-
-8-
CHAPTER 36
UNIFORM CODES
SECTION 36-1 Uniform and International Codes
SECTION 36-2 Building Code
SECTION 36-3 Plumbing Code
SECTION 36-4 Mechanical Code
SECTION 36-5 Electrical Code
SECTION 36-6 Fire Code
SECTION 36-7 Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings
SECTION 36-8 Energy Code
SECTION 36-9 Administrative Code
SECTION 36-10 Revisions and Amendments of the Codes
SECTION 36-11 Penalty
 
  Ch. Pg. 1
CHAPTER 36
UNIFORM CODES
SECTION 36-1. Uniform and International Codes.
The Uniform and/or International Codes as adopted by the State of Utah, is hereby adopted by
Cedar City to regulate and control the design, erection, construction, enlargement, alteration, repair,
moving, removal, demolition, conversion, occupancy, equipment, use, height, area and maintenance
and use of all buildings, structures or systems in Cedar City, Utah, and further to provide for the
issuance of permits and collection of fees, and provide for penalties for violations thereof.
SECTION 36-2. Building Code.
The current Uniform Building/International Code which has been adopted by the State of
Utah, for use in the State of Utah is hereby adopted by Cedar City, Utah. Three copies of the current
code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Recorder.
SECTION 36-3. Plumbing Code.
The current Uniform Plumbing/International Code which has been adopted by the State of
Utah for use in the State of Utah is hereby adopted by Cedar City, Utah. Three copies of the current
code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Recorder.
SECTION 36-4. Mechanical Code.
The current Uniform Mechanical/International Code which has been adopted by the State of
Utah, for the use in the State of Utah is hereby adopted by Cedar City, Utah. Three copies of the
current code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Recorder.
SECTION 36-5. Electrical Code.
The current National Electrical Code which has been adopted by the State of Utah, for use in
the State of Utah is hereby adopted by Cedar City, Utah. Three copies of the current code shall be
filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Recorder.
SECTION 36-6. Fire Code.
The current Uniform/International Fire Code which has been adopted by the State of Utah, for
use in the State of Utah is hereby adopted by Cedar City, Utah. Three copies of the current code
shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Recorder.
SECTION 36-7. Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.
 
  Ch. Pg. 2
The current Uniform/International Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings which has
been adopted by the State of Utah, for use in the State of Utah is hereby adopted by Cedar City,
Utah. Three copies of the current code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the
office of the City Recorder.
SECTION 36-8. Energy Code.
The current Uniform/International Energy Code 1995 Edition which has been adopted by the
State of Utah, for use in the State of Utah is hereby adopted by Cedar City, Utah. Three copies of the
current code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Recorder.
SECTION 36-9. Administrative Code.
The current Uniform/International Administrative Code which has been adopted by the State
of Utah, for the use in the State of Utah is hereby adopted by Cedar City, Utah. Three copies of the
current code shall be filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Recorder.
SECTION 36-10. Revisions and Amendments of the Codes.
Any Uniform/International code as adopted by this Ordinance shall also include the adoption
of any and all revisions, supplements, and amendments, providing at least three copies of said
revisions, supplements and amendments are kept on file in the office of the City Recorder.
SECTION 36-11. Penalty.
Any violation of any provisions of the Uniform/International codes herein adopted shall be
deemed a misdemeanor. Also, any structure or equipment built or installed in violation of any
provision of the codes herein adopted shall be deemed a public nuisance and may be abated by
appropriate proceedings.
(AMENDED 2/98)
CHAPTER 37
WATERWORKS
SECTION 37-1 Waterworks. Shall Be Under Exclusive Control of City
SECTION 37-2 Employment of Superintendent
SECTION 37-3 Duties of the Superintendent
SECTION 37-4 Written Application for Water Service
SECTION 37-4-1 Temporary Occupancy Pending Financing; Application for Water
Service
SECTION 37-4-2 Temporary Fire Hydrant Meters
SECTION 37-5 Service Pipes
SECTION 37-5-1 Water Supply Protection; Cross Connection
SECTION 37-5-2 Ownership of Service Lateral Lines
SECTION 37-5-3 City Meters and shut-off valve for City personnel use only.
SECTION 37-6 Plumbing Approval Report
SECTION 37-7 Waste Prohibited
SECTION 37-7-1 Time-of-Day Watering Parameters
SECTION 37-8 Water Department to Have Free Access
SECTION 37-11 Fire Hydrants
SECTION 37-12 Unlawful to Take Water Without Paying Therefor
SECTION 37-13 Unlawful to Take Water After It Has Been Turned Off by The
Water Department
SECTION 37-13-1 Billing
SECTION 37-13-2 Shut-off of Water Service
SECTION 37-13-3 Fee to Resume Service After Shut-off
SECTION 37-13-4 Pulling of the Meter and Imposing a Fee for Re-Installation of the
Meter.
SECTION 37-13-5 Pulling of the Meter and Imposing a Fee for Re-Installation of the
Meter
SECTION 37-13-5 Authority to Postpone Shutting off Water Service
SECTION 37-13-6 Writing Off Terminated and Uncollectible Account
SECTION 37-13-7 Late Fee Payment Agreements
SECTION 37-13-8 Un-billed water accounts
SECTION 37-14 Scarcity of Water
SECTION 37-15 Repealed, March 1998
SECTION 37-16 Water Mains
SECTION 37-17 Water Rates
SECTION 37-18 Discontinuance During Quarter
SECTION 37-19 Befouling Waters
SECTION 37-20 Extensions of Water Beyond City Limits
SECTION 37-21 Water Outside City Limits
SECTION 37-22 Use Restrictions on Livestock Watering Outside City Limits
SECTION 37-23 Authority for Connection
SECTION 37-24 Unlawful to Interfere with City Officers
SECTION 37-25 Rules and Regulations
SECTION 37-26 Repealed, May 2005
SECTION 37-27 Repealed, May 2005
SECTION 37-28 Repealed, May 2005
SECTION 37-29 Recommendations
SECTION 37-30 Penalty
SECTION 37-31 Drinking Water Source Protection
SECTION 37-32 Water Acquisition
SECTION 37-32-1 Findings
SECTION 37-32-2 Purpose and policy
SECTION 37-32-3 Time to acquire water rights or pay special assessment
SECTION 37-32-4 Acquisition of water reserve
SECTION 37-32-5 Acquisition of excess water rights
SECTION 37-32-6 Agricultural uses to continue and accounting for water rights
SECTION 37-32-7 Amount and type of water required – Exception
SECTION 37-32-8 Establishment of special assessment
SECTION 37-32-9 Effective date
Ch. 37 Pg. 1
CHAPTER 37
WATERWORKS
SECTION 37-1. Waterworks. Shall be Under Exclusive Control of City.
The waterworks constructed by the City to supply the City with water from any source
shall be known and designated as the City Water Works; it shall be the property of said City, and
shall be under the sole and exclusive control of the Mayor and City Council, who may from time
to time direct the construction of such reservoirs, water wells, water tanks, water mains, service
pipes and fire hydrants as the necessities of the inhabitants of the City may require.
SECTION 37-2. Employment of Superintendent.
The Mayor with the consent and approval of the City Council shall appoint a competent
and suitable person to care for, look after, and take charge of the City waterworks system. Such
employee shall be known as the Superintendent of the Waterworks System.
SECTION 37-3. Duties of the Superintendent.
The Superintendent of the Waterworks System shall, under the direction of the Mayor,
and City Council, the City Manager, and the Public Works Director have charge of the operation,
maintenance, and inspection of the Cedar City Waterworks System, including the mains, storage
reservoirs, pumps, wells, sources of supply, water meters and such other duties as shall be
assigned.
SECTION 37-4. Written Application for Water Service.
Any property owner of record desiring a supply of water from the City system to their
property, where such service is available, shall apply therefore to the City, and file an agreement
with the City, said agreement and application shall contain the following information, and any
and all other information City staff may deem necessary and appropriate, to whit:
APPLICATION FOR UTILITY SERVICE
Cedar City, Utah , 20 .
To Cedar City, a Municipal Corporation:
The Undersigned hereby applies for, sewer, and/or garbage utility service for their
premises located at , Cedar City, Utah, and hereby agrees to pay
service charges for utility services as fixed by Cedar City, and agrees to be bound by the rules,
regulations and ordinances of CEDAR CITY for the control of the CITY’s utility systems, and in
Ch. 37 Pg. 2
the event of a failure to pay the utility charges, the City shall have the right to shut off the water
meter at its election. Any delinquent account may be turned over to a collection agency, and
applicant will be responsible for any and all collection fees assessed by said agency. In addition,
by affixing my signature to this agreement I hereby signify that I have inspected the premises to
insure that it is ready for water service, and hereby authorize the CITY to turn on water service
to my property. I also agree that I will indemnify, defend, and hold harmless CEDAR CITY, its
agents and employees, elected and appointed officials, from and against all claims, damages,
losses that occur due to any condition on the applicant’s property arising out of or resulting from
the act of turning on water service to the below mentioned property.
Signature of Property Owner Only
Prior to providing water service to any person, company, trust, or organization, any and
all charges due and payable to the City by the person, company, trust, organization, or any of
their assignors, trustees, or predecessors in interest for past water, service, material or supplies
must be paid in full.
SECTION 37-4-1. Temporary Occupancy Pending Financing; Application for Water
Service.
As set forth in Section 37-4 above, the property owner of record must make written
application for water service, and bear all responsibility for payment of the same.
Under certain circumstances, property may be occupied by individuals desiring to
purchase the same. In the event that a closing date for the purchase of property by such
individuals has been determined, and/or financing is pending approval, the occupant may make
application with the City in writing for water service to said premises, where such service is
available. Such service when granted shall be available up and until the closing date as verified
by an Earnest Money Sales Agreement or similar document. Thereafter, the property owner
shall be subject to Section 37-4 above.
Any occupant qualifying under the circumstances set forth above must make written
application to the City Recorder and file an agreement with the City, which in substance and
form shall duplicate the agreement and application of Section 37-4 above, except it shall be
signed by the prospective buyer.
In addition, such occupant must file a cash sum with the City equal in amount to two
months minimum billing for said service as currently established by resolution by the Cedar City
Council, as and for a deposit for said water service. The deposit shall be refundable after the
closing date upon verification by occupant that occupant is now the owner of record, and upon
fulfillment of all terms of the Application for Water Agreement.
Prior to providing water service to any person, company, trust, or organization, any and
all charges due and payable to the City by the person, company, trust, organization, or any of
Ch. 37 Pg. 3
their assignors, trustees, or predecessors in interest for past water, service, material or supplies
must be paid in full.
SECTION 37-4-2. Temporary Fire Hydrant Meters.
A. It shall be the policy of Cedar City that individuals who demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the Water Superintendent a need for use of culinary water at a location where
permanent service has not been connected may obtain from the City a fire hydrant use permit for
the purpose of utilizing a portable meter at an approved fire hydrant. The Water Superintendent
must determine that the use of said hydrant will not adversely affect deliveries of water to
existing connections of the Cedar City Water System. (See paragraph C below.) Water shall not
be removed through fire hydrants even with a temporary meter without prior approval of the
Water Superintendent or one of his designated agents.
B. The procedure to obtain a fire hydrant use permit is as follows:
1) A standard form issued by the Water Department must be completed by the
applicant stating the conditions, location and nature of the use requested, and
acknowledging charges and liabilities;
2) In addition, payment for the use of the temporary fire hydrant meter and
associated fees ($1,500.00 deposit and a $25.00 non-refundable administration
fee) shall be paid in full to the City Treasurer.
3) Upon approval of the fire hydrant use permit application by the Water
Superintendent, and verification of receipt of payment, the Water Department
may issue the hydrant meter. At that time a meter reading and the meter serial
number will be recorded on the use permit.
C. The Water Superintendent may deny a hydrant use permit depending upon location
and availability of water from the water system. In any event, all other means of obtaining water
for construction purposes or dust control should be investigated and used if practicable.
D. The base rate per month for hydrant meters shall be $75.00. Water usage shall be
calculated at double the Tier III (excessive irrigation) rate currently in effect per each thousand
gallons. Meters shall be read and billed monthly by the Water Department. The meter lessee
shall be responsible for returning the meter to the Water Division each month for inspection and
reading. Readings shall be conducted on the third Tuesday and Wednesday of each month or by
appointment if made in advance.
E. Any lessee who does not return the meter to the Water Division each month for
inspection and reading on the third Tuesday or third Wednesday or by appointment if made in
advance shall be subject to a $250.00 monthly penalty. If the lessee fails to return the meter
Ch. 37 Pg. 4
after three months, the lessee shall forfeit his/her deposit and shall be subject to further penalties
as described in paragraph H. Prior to imposing a penalty, the Water Division shall send the
lessee written notice that he/she has missed the monthly reading. Said notice shall be sent
certified mail, return receipt requested, to the lessee’s billing address as listed on the hydrant
meter lease form.
F. Proper use of fire hydrants is required. The applicant must close the hydrant and
disconnect the cut off valve from the hydrant when not using the water, thereby leaving the
hydrant free and clear for use by the Fire Department.
G. Any damage to the fire hydrant or public works department equipment after release to
the applicant and prior to return must be paid for by the applicant. Any portion of the $1,500.00
deposit may be retained by the City to cover the cost of such damage.
H. Any use of City water from a source where permanent connection has not taken place
without a meter as provided herein shall be unlawful. Any person violating any provision of this
Ordinance shall upon conviction be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars
($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six months (6), or by both such fine and
imprisonment.
The City shall retain the right to revoke a hydrant permit and confiscate the hydrant meter for
any reason it deems appropriate. In such case, after any the cost of damages and/or fees are
subtracted, the remainder of the hydrant deposit shall be refunded.
AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 0610-09-1
SECTION 37-5. Service Pipes.
Service pipes must be so arranged that the supply to each separate house or premises may
be controlled by separate stopcock and water meter placed within and near the line of the street
curb, or as otherwise approved by the Public Works Director or Water
Superintendent. Before water will be supplied through such service pipe, a written application
for utility service must be completed to the satisfaction of the City as per Cedar City ordinance
37-4 or 37-4.1.
All water users shall keep their service pipes and connections and other apparatus in good
repair and protected from frost at their own expense. No person except under the direction of the
Cedar City Public Works Department shall be allowed to dig into the street for the purpose of
laying, removing or repairing any service pipe.
All service pipes installed within the City’s water system shall be of a type approved for
such use listed within the City Engineering Standards. No extension or service pipes shall be
made without first obtaining the City’s approval.
Ch. 37 Pg. 5
SECTION 37-5-1. Water Supply Protection; Cross Connections.
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the City
or any other water utility unless the water supply in the premises is protected as required herein.
In order to prevent cross connections between the City’s culinary water system and any
other system, the resident or business owner will choose between another system and the City’s
culinary system. If a system other than the City’s culinary water system is connected, then the
homeowner or business shall not have a feed line connecting this other system with the City’s
culinary water system. No physical connection shall be allowed between the City’s culinary
system and any other system.
(A) Definitions:
(1) Back Flow. The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either
back-pressure or back-siphonage.
(2) Back-Pressure. The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures or substances
under pressure into the feeding distribution pipes of a potable water supply
system from any source other than the intended source.
(3) Back-Siphonage. The flow of water or other liquids or substances into the
distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source other
than the intended source caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable
water supply system.
(4) Back Flow Prevention Assembly. To gain approval for the use within a
public drinking water system, all back flow prevention assemblies must be
in-line serviceable (repairable), in-line testable and have certification
through third party certifying agencies. The third party certification will
consist of any combination of two laboratory or field test certifications.
Acceptable third party laboratory certifying agencies are American
Society of Sanitary Engineers, International Association of
Plumbing/Mechanical Officials, and the University of Southern California
- Foundation for Cross Connection Control Hydraulic Research. All back
flow prevention devices must have third party certification.
(5) Cross Connections. Any connection which may allow non-potable water
or industrial fluids or other material of questionable quality to come into
contact with potable water inside a distribution system, including any
temporary connections, swing connections, removable connections, fourCh.
37 Pg. 6
way plug valves, swivel change-over devices, or other similar plumbing
arrangements.
(B) Duty to Inspect. It shall be the responsibility of the water consumer to purchase,
have installed, tested, and maintain back flow prevention devices where necessary
and to control cross connections. The consumer shall have certified inspections
and operational tests at least once a year upon request of the City. Where the City
deems a hazard to be great, the consumer may be required to have such
inspections and tests at a more frequent interval as prescribed by the City. All
such tests shall be made according to the standard set forth by the State of Utah
Division of Drinking Water.
(C) New Construction. The water division employee designated by the Water
Superintendent as the Back Flow Enforcement Officer will review all plans for
new construction and insure that cross connections are not part of the consumer's
water system.
(D) Installation Required. Whenever the City deems a service connection's water
usage contributes a sufficient hazard to the water supply, installation of an
approved back-flow prevention assembly shall be required. The type of
protective assembly required shall depend upon the degree of hazard. The City
may test all back-flow prevention assemblies after the initial installation in order
to determine their adequacy.
(E) Existing Equipment. All back-flow prevention assemblies existing at the time this
ordinance is adopted which do not meet the requirements hereof shall be excluded
from the requirements hereof provided they were approved for the purposes
described herein at the time of installation and have been properly maintained.
Such previously existing assemblies shall be subject to the periodic inspection and
testing required by Section B above. Whenever an existing assembly is moved to
another location, or where it is determined to constitute a hazard to health, the unit
shall be replaced by an approved back-flow prevention assembly.
(F) Repair and Maintenance of Equipment. The maintenance of all back-flow
prevention assemblies and cross connection control devices required hereunder
shall be the responsibility of the property owner, and failure to adequately
maintain the required equipment shall be a violation. Repairs to a back flow
prevention assembly must be performed by a tester having appropriate licensure
form the Department of Commerce, Division of Professional Licensing who also
holds a current Class II or III back flow technical certificate or by an agent of the
owner or the assembly.
(G) Access for Inspection. A consumer system shall be open for inspection at all
reasonable times to authorized representatives of the City in order to determine if
Ch. 37 Pg. 7
cross connections or other hazards exist. Consumer's shall be responsible to
provide access across their property for inspection purposes free from litter,
overgrowth, threat of vicious animals, or other hindrance that may be detrimental
to ease of access.
(H) Certified Back-Flow Technician. All tests of mechanical devices shall be
conducted by a certified back-flow technician. Such technician shall be
responsible for the following:
(1) Assure that acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for the
testing, repairing or overhauling of back-flow prevention assemblies.
(2) Make reports of such testing and/or repair to the consumer, and the City,
(3) Include in all reports a list of any materials or replacement parts used.
(4) Assure that replacement parts are equal in quality to original parts and that
any testing, repair or replacement does not change the design or
operational characteristics of the assembly.
(5) Maintain license in current condition and testing equipment in proper
operating conditions.
(6) Be equipped with the competent to use all necessary equipment to
properly test and maintain back-flow prevention assemblies.
(7) Tag each assembly or high hazard air gap tested or inspected; show the
serial number, date tested and by whom, including the technician's license
number.
(I) Public Notification. Although failure of a consumer to be aware of this ordinance
shall be no defense to violation, the water department shall use reasonable means
to notify its customers of the hazards of cross connections and the need for annual
inspection of back-flow assemblies.
(J) Records. The water department shall keep reasonable records of cross connection
hazards and the condition of back-flow assemblies, including those records
required by State and Federal agencies. It shall provide the tags required by
Section H (7) above upon requested.
(K) Violations. Service of water to a consumer found to be in violation of this
Ordinance shall be discontinued by the City after written notice of the violation,
Ch. 37 Pg. 8
ten (10) days suspended for voluntary compliance, and due process otherwise
extended by the City before termination of water service. A violation exists:
(1) If back-flow prevention assembly required herein for control of cross
connections is not installed, tested or maintained;
(2) It is found that a back-flow prevention assembly is removed or has been
bypassed;
(3) If an unprotected cross connection exists on the premises;
(4) If the periodic system inspection has not been conducted.
Where written notification of a deficiency is provided by the City to the
Consumer to take required corrective action within ten (10) days after the date of mailing such
notice, the City shall thereafter discontinue service in accordance herewith. Water service will
not be restored until all such conditions or defects are corrected. In addition to any penalty
provided herein, violation of this Ordinance shall be a class B misdemeanor. (8/90)
SECTION 37-5-2. Ownership of Service Lateral Lines.
All service lateral lines connecting the City Water System to a land owner or resident’s
premises shall be owned, operated and maintained by the City from the City Water Main to the
outlet connection of the meter setter or the property line, whichever is the shortest distance.
From that point, the service lateral line is owned and maintained by the landowner. Water
meters however, shall always be owned, operated and maintained by the City. All service lateral
lines from the City water main through the meter box shall be installed to City Engineering
Standards. (7/98)
SECTION 37-5-3 City Meters and shut-off valve for City personnel use only.
Access into the City owned meter pit or box, and use of the plumbing inside, including,
but not limited to the meter, setter, check valves and shut-off valve shall be allowed only by City
Water Department personnel, unless otherwise approved by the Water Superintendent or his
designee.
SECTION 37-6. Plumbing Approval. Report.
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any extension of any pipe or connect any
fixture to the waterworks system for any purpose whatsoever without first obtaining approval
from the City. Within twenty-four (24) hours after the completion and before the work is covered
any plumbing work, connected with the water works system, the same must be reported to the
plumbing inspector. All new service connections and extensions to the water system shall be
Ch. 37 Pg. 9
isolated from the potable water until such time as the lines have been flushed, disinfected and
tested as required by Cedar City.
SECTION 37-7. Waste Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any water user to waste water, or to allow it to be wasted, by
imperfect stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes, or to allow tanks or watering troughs to leak
or overflow, or to wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets, or stops or through basins, water
closets, urinals, sinks, or other apparatus, or to use the water for purposes other than those for
which he has paid, or to use water in violation of the rules and regulations for controlling the
water supply. After notification of violation, the City may terminate any service found in
violation of this section if, within a reasonable time period, the condition has not been remedied.
SECTION 37-7-1. Time-of-Day Watering Parameters.
(A) For purposes of this section the following terms shall have the following
definitions:
1. “Culinary Water” shall include all water supplied through that portion of
Cedar City’s water works system for culinary use. Typical examples of
culinary water include, but are not limited to, residential connections,
business connections, and industrial connections.
2. “Ditch Irrigation Water” shall include all water supplied by Cedar City
pursuant to the terms of Chapter 21 of the Ordinances of Cedar City.
3. “Irrigation” shall include the spraying, sprinkling, misting, flooding,
dripping, or otherwise applying water on turf, gardens, trees, grass,
shrubbery, or any other vegetation.
4. “Secondary Irrigation Water” shall include all non-potable water supplied
through any Cedar City water works system dedicated for secondary
irrigation purposes. Typical examples of secondary irrigation water
include, but are not limited to, large irrigation users such as schools, City
recreational facilities, golf courses, or Southern Utah University.
Additional irrigation uses may be added by the Superintendent of the
Cedar City Water Works System.
(B) Beginning on April 1 and ending on October 31 of each calendar year, outside
irrigation using culinary water is prohibited between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and
6:00 p.m., except for the following situations:
Ch. 37 Pg. 10
1. New lawns that require frequent irrigation for establishment purposes
within thirty (30) days of planting;
2. Short cycles required for testing, inspecting, and maintaining irrigation
systems provided that there is a person physically present to monitor the
system test; or
3. Use of culinary water for irrigation of commercial stock and commercial
gardens or plant nurseries that are licensed by the City, provided that the
licensee or a representative is personally on the premises at the time the
irrigation is taking place.
4. Special permit issued by the Superintendent of the Cedar City Water
Works System.
(C) Use of Secondary Irrigation Water and Ditch Irrigation Water are specifically
excluded from the provisions of this ordinance.
(D) Within a calendar year culinary water users found violating this ordinance shall be
subject to the following penalties:
1. Upon a first offense a notice reasonably designed to educate and inform
the water user about the provisions of this ordinance shall be provided.
The notice shall be deemed sufficient if left in a conspicuous location on
the property where the ordinance violation occurs. An example is leaving
a notice hanging on the front door of a residence, or the manager’s door of
a multi-unit dwelling.
2. Upon a second violation the water supply to the property where the
violation occurs shall be shut off. Once the water is shut off it may only
be turned back on by City staff after the fee established in this ordinance
or the City’s fee schedule has been paid.
3. Upon a third or subsequent violation the water supply to the property
where the violation occurs shall be shut off. Once the water is shut off it
may only be turned back on by City staff after the fee established by this
ordinance or the City’s fee schedule and an additional one hundred dollar
($100) penalty have been paid.
(E) All fines and penalties shall be paid in full prior to restoration of water service. If
not paid the fines shall be added to the water user’s outstanding water bill and
collected in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance.
Ch. 37 Pg. 11
(F) The City’s Public Works Department shall maintain a complete list containing the
time of day, date, and address of each property for the enforcement of the
provisions of this ordinance.
(G) After the enforcement action has taken place a property owner shall be able to
appeal. The appeal shall be to the City Manager. The appeal shall be limited in
scope to the property owner having to show that on the dates and times recorded
by the Public Works Department they were not irrigating with culinary water
during prohibited times. The City Manager shall be limited in the remedy that
may be provided. If clear from the facts and circumstances the City Manager may
waive re-connection fees and/or penalties imposed by this ordinance and remove
the unfounded violation from the records maintained by Public Works.
(H) For purposes of enforcing this ordinance each day when a violation occurs may be
considered a separate violation.
Amended by City Ordinance No. 0423-14-1
SECTION 37-8. Water Department to Have Free Access.
The Water Superintendent and his agents shall at all ordinary hours have free access to
places supplied with water from the water works system for the purpose of examining the
plumbing system, ascertaining the amount of water used and the manner of its use.
SECTION 37-11. Fire Hydrants.
All public fire hydrants shall be kept under control of and shall be kept in repair by the
Superintendent of water works, and in case of fire the fire department shall have free
access to said hydrants. No other person shall open or operate any fire hydrant, or attempt to
draw water therefrom without special permission of the Superintendent of water works, or
obstruct the approach thereto.
SECTION 37-12. Unlawful to Take Water Without Paying Therefore.
It shall be unlawful for any person by himself, family, servants, or agents to take or use
water coming through the water mains without paying therefor as herein provided; or without
authority, to open any stop-cock, valve, water meter or other fixture attached to the system of
water supply, or in any way to injure, deface, or impair any part, or any appurtenance of the
water works, or to cast anything into any reservoir or tank of the said water works.
During construction the general contractor shall be responsible for the project and subject
to a five hundred dollar ($500.00) penalty for any violation of the above paragraph. Said penalty
Ch. 37 Pg. 12
shall be paid in full prior to the issuance of a building permit or certificate of occupancy,
whichever comes first.
SECTION 37-13. Unlawful to Take Water After It Has Been Turned Off by the
Water Department.
It shall be unlawful for any person, after the water has been turned off from his premises,
on account of non-payment of dues, or for violation of the rules and regulations relating to the
water supply, to turn the water on again or allow the water to be used without authority.
SECTION 37-13-1. Billing
Water bills are sent out monthly. All water bills shall be paid in full by 5pm on the 23rd of
the month. If the 23rd falls on a weekend or legal holiday, payment is due by 5pm the following
business day. Late Fees will be assessed when payments are not received as specified herein.
SECTION 37-13-2. Shutting off Water Service
(A) Unpaid water accounts are subject to immediate shutoff when the delinquent
unpaid balance is not paid in full by the due date of the next billing cycle. Posting
of a notice on the property shall be used to notify the occupants subject to shutoff
at least three (3) calendar days prior to shutoff.
(B) The first sentence of Subsection 37-13-1 (A) shall be re-printed in each water
monthly water bill.
SECTION 37-13-3. Fee to Resume Service After Shut-off.
Subsequent to shut-off of water service as set forth in Section 37-13-1, water service shall
be resumed only after payment in full of the outstanding bill by the responsible party and
payment of a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) turn-on fee. The turn-on fee may be amended by the
Cedar City Council by Resolution as deemed appropriate.
SECTION 37-13-4. Pulling of the Meter and Imposing a Fee for Re-Installation of
the Meter.
Any tampering with the water system shall result in pulling of the water meter. The fee
for re-installation of a water meter shall be $100.00. The re-installation fee may be amended by
a resolution of the Cedar City Council. (amended 5/05)
SECTION 37-13-5. Authority to Postpone Shutting off Water Service
Ch. 37 Pg. 13
The City Manager, or his designee, shall have the authority to postpone shutting off an
account for a maximum of (10) calendar days. The decision to postpone shutting off an account
shall be made after considering the circumstances surrounding the request and after consultation
with staff regarding the history of the account. In the event a shut off has been postponed, the
total delinquent balance must be paid on or before the tenth calendar day after the postponement,
or the water will be immediately shut off.
SECTION 37-13-6. Writing Off Terminated and Uncollectible Account
The City Treasurer shall have the authority to manage terminated and uncollectible
accounts and refer such accounts to a debt collection service. All terminated accounts with
outstanding balances in excess of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be written off after forty-five (45)
days of the account becoming delinquent. After terminated accounts with outstanding balances
in excess of ten dollars ($10.00) have been written off, they shall be sent to a debt collections
firm retained by Cedar City. Terminated accounts with outstanding balances of ten dollars
($10.00) or less shall be written off but not sent to debt collections.
Accounts that have been disconnected due to shut off shall remain on the City’s books.
Interest will continue to accrue on all past due amounts at the rate of 5% per month until paid in
full. In the event any amount(s) is/are referred to a third-party debt collection agency, the
account holder shall be responsible to pay for a collection fee of up to 25% of the principal
amount(s) owing as allowed by Utah Code, plus any other amount(s) allowed for by law (such as
interest, court costs, reasonable attorney’s fees, etc.).
When fines reach the accumulated amount of two-hundred dollars ($200), the property
owner will be sent a three (3) day notice informing them that their utility services will be
disconnected unless a Late Fee Payment Agreement, as contemplated under 37-13-7, is signed,
or the remaining account balance is paid in full.
For purposes of this section, a terminated account is defined as any account where the
ownership of the property, as evidenced by the utilities service agreement, has changed for any
reason, or the City has been given notice by the applicant that the service is no longer needed.
The date of termination will be effective as of the date when the City has been notified of the
change in ownership. Upon termination, any remaining account balances will be referred to a
third-party debt collection agency.
Amended by ordinance No. 1023-19
SECTION 37-13-7. Late Fee Payment Agreements
Upon the request of a property owner that has accumulated more than two hundred
dollars ($200.00) in late fees, the City Manager, or his designee, may enter into a payment
Ch. 37 Pg. 14
agreement with the property owner whereby a stay is placed on the accrual of further late fees
and the owner is given a negotiated time period, not to exceed six (6) months, to pay the late
fees. Any agreement shall be in writing signed by the City Manager, or his designee, and the
property owner.
Upon the request of a property owner that has accumulated more than one thousand
dollars ($1000.00) in late fees, the City Manager, or his designee, may enter into a payment
agreement with the property owner whereby a stay is placed on the accrual of further late fees
and the owner is given a negotiated time period, not to exceed twelve (12) months, to pay the late
fees. Any agreement shall be in writing signed by the City Manager, or his designee, and the
property owner.
In cases involving leaks or other extraordinary circumstances, the City Manager or his
designee, after consultation with the water superintendent, shall be authorized to reduce the
charge per 1,000 gallons to the City’s Block two (2) culinary water rate. The staff shall not have
authority to reduce late fees unless the late fee accrued as a result of City action. In no case shall
the City staff have the authority to reduce the principal and late fees due on a water bill in an
amount greater than $500.00.
For purpose of Section 37-13, Disconnected Services is defined as the disconnection of
all utility services offered by the City and the discontinuation of charges. Disconnected Services
may occur voluntarily at the property owners request or involuntarily because of the property’s
owners’ fines reaching an accumulated amount of two-hundred dollar ($200). A voluntary
request to disconnect services will be free of charge whereas the involuntarily disconnection of
services will accrue a shut off fee.
(Amended by ordinance No. 0827-08 and 1023-19)
SECTION 37-13-8 Un-billed water accounts.
If upon examination of the customer’s bill staff determines that the customer was likely
not receiving a bill for water services staff is authorized to take one of the following actions:
1. If the period of time when the customer was not receiving a bill for this utility
service is longer than two (2) years staff shall bill the customer for two (2) years
of service at the rates applicable during the two (2) years immediately preceding
the bill. Staff is authorized to write off any amount that exceeds the bill for the
preceding two (2) years. If the period of time when the customer was not
receiving a bill is anything shorter than two (2) years staff shall collect the entire
bill.
Ch. 37 Pg. 15
2. If when the customer is notified they request additional time to pay for up to two
(2) years of services for which they have not received a bill, then staff is
authorized to offer the customer an agreement whereby the customer shall make
monthly payments of the principle. The length of any such agreement shall not
exceed two (2) years. During the course of such an agreement the customer shall
not be charged interest or penalty on the initial principle amount. Interest may be
charged if the customer is late on a payment pursuant to the payment agreement.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to sign any such agreement on behalf of the City.
3. If staff can document that the customer has engaged in intentional fraud or deceit
in order to avoid paying for utility services received, then staff shall not be
allowed to offer the customer the benefit of a two-year repayment and shall
proceed with all legal collection efforts to collect the entire amount of un-paid
bills due to the customer’s intentional fraud or deceit.
A. A customer may appeal staff’s decision that the customer engaged in
intentional fraud and/or deceit. The appeal is to the City Manager. A
brief written statement must be submitted by the customer. The City
Manager is required to receive staff’s input prior to making a decision.
The City Manager shall render a decision within ten (10) working days,
and notify the customer in writing. In cases where the City Manager does
not agree with staff’s finding of intentional fraud or deceit, the City
Manager’s authority is limited to allowing the customer to take advantage
of the two (2) year payback provisions contained in this ordinance.
4. Staff shall be able to rely on the City’s billing records in order to make a
determination if the customer has been receiving a bill for these services and if the
bill has been sent to the address requested by the property owner.
5. If the staff is not successful in collecting the bill pursuant to this section, nothing
in this section shall be construed to limit, restrict, or prohibit the City from using
its other collection remedies contained in the Cedar City Ordinance including, but
not limited to discontinuing the customer’s water service, or collecting the debt as
a civil debt.
Amended by ordinance No. 1214-11
SECTION 37-14. Scarcity of Water.
In the event of scarcity of water, whenever it shall in the judgment of the Council be
necessary, the Mayor shall by proclamation limit the use of water to such an extent as may be
required for the public good and also, said proclamation may determine the method, manner and
time of use of said water.
Ch. 37 Pg. 16
SECTION 37-15. Tapping and Water Development Fees.
REPEALED, MARCH 1998
SECTION 37-16. Water Mains.
Except where otherwise provided in these ordinances, the following shall be the
exclusive method of extending water mains in Cedar City, Utah, on dedicated streets where
water services are not now available and outside of recognized subdivisions.
In the event the lot owner desires water service and there is not a water main in front of
the property for which owner desires said service, then for whatever extension is necessary to
bring the water main (8-inch minimum diameter) to the furthest developed property line, said
property owner shall sign an agreement with Cedar City providing that he shall be reimbursed
for expenses incurred to cover the actual cost of extending said water main. After said
agreement is executed and construction drawings have been submitted and approved by the City
Engineer, then water main can be installed. Thereafter, the installation reimbursement amounts,
shall be collected along the specific pipe line thus installed, and be paid by Cedar City
Corporation to the individual that paid for the extension until that individual has been completely
reimbursed without interest for the money expended for making said extension or for a ten-year
period whichever occurs first. In addition to the cost of extension, said property owner shall pay
the physical connection costs and impact fee required by ordinance. Other property owners who
thereafter connect to the extended line fronting their property shall pay for the physical
connection costs, impact fees and, for the ten-year period indicated above, the reimbursement
amount of one half (½) the actual cost of the installation across the front of their property. This
method of reimbursement shall also apply to lines extended and paid for by Cedar City.
This ordinance shall not be applicable in subdivisions wherein extensions have already
been made at the cost of the developer.
SECTION 37-17. Water Rates.
All charges for use of Cedar City culinary water provided to a customer shall be
established by the Cedar City Council and adopted in the form of written Resolutions duly
authorized and approved by said Council. Amended 8/86
SECTION 37-18. Discontinuance During Quarter.
Ch. 37 Pg. 17
Where water service is discontinued during any month at the request of the user, the
charge for that month shall be prorated using the then-current rate as a basis for calculating the
proportionate amount due. amended 10/94
SECTION 37-19. Befouling Waters.
It shall be unlawful for any person to in any way befoul any of the waters which shall
come into the Cedar City Water Works System, or to befoul the waters of any spring or stream
used as a source of supply. Any person violating this section shall be punished by a fine in any
sum less than One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment for any period less than six
(6) months or by both such fine and imprisonment. Amended 10/8/86.
SECTION 37-20. Extensions of Water Beyond City Limits.
Except as the same may now exist or as herein otherwise provided, no extension or use of
culinary water outside the City Limits of Cedar City, Utah, without prior approval of the
governing body of said City shall be permitted. Any violation of this ordinance shall be a
misdemeanor. Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted to prohibit an individual with a
lawful water connection from filling a container and using the water outside of the City limits for
a culinary use. This section of the Cedar City Ordinance shall not be interpreted to alter the
existing, or hereafter amended or adopted provisions of the Cedar City Ordinance regulating the
use of the City’s water system for the watering of livestock outside of the City limits. This
section of the Cedar City Ordinance shall not be interpreted to alter the existing or hereafter
amended or adopted provisions of the Cedar City Ordinance regulating physical connections to
the City’s water system.
SECTION 37-21. Water Outside City Limits.
Culinary water from the distribution lines of Cedar City, Utah, may be used to provide
water as currently provided to existing residential or commercial customers. Only governmental
entities may request additional residential or commercial water connections to the Cedar City
Water System when the water connection fails outside Cedar City limits. Approval of such
request may only be granted by a majority vote of the City Council. Other uses may be allowed
outside the City limits but only in accordance with City ordinance and amendments thereto.
This section amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0708-20-7
SECTION 37-22. Use Restrictions on Existing Livestock Watering Outside City
Limits.
The following use restrictions shall apply in connection with existing uses of culinary
water service outside City limits:
Ch. 37 Pg. 18
A. The user shall at his own expense install all connections and meters as required
by Cedar City in accordance with the current Cedar City Engineering Standards.
B. No connection shall be made to the distribution system of Cedar City, Utah,
except under the direct supervision of the Superintendent of the Water
Department.
C. At the point of each connection to any distribution line, a meter shall be installed,
at the expense of the user, in accordance with current Cedar City Engineering
Standards.
D. No more than one user shall be on any metered connection to said distribution
system.
E. The user rate for connections outside the City limits for livestock watering and
residential connections shall be double the Residential Tier III (excessive
irrigation) rate charged within the City Limits. The user rate for commercial
connections outside the City limits shall be double the Commercial rate charged
within the City Limits. Any expense incurred by Cedar City caused by the use of
said water, shall be billed to the user and be considered as part of the fee for the
use of said water, in addition to the amount provided for in this paragraph.
F. Cedar City, Utah, specifically reserves the privilege and right at any time, with or
without notice, for any reason satisfactory to Cedar City, Utah, to shut off the
water and terminate this use, and in the event of a water shortage, Connections
outside the City Limits may be shut off before there is any limitation of water use
within the City Limits.
G. Each user shall meet the standards of the Utah State Board of Health concerning
possible contamination of water supplies, potential water supplies, disposal of
sewage, disposal of waste, condition of corrals, and any and all sanitary items,
and in addition, Cedar City Corporation specifically reserves the right to impose
any additional requirements on these items deemed necessary by the governing
body of Cedar City, Utah.
H. The user is to be entirely responsible for the construction and maintenance of any
service line connected under authority of this ordinance, and in the event Cedar
City incurs any expense whatsoever because of the user’s service line or
connection, the user shall be required to reimburse Cedar City, Utah for the actual
expense incurred.
I. Any unauthorized hookup or connection on any line installed under authority of
this ordinance shall automatically terminate the use of water for the entire
Ch. 37 Pg. 19
offending line, and all sums on deposit from said offending line shall be forfeited
and there shall be no renewal without the approval of the governing body of
Cedar City, Utah.
J. Connections of the City water system to other political subdivisions or special
service districts water systems may also be allowed in order to purchase or sale
water at wholesale rates at times when deemed necessary and appropriate by the
Mayor.
This section amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0514-14 and 0325-20.
SECTION 37-23. Authority for Connection.
No Connection to any water line of Cedar City, Utah shall be made and no water shall be
transported outside the City Limits of Cedar City, Utah, for animal use, except by authority of
this ordinance.
SECTION 37-24. Unlawful to Interfere with City Officers.
It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or obstruct the
Superintendent of water works or the Health Officer of this City or any of their employees,
agents or servants while in the performance of their duties as provided herein.
SECTION 37-25. Rules and Regulations.
The Mayor and City Council shall make such rules and regulations not inconsistent with
the provisions of this chapter as may be necessary for the further regulation and control of the
City Water Works System.
SECTION 37-30. Penalty.
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall upon conviction be punished by
a fine not exceeding One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) or by imprisonment not exceeding six
(6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Amended 10/8/86.
SECTION 37-31. Drinking Water Source Protection
A. Short Title and Purpose
(1) This ordinance shall be known as the "Drinking Water Source Protection
Ordinance."
Ch. 37 Pg. 20
(2) The purpose of this ordinance is to insure the provision of a safe and
sanitary drinking water supply for Cedar City by the establishment of
drinking water source protection zones surrounding the wellheads and
springs for all wells and springs which are the supply sources for Cedar
City water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses
and conditions which may be maintained within such zones.
B. Definitions. When used in this ordinance the following words and phrases shall
have the meanings given in this section:
(1) Design Standard - means a control which is implemented by a potential
contamination source to prevent discharges to the ground water. Spill
protection is an example of design standard.
(2) Land Management Strategies - means zoning and non-zoning controls
which include, but are not limited to, the following: zoning and
subdivision ordinances, site plan reviews, design and operating standards,
development rights, public education programs, ground water monitoring,
household hazardous waste collection programs, water conservation
programs, memoranda of understanding, written contracts and agreements,
and so forth.
(3) Pollution Source - means point source discharges of contaminants to
ground water or potential discharges of the liquid forms of "extremely
hazardous substances" which are stored in containers in excess of
"applicable threshold planning quantities" as specified in SARA Title III.
Examples of possible pollution sources include, but are not limited to, the
following: storage facilities that store the liquid forms of extremely
hazardous substances, septic tanks, drain fields, class V underground
injection wells, landfills, open dumps, landfilling of sludge and septage,
manure piles, salt piles, pit privies, and animal feeding operations with
more than ten animal units. The following clarify the definition of
pollution sources:
(a) Animal Feeding Operation - means a lot or facility where the
following conditions are met: animals have been or will be stabled
or confined and fed or maintained for a total of 45 days or more in
any 12-month period, and crops, vegetation forage growth, or postharvest
residues are not sustained in the normal growing season
over any portion of the lot or facility. Two or more animal feeding
operations under common ownership are considered to be single
feeding operation if they adjoin each other, if they use a common
area, or if they use a common system for the disposal of wastes.
Ch. 37 Pg. 21
(b) Animal Unit - means a unit of measurement for any animal feeding
operation calculated by adding the following numbers: the number
of slaughter and feeder cattle multiplied by 1.0, plus the number of
mature dairy cattle multiplied by 1.4, plus the number of swine
weighing over 55 pounds multiplied by 0.1, plus the number of
horses multiplied by 2.0.
(c) Extremely Hazardous Substances - means those substances which
are identified in the Section 302 (EHS) column of the "TITLE III
LIST OF LISTS - Consolidated List of Chemicals Subject to
Reporting Under SARA Title III", (EPA 560/4-91-011).
(4) Potential Contamination Source - means any facility or site which employs
an activity or procedure which may potentially contaminate ground water.
A pollution source is also a potential contamination source.
(5) Regulatory Agency - means any governmental agency with jurisdiction
over hazardous waste as defined herein.
(6) Sanitary Landfill - means a disposal site where solid wastes, including
putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by
placing earth cover thereon.
(7) Septic Tank/Drain-Field Systems - means a system which is comprised of
a septic tank and a drain field which accepts domestic wastewater from
buildings or facilities for subsurface treatment and disposal. By their
design, septic tank/drain field system discharges cannot be controlled with
design standards.
(8) Wellhead - means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports,
seals, valves and other attachments.
(9) Spring - means the ground surface outlet of a natural underground spring
including spring collection and control boxes, valves, piping and other
attachments.
C. Establishment of Drinking Water Source Protection Zones. There is hereby
established use districts to be known as zones one, two, three and four of the
drinking water source protection area, identified and described as follows:
Ch. 37 Pg. 22
(1) "Zone One" is the area within a 100-foot radius from the wellhead or
spring.
(2) "Zone Two" is the area within a 250-day ground-water time of travel to
the wellhead or spring, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies
water to the ground-water source, or the ground-water divide, whichever is
closer.
(3) "Zone Three" (waiver criteria zone) is the area within a 3-year groundwater
time of travel to the wellhead or spring, the boundary of the
aquifer(s) which supplies water to the ground-water source, or the groundwater
divide, whichever is closer.
(4) "Zone Four" is the area within a 15-year ground water time of travel to the
wellhead or spring, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to
the ground-water source, or the ground-water divide, whichever is closer.
D. Permitted Uses. The following uses shall be allowed within the ground water
protection zones:
(1) All Zones.
(a) Uses established before the Effective Date of this Ordinance and
used continuously and in the same manner thereafter, which uses
may continue, subject to Section 37.31.E, of this Ordinance,
provided any such use is not judged by any court of competent
jurisdiction to be a nuisance under the provisions of federal, state
or local laws or regulations.
(b) Use of single or multiple-family residential dwellings, commercial
or institutional uses established on or after the effective Date of
this ordinance connected to a sanitary sewer system.
(c) Uses incidental and accessory to the uses set forth in the two
immediately preceding subparagraphs.
(2) Zone 4.
(a) The tilling of the soil and the raising of crops, provided fertilizing
and the use of pesticides is accomplished within federal state and
local guidelines.
Ch. 37 Pg. 23
(b) The pasturing of livestock, provided all forage is raised on the
pastured area.
(c) Uses incidental and accessory to the uses set forth in the two
immediately preceding subparagraphs.
E. Prohibited Uses. Except uses established before the Effective Date of this
ordinance and used continuously and in the same manner thereafter, which uses
may continue, on or after the Effective Date of this ordinance, the following uses
or conditions shall be and hereby are prohibited within ground water protection
zones, regardless or whether such uses or conditions may otherwise be included
as part of a use allowed under Section 37.31.D of this ordinance:
(1) Zones 1 and 2
(a) Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead or spring
collection area.
(b) Underground storage tanks.
(c) Storm water infiltration structures.
(d) Any pollution source as defined herein or in R-113 or the Utah
Administrative Code.
(2) Zones 1, 2 and 3. Agriculture industries including, but not limited to,
intensive feeding operations such as feed lots, dairies, fur breeding
operations, poultry farms, etc.
(3) All Zones.
(a) Surface use, storage, or dumping of hazardous waste or material,
expressly including industrial or commercial uses of agricultural
pesticides (except when such pesticides are used in farming
applications within strict compliance of the manufacturer's
recommendations of use, subject to inspection by local officials).
(b) Sanitary landfills.
(c) Hazardous waste or material disposal sites.
(d) Septic tanks/drain field systems.
Ch. 37 Pg. 24
F. Administration. The policies and procedures or administration of any source
protection zone established under this ordinance, including without limitation
those applicable to nonconforming uses, exception, enforcement and penalties,
shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance Chapter 26 for
Cedar City, Utah, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be
amended.
(Adopted 4/98)
SECTION 37-32. Water Acquisition.
Section 37-32-1. Findings.
A. Cedar City has limited water rights. Cedar City provides culinary and irrigation
water for residential, commercial, and industrial uses consistent with City
ordinance. There are limited water rights in the Cedar City area and these
resources are used by Cedar City, Enoch City, the Central Iron County Water
Conservancy District, agriculture, private owners, and private water corporations.
B. Cedar City is experiencing sustained residential, commercial, and industrial
growth, and growth necessitates acquisition of additional water rights.
C. The City Engineer has conducted an analysis of the City’s reasonable water
needs. That analysis is incorporated herein and forms the basis for this ordinance.
Cedar City contracts for the appraisal of water rights, future appraisals shall be
used to determine the amount of special assessment to be charged as an
alternative to dedicating water rights.
D. The State of Utah water engineer has determined that the water rights in the Cedar
Valley Aquifer have been fully appropriated and has closed the basin to future
appropriation of water rights.
Section 37-32-2. Purpose and policy.
A. Cedar City’s primary purpose for establishing this ordinance is to acquire the
water rights necessary to serve its expanding population. Therefore, nobody will
be allowed to pay the special assessment established herein if the property on
which they are filing a land use application has been the point of use for water in
the previous three years or since the enactment of this ordinance, whichever is the
shorter look back period.
B. In order to carry out the policy stated above, it is hereby ordained that all land
within Cedar City, or petitioning for annexation into Cedar City, is wet land if: the
Ch. 37 Pg. 25
property has been the point of use for water within the look back period described
in section 32-2(A); or the land was wet at the time of annexation and deferred
conveyance of water rights in accordance with 32-3-A-1. All wet land must deed
all water rights used on the land up to the amount sufficient to satisfy the
provisions of this ordinance and may not pay the special assessment for the
deeded water.
C. All land that has not been the point of use for water within the look back period
described in section 32-2(A) prior to filing of a land use application and did not
defer water conveyance at the time of annexation in accordance with 32-3-A-1, is
ordained to be dry land and the party submitting a land use application may pay
the special assessment contained in this ordinance and not be required to deed
water rights to the City.
D. All land use applications filed with Cedar City must be accompanied by sufficient
documentation from the state engineers’ office to show if the subject property was
or was not the point of use for any water rights within the look back period
described in section 32-2(A).
Section 37-32-3. Time to acquire water rights or pay special assessment.
A. Annexation. Unless one of the following exceptions apply: (1) part of the
annexation property qualifies for a deferment of water right conveyance as per
Section 32-3(A)(1), or; (2) there is a property owner that does not sign the
annexation petition as per Section 32-3(A)(4), if the property is wet land pursuant
to section 32-2(B), the City shall require the deeding of water rights sufficient to
comply with this ordinance at the time of annexation. If, when proposing
annexation, the property is dry land pursuant to section 32-2(c), the parties will
agree to either acquire water sufficient for the annexation, and deed those rights to
the City; or pay the City the special assessment established by this ordinance prior
to receiving final approval for a residential subdivision per Section 32-3B, or
prior to receiving a building permit per Section 32-3C.
1. DEFERMENT OF WATER CONVEYANCE.
a. A land owner that signs the petition to annex may defer the
conveyance of water only if;
1. The total land area (measured in acres) that wants to defer
the conveyance of water does not exceed ten percent (10%)
of the total land area (measured in acres) of the annexation,
and;
Ch. 37 Pg. 26
2. The total amount of water rights requesting the deferred
conveyance (as measured in acre feet) does not exceed ten
percent (10%) of the total surface or subsurface water used
on the property (as measured in acre feet) at the time of
annexation.
The deferring land owner’s land will be considered wet pursuant to
the terms of this ordinance so that at the time the present or
subsequent owner subdivides or applies for a building permit they
will not be allowed to pay a fee instead of conveying water rights.
The land owner will be required to convey 1.5 acre feet of water
per acre of land pursuant to the provisions of this ordinance.
b. A land owner that does not sign the petition and does not convey
water rights at the time of annexation shall have their property
deemed dry property pursuant to this ordinance.
2. Required Notice
The annexation petition sponsor in an annexation having any parties that
do not sign the petition, or want to defer the conveyance of water shall
send out the following written notice via certified mail return receipt
requested, to all owners of land within the boundaries of the annexation
petition:
a. that the owner’s property is being petitioned for annexation;
b. that as a condition of annexation and development within Cedar
City’s boundaries, all water rights used on the land at the time of
annexation, up to the amount sufficient to satisfy the provisions of
Section 37-32, will be required at the time of annexation or at the
time of development as set forth in Section 37-32-7; and
c. that if water is conveyed to Cedar City at the time of annexation,
the amount of water required by Cedar City, per acre, is less than
the amount of water required at the time of development or at the
time of requesting a building permit as per section 37-32-7(A)(1)
and (2); and
d. that if water is being used on the owner’s land at the time
of annexation, Cedar City will not permit development of the land
without the owner providing to Cedar City the required
Ch. 37 Pg. 27
water. Payment of the special assessment will not be permitted as
per Section 37-32-2(B); and
e. that if water is not being used on the owner’s land at the
time of annexation, or the owner does not sign the petition for
annexation, payment of the special assessment will be permitted in
accordance with the amount of water required per acre as per
Section 37-32-7(A)(1) and (2).
3. Required Recording of Notice on Title of Property Deferring Conveyance
of Water Rights.
a. If a land owner qualifies for a water rights conveyance deferment
the following notice shall be signed by the land owner and the City
and recorded with the Iron County Recorder on the chain of title to
the land owner’s property within the annexation boundaries at the
time the annexation is approved and recorded:
NOTICE OF WATER CONVEYANCE DEFERMENT
Ch. 37 Pg. 28
Notice is hereby given that the below described property
was annexed into Cedar City without conveying water rights
required by Cedar City Ordinance 37-32. The current and any
subsequent owner is hereby put on notice that this property is
deemed wet for purposes of Cedar City Ordinance and will be
required upon subdivision or securing a building permit to convey
water to Cedar City in an amount sufficient to satisfy the City’s
existing ordinance at the time of the subdivision or building
permit. Because this land has deferred the conveyance of water at
the time of annexation it will not be permitted to pay a fee instead
of conveying water.
County serial number
County tax I.D. number
legal description
Dated this ____ day of ____________, 200_.
______________________________
Property owner
STATE OF UTAH )
:ss.
COUNTY OF IRON )
On this day of , 200_, personally
appeared before me , who
duly acknowledged to me that _he signed the above and foregoing
document.
_______________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC
******************************************
************
Dated this _____ day of ______________, 200_.
__________________
Mayor
[SEAL]
Ch. 37 Pg. 29
Attest:
_________________________
Recorder
STATE OF UTAH )
:ss.
COUNTY OF IRON )
This is to certify that on the day of , 20 ,
before me, the undersigned, a Notary Public, in and for the State of
Utah, duly commissioned and sworn as such, personally appeared
Gerald R. Sherratt, known to me to be the Mayor of Cedar City
Corporation, and Renon Savage, known to me to be the City
Recorder of Cedar City Corporation, and acknowledged to me that
he, the said Gerald R. Sherratt, and she, the said Renon Savage,
executed the foregoing instrument as a free and voluntary act and
deed of said corporation, for the uses and purposes therein, and on
oath state that they were authorized to execute said instrument, and
that the seal affixed is the corporate seal of said corporation.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF, I have hereunto set my hand
and affixed my official seal the day and year hereinabove written.
___________________________________
NOTARY PUBLIC
4. Owners of property annexed into the City without the owner of record
signing the annexation petition shall not be required to supply water rights
to the City upon annexation. If property is annexed without supplying
water at the time of annexation that property shall be required to supply
water pursuant to the terms of this ordinance upon subdivision or
obtaining a building permit. For purposes of this section the property
owner of record shall be the current property owner as shown by the
records of the Iron County Recorder’s office.
5. Effect of Amendment on Pending Annexations
Ch. 37 Pg. 30
a. All annexations that have filed a petition with the City prior to the
effective date of this amendment shall be able to use the provisions
of this amendment.
B. Subdivision. If real property has annexed into Cedar City prior to the enactment
of this ordinance, then prior to a residential subdivision’s final plat approval being
granted, the developer or owner shall either deed to the City water rights
sufficient to comply with this ordinance, if they are subdividing wet land pursuant
to section 32-2(B); or pay to the City the special assessment established by this
ordinance, if they are subdividing dry land pursuant to 32-2©.
C. Building Permit. If real property has been annexed into Cedar City prior to the
effective date of this ordinance and is not in a residential platted subdivision, then
prior to receiving a building permit the owner shall either deed to the City
sufficient water rights to comply with this ordinance, if the property is wet land
pursuant to section 32-2(B); or pay the special assessment set by this ordinance, if
the land is dry land pursuant to 23-2©.
1. Nothing in this ordinance shall require deeding of water rights or
payment of the special assessment when a building permit is pulled
for repair, remodel, or expansion of a building that has been
granted a building permit prior to, or after, the effective date of this
ordinance.
Section 37-32-4. Acquisition of water reserve.
A. Cedar City is an owner of water rights. In providing for culinary, commercial, and
industrial uses, the City has been able to determine an appropriate reserve necessary
to keep ahead of reasonably foreseeable growth in order to serve the health, safety,
and welfare of the Cedar City citizens. This reserve would be water rights that are not
being constantly used but would be available for service if necessary. These water
rights would be administered pursuant to state law in order to avoid any partial or
complete forfeiture. The City has determined the reserve amount necessary to keep
ahead of reasonably foreseeable growth to be twenty percent (20%) of the total water
rights owned by the City. With the annual Water Report, the City Engineer shall
provide information relating to the status of the reserve amount. If at any time the
reserve amount of water rights is reached, the City Council shall impose a
moratorium on the approval of all annexations, residential platted subdivisions, and
building permits not in a residential platted subdivision until the developer or owner
is able to provide, or the City is able to acquire, sufficient water to meet the needs as
established by this ordinance.
Section 37-32-5. Acquisition of excess water rights.
A. If at any time an owner is required to deed water rights to the City, and if that
owner owns more water rights in the Cedar Valley Aquifer than the owner is
Ch. 37 Pg. 31
required to deed to the City, then the City shall request that the owner either sell
the excess rights to the City or enter into an agreement with the City giving the
City the first right of refusal should the owner decide to sell said water rights in
the future.
Section 37-32-6. Agricultural uses to continue and accounting for water rights.
A. To the maximum extent legally allowable, the City shall honor agreements
entered pursuant to the terms of this section as it existed prior to being
repealed.
Section 37-32-7. Amount and type of water required – Exception.
A. Amount of water required.
1. If water is deeded at the time of annexation, the property owner will be
required to deed 1.2 acre feet of water rights per acre of land annexed into
the boundaries of Cedar City.
2. If water is deeded after annexation and at or prior to final residential plat
approval, the property owner will be required to deed 1.5 acre feet of
water rights per acre of property proposed for a platted residential
subdivision. All lots within the subdivision that are one (1) acre in size or
greater, including the portion of City streets fronting those lots, shall be
assessed pursuant to the standard set forth in paragraph 3 of this section.
3. If water is deeded after annexation, but at or prior to acquiring a building
permit not in a residential platted subdivision, the owner will be required
to deed a minimum of .80 acre feet of water rights per each 50 gallons per
minute of the water meter’s maximum flow rating. The amount of water
required for all subdivided residential lots equal to or greater to one (1)
acre, including the portion of City streets fronting those lots, shall be
pursuant to this provision.
B. Type of water required.
1. As used in this section the following terms shall have the following meaning:
a. “sub-surface water rights” shall mean all rights to underground
water within aquifers that can physically and legally supply water
to Cedar City;
b. “class 1 surface rights” shall mean all surface water rights to Coal
Creek water adjudicated up to 1870;
Ch. 37 Pg. 32
c. “class 2 surface rights” shall mean all surface water rights to Coal
Creek water on which claims were filed from 1870 through 1880;
d. “class 3 surface rights” shall mean all surface water rights to Coal
Creek water on which claims were made from 1880 through 1890;
e. “class 4A surface rights” shall mean all surface water rights to
Coal Creek water on which claims were made from 1890 through
1898;
f. “class 4B surface rights” shall mean all surface water rights to
Coal Creek water on which claims were made post 1898.
2. The following classifications of water rights shall be deeded to Cedar City
in compliance with this ordinance:
a. one third of the required water rights shall be sub-surface water
rights;
b. one third of the required water rights shall be class 1,2, or 3,
surface rights or additional sub-surface water rights;
c. one third of the required water rights shall be class 4A or 4B
surface rights; class 1,2, or 3 surface rights; or additional subsurface
water rights.
d. if a secondary or supplemental sub-surface water right can be
transferred to and used by the City with a primary surface water
right then, 50% of the total right shall be credited as a sub-surface
water right and 50% of the right credited as a surface water right of
the class designated for the primary right.
C. Exception.
1. Open space exception. If at the time of final plat approval, or pulling of a
building permit, land is deeded to Cedar City for undeveloped open space,
parks and recreation, or placed in a conservation easement that complies
with the provisions of Title 57, Chapter 18, Sections 1 through 7, Utah
Code Annotated, 1953 as amended, then that acreage is not subject to the
requirements of this ordinance that mandate the deeding of water rights or
payment of fees. This provision does not apply to annexation as the
amount of water required for annexation was adjusted to account for such
lands.
2. Public lands exception. If at the time of annexation, the annexed property
is owned by the Bureau of Land Management or the U.S. Forest Service
Ch. 37 Pg. 33
then that acreage is not subject to the requirements of this ordinance that
mandate the deeding of water rights. This exception only applies to
annexation and not when the property is platted as a residential
subdivision or receives a building permit.
3. Nothing in this ordinance shall require the City to deed water or pay a fee
if the City develops land. Furthermore, nothing in this ordinance shall
require any person that purchases land from the City, and within the look
back period of the purchase develops the land, to deed water to the City.
A purchaser of property from the City will have to pay the assessment to
the City consistent with this ordinance.
4. A narrow exception is hereby created to allow for the annexation of
property with existing water users that are more than 300 feet from
existing City water infrastructure. City staff shall be allowed to permit an
exception of up to .45 acre feet for a domestic unit, 4 acre feet per acre of
irrigated crop land, or .028 acre feet per animal unit of stock watering.
Staff shall be permitted to rely on information from the State of Utah
Water Engineer in determining animal units, irrigated crop land, and
domestic units. Any party that annexes into the City, deeds water to the
City and qualifies for this exception shall be able to lease the determined
amount of water for domestic use, crop irrigation, and/or stock watering at
a nominal fee until such time as they subdivide or receive a building
permit.
37-32-7 Last amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0225-09
Section 37-32-8. Establishment of special assessment.
A. There is established a special assessment that owners may pay instead of deeding
water rights to the City as required by this ordinance. The special assessment
shall be established by the Cedar City Council and adopted in the form of written
Resolution duly authorized and approve by said Council. This special assessment
may be amended from time to time also by a resolution of the Cedar City Council.
Prior to amending the special assessment, the City shall have the surface water
rights and sub-surface water rights in the Cedar City area appraised and/or use the
best available market information. The council may also, by resolution, add costs
for reasonable administrative overhead to this special assessment.
Section 37-32-9. Effective date.
A. This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon passage by the Cedar
City Council, and being signed by the Mayor.
(Section 32 adopted 3/06)
Ch. 37 Pg. 34
(Section 32 amended by ordinance number 0227-08-01, Dated February 27, 2008)
(Section 32 amended by ordinance number 1203-08, Dated December 15, 2008)
(Section 32 amended by ordinance number 0514-14-1, Dated May 16, 2014)
Chapter 38 - Page 1
CHAPTER 38
38-1 Storm Drain Utility
38-2 Storm Drainage
38-3 On-site Drainage Control
38-1 STORM DRAIN UTILITY
Section 38-1-1 Findings
Section 38-1-2 Purpose
Section 38-1-3 Definitions
Section 38-1-4 Storm Drain Utility
Section 38-1-5 Storm Drain Utility Fee
Section 38-1-6 Billing
SECTION 38-1-1 FINDINGS
The City Council makes the following findings regarding storm water runoff and the
City’s storm drain and flood control systems:
A. Historically, the City’s storm drainage system consisted of a network of ditches
that were primarily used for irrigation. Those ditches are no longer allowed to be
used or are being removed as improvements are made by installing curb and
gutter. By eliminating the use of the ditches there is no way for the storm water to
be conveyed.
B. The City’s existing culverts and remaining ditches do not adequately handle the
storm water runoff generated in the City.
C. The City’s anticipated growth will place increased demands on the already
inadequate storm drainage system.
D. The City has constructed significant flood control improvements which need
adequate maintenance in order to remain effective.
E. Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled storm and flood waters cause erosion and
property damage.
F. Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled storm and flood waters hinder the City’s
ability to provide emergency services to its residents.
G. Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled storm water runoff impedes the regular
flow of traffic in the City.
Chapter 38 - Page 2
H. Uncontrolled or inadequately controlled storm and flood waters pose hazards to
the citizens of the community.
I. Storm water runoff carries concentrations of oil, grease, nutrients, chemicals,
heavy metals, toxic materials and other undesirable materials that may jeopardize
the integrity of ground waters receiving waters including the City’s culinary water
supply.
J. All developed properties in the City contribute to the need for the storm drainage
system by converting natural ground cover into impervious surfaces.
K. Al developed properties in the City make use of or benefit from the City’s
operation and maintenance of the storm drain and/or flood control systems.
L. Inadequate drainage along existing streets due to the lack of adequate storm drain
systems cause the street pavement to deteriorate and fail thus increasing street
maintenance costs.
M. Absent effective maintenance, operation, regulation and control of existing storm
water drainage and flood control systems in the City constitute a potential hazard
to the health, safety and general welfare of the City, its residents, and its
businesses.
N. A storm drain utility is the most equitable and efficient method of managing storm
water and providing flood control in the City and ensuring that each property in
the City pays its fair share of the amount that the property contributes to, benefits
from, and otherwise uses the storm drain and flood control systems.
SECTION 38-1-2 PURPOSE
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the City and
its inhabitants by improving and maintaining the City’s storm drain and flood control systems,
managing and controlling storm water runoff, protecting property, preventing polluted waters
from entering the City’s water supply and other receiving waters, and establishing a viable and
fair method of financing the improvement, operation and maintenance of the storm drain system.
SECTION 38-1-3 DEFINITIONS
The following bolded words and phrases shall be defined as follows:
A. Developed Parcel. Any parcel that has been altered from its natural condition by
grading, filling, or the construction of improvements or other impervious surfaces.
Chapter 38 - Page 3
B. Impervious Surface. Any hard surface, other than the natural surface, that
prevents or retards the absorption of water into the soil, or that causes water to run
off the surface in greater quantities or at a greater rate of flow than the natural
surface.
SECTION 38-1-4 STORM DRAIN UTILITY.
A. Creation. The City Council hereby creates and establishes a storm drain utility.
The storm drain utility shall plan, design, improve, maintain, administer and
operate the City’s storm drain and flood control systems.
B. Enterprise Fund. The City Council hereby establishes a storm drain utility
enterprise fund to handle all income, expenses and other financial transactions
related to the storm drain utility. All storm drain utility service charges shall be
deposited in the enterprise fund. Money in the storm drain utility enterprise fund
shall be restricted to expenses associated with the storm drain utility. However,
the storm drain utility may pay other City funds for services and expenses directly
attributable to the storm drain utility. The enterprise fund shall be operated
according to State law and City Policy.
C. Facilities and Assets. The storm drain utility shall operate independently of City
operations funded by the general fund. The storm drain utility shall have the same
relationship to the City as other City utilities, such as the Water utility and the
sanitary sewer (waste water) utility. Upon creation of the utility, all of the City’s
storm drain and flood control facilities and assets (other than streets and other
facilities and assets designated by the Public Works Director) shall be transferred
to the storm drain utility in consideration for the storm drain utility’s agreement to
take primary responsibility for planning, designing, improving, maintaining,
administering and operating the City’s storm drain and flood control systems.
D. Operation, Maintenance and Administration. The storm drain utility shall be
operated and maintained under the direction of the City’s Street Department
Superintendent and administered by the City’s Public Works Director.
SECTION 38-1-5 STORM DRAIN UTILITY FEE.
A. Imposed. Each developed parcel of real property in the City shall be charged a
storm drain fee.
B. ESU. The fee shall be based on the number of equivalent service units (ESU’s)
contained in the parcel. The City Council finds that the ESU is the most accurate
measurement for determining the amount that each parcel contributes to, benefits
Chapter 38 - Page 4
from, and otherwise uses the storm drain utility. The definition of an ESU shall
be established by resolution of the City Council.
C. Calculation. The City Council will establish a base rate for each ESU. Each
parcel shall pay the base rate multiplied by the number of ESU’s as defined by
resolution of the City Council. The City Council may adopt separate rates for
uses that are not easily handled under the standard rate schedule.
D. Charge per ESU. The amount charged for each ESU shall be established by
resolution of the City Council.
E. Exemptions and Credits. The City Council may establish exemptions and
credits to the storm drain utility fee by resolution.
F. Policies. The Public Works Director may adopt policies, consistent with this
ordinance and any resolutions passed by the City Council, to assist in the
application, administration and the interpretation of this ordinance and any
resolutions related to the storm drain utility.
G. Appeals. Any person or entity that believes that this ordinance, or any storm
drain utility rate resolution, was interpreted or applied erroneously may appeal to
the Public Works Director (“Director”). The appeal shall be in writing, shall state
any facts supporting the appeal, and shall be made within ten (10) days of the
decision, action, or bill being appealed. The Director may elect to hold a hearing
on the appeal. The Director shall decide the appeal within ten (10) days of when
the appeal is filed. If the person or entity is not satisfied with the Director’s
decision, a further appeal may be made to the City Manager (or his/her designee).
The appeal to the City Manager shall follow the same procedure as the appeal to
the Director. The City Manager’s decision shall be final.
SECTION 38-1-6 BILLING
(A) The City Council finds that the City’s storm drain system, flood control system, sanitary
sewer system, culinary water system, and solid waste collection system are interrelated services
that are part of a unified City plan to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the City and its
residents in an environmentally responsible manner. Therefore, the storm drain utility fee shall
be included on the City’s regular monthly utility bill for any given property, the storm drain
utility fee shall be charged to the owner of the property. The fee shall be deemed a civil debt
owed to the City by the person or entity paying for the City utility services provide to the
property. All properties shall be charged the fee, regardless of whether or not the owner or
occupant of the property requests the storm drain utility service. Failure to pay any portion of the
utility bill may result in termination of water service in accordance with the City’s Waterworks
Ordinance.
Chapter 38 - Page 5
(B) If upon examination of the customers bill staff determines that the customer was likely
not receiving a bill for water services staff is authorized to take one of the following actions:
1. If the period of time when the customer was not receiving a bill for this utility
service is longer than two (2) years staff shall bill the customer for two (2) years
of service at the rates applicable during the two (2) years immediately preceding
the bill. Staff is authorized to write off any amount that exceeds the bill for the
preceding two (2) years. If the period of time when the customer was not
receiving a bill is anything shorter than two (2) years staff shall collect the entire
bill.
2. If when the customer is notified they request additional time to pay for up to two
(2) years of services for which they have not received a bill, then staff is
authorized to offer the customer an agreement whereby the customer shall make
monthly payments of the principle. The length of any such agreement shall not
exceed two (2) years. During the course of such an agreement the customer shall
not be charged interest or penalty on the initial principle amount. Interest may be
charged if the customer is late on a payment pursuant to the payment agreement.
The Mayor is hereby authorized to sign any such agreement on behalf of the City.
3. If staff can document that the customer has engaged in intentional fraud or deceit
in order to avoid paying for utility services received, then staff shall not be
allowed to offer the customer the benefit of a two year repayment and shall
proceed with all legal collection efforts to collect the entire amount of un-paid
bills due to the customer’s intentional fraud or deceit.
A. A customer may appeal staff’s decision that the customer engaged in
intentional fraud and/or deceit. The appeal is to the City Manager. A brief
written statement must be submitted by the customer. The City Manager
is required to receive staff’s input prior to making a decision. The City
Manager shall render a decision within ten (10) working days, and notify
the customer in writing. In cases where the City Manager does not agree
with staff’s finding of intentional fraud or deceit, the City Manager’s
authority is limited to allowing the customer to take advantage of the two
(2) year payback provisions contained in this ordinance.
4. Staff shall be able to rely on the City’s billing records in order to make a
determination if the customer has been receiving a bill for these services and if the
bill has been sent to the address requested by the property owner.
5. If the staff is not successful in collecting the bill pursuant to this section, nothing
in this section shall be construed to limit, restrict, or prohibit the City from using
its other collection remedies contained in the Cedar City Ordinance including, but
Chapter 38 - Page 6
not limited to discontinuing the customer’s water service, or collecting the debt as
a civil debt.
Amended by ordinance No. 1214-11
38-2. STORM DRAINAGE
Section 38-2-1 Definitions
Section 38-2-2 Development Improvements
Section 38-2-2a Storm Drains and Channels
Section 38-2-3 Obstruction
Section 38-2-4 Dumping
Section 38-2-5 Damage
Section 38-2-6 Violation and Penalty
SECTION 38-2-1 DEFINITIONS.
For the purpose of this Article, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations
shall have the meaning given herein.
A. Sump shall mean a formalized structure underground surrounded by drain rock,
that acts as a detention basin to allow the slow release of water into the
surrounding sub-soil. Sumps usually receive storm water runoff from paved areas
such as streets, parking lots, building roofs, etc.
B. Detention Basin shall mean a depression designed with an inlet and outlet that
regulates water flow and allows debris to settle out, that is capable of detaining
storm and flood water until it can be released without causing damage
downstream.
C. Storm and Flood Water is defined as precipitation such as rain, snow, hail, or
other natural occurrence.
D. Storm Water Runoff is water that is generated by storm water flows overland.
E. Non-Storm Water Runoff is defined as any runoff other than storm water.
F. Storm Drain shall mean a closed conduit for conducting storm water that has
been collected by inlets or collected by other means.
G. Drain Inlet shall mean a point of entry into a sump, detention basin, or storm
drain system.
Chapter 38 - Page 7
H. Catch Basin is a basin combined with a storm drain inlet to trap solids.
I. Debris shall mean any dirt, rock, sand, tree, or other rubbish, litter, etc.
SECTION 38-2-2 DEVELOPMENT IMPROVEMENTS
When property develops by subdividing the property, improving a dedicated street, or
obtaining a building permit, the developer shall pay for any storm drains, drain inlets or catch
basins that are required for the development. If a master planned storm drain is required to be
extended through a development in order to convey off-site storm water runoff, the property
developer shall pay for the costs to install a 12 inch diameter storm drain or a storm drain sized
to convey the storm water runoff from the developer’s development, whichever is greater.
SECTION 38-2-2a STORM DRAINS AND CHANNELS
Except where otherwise provided in these ordinances, the following shall be the exclusive
method of extending storm drains in Cedar City, Utah, on dedicated streets where such drainage
improvements are not now available and outside of recognized subdivisions.
In the event the property owner requires a storm drain and there is not a storm drain in
front of the property, then for whatever extension is necessary to bring the storm drain (12 inch
minimum diameter) to the furthest developed property line, said property owner shall sign an
agreement with Cedar City providing that he shall be reimbursed for expenses incurred to cover
the actual cost of extending said storm drain. After said agreement is executed and construction
drawings have been submitted and approved by the City Engineer, then the storm drain can be
installed. Thereafter, the installation reimbursement amounts, shall be collected along the
specific pipe line thus installed, and be paid by Cedar City Corporation to the individual that paid
for the extension until that individual has been completely reimbursed without interest for the
money expended for making said extension or for a ten year period whichever occurs first. In
addition to the cost of extension, said property owner shall pay the impact fee required by
ordinance. Other property owners who thereafter connect to the extended line fronting their
property shall pay for the impact fees and, for the ten year period indicated above, the
reimbursement amount of one half (1/2) the actual cost of the installation across the front of
their property. This method of reimbursement shall also apply to lines extended and paid for by
Cedar City.
This ordinance shall not be applicable in subdivisions wherein extensions have already
been made at the cost of the developer.
ADOPTED by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0709-14.
Chapter 38 - Page 8
SECTION 38-2-3 OBSTRUCTIONS
A. It is unlawful for any person to obstruct or contribute to the obstruction of the
flow of storm water runoff or non-storm water runoff into any sump, detention
basin, storm drain, curb and gutter, drain inlet, or other associated structural
controls that convey storm water and/or non storm water runoff.
B. It is unlawful for any person to cause any obstruction that inhibits the normal flow
of storm water and/or non-storm water runoff in any curb and gutter, unless the
obstruction is associated with a street and/or storm drainage improvement project
and is authorized by the Public Works Director or his/her appointee and granted
with the issuance of a permit signed by the Public Works Director or his/her
appointee.
C. It is unlawful for any person to cover over any drain inlet for any reason or
purpose.
D. Paragraphs A and B of this section shall not apply during clean-up periods
established by the City, provided the materials are placed according to any
directions from the City and do not obstruct drain inlets.
SECTION 38-2-4 DUMPING
A. It is unlawful for any person to dump, or allow to be dumped into any sump,
detention basin, storm drain, curb and gutter, drain inlet, or other storm drainage
structure that conveys storm or flood water and/or non-storm water, any type of
debris, petroleum product, chemical, paint, pesticide, herbicide, heavy metal, acid
or base product, solid or liquid waste product, hazardous waste product, and/or
human or animal waste.
B. The restrictions set forth in paragraph A shall not apply to the normal runoff of
non-storm water related to the washing of vehicles displayed for sale on
Automobile Sales Lots, washing of vehicles for charity or fund raising activities
not required to have a business license, or for other domestic home uses; for
example, lawn watering, washing cars, etc.
Chapter 38 - Page 9
SECTION 38-2-5 DAMAGE
It is unlawful for any person to cause damage to any storm drain or flood control
improvement.
SECTION 38-2-6 VIOLATION AND PENALTY
A. The violation of any of the provisions of the Article shall be a Class B
misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed One Thousand Dollars
($1,000.00) or a jail term of up to ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and
imprisonment. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
B. If, as a result of the violation of any provision of this Chapter, the City or any
other party suffers damages and is required to make repairs and/or replace any
materials, the cost of repair or replacement shall be borne by the party in violation,
in addition to any criminal fines and/or penalties.
38-3 ON-SITE DRAINAGE CONTROL
Section 38-3-1 Ordinance Purpose
Section 38-3-2 Definitions
Section 38-3-3 Drainage Impact Fees
Section 38-3-4 Design and Installation Standards
Section 38-3-5 Improvement Maintenance
Section 38-3-6 Oversized Improvements
Section 38-3-7 Review Criteria
SECTION 38-3-1 PURPOSE OF ORDINANCE
The underlying purpose and intent of this Ordinance is to minimize storm water flooding
to the extent possible for frequent storm events. This Ordinance is enacted for the further
purpose of protecting human life and property, minimizing flood damage, protecting water
quality and minimizing the need for public capital facilities for storm water management.
Additionally, this Ordinance will provide a defined alternative to paying Drainage Impact Fees
for commercial and industrial developments.
SECTION 38-3-2 DEFINITIONS
For the purpose of this Ordinance, the following definitions shall apply:
Chapter 38 - Page 10
A. CFS Storm water flow rate measured in cubic feet per second.
B. Impact-Fee-Assessed Development Any construction or expansion of a
residential building or structure or other building or structure that is not included
in the definition of an Impact-Fee-Exempt Development; or any change in the use
of land that creates additional demand and need for public facilities.
C. Impact-Fee-Exempt Development Any construction or expansion of a
commercial or industrial building where the builder or developer chooses to
install required on-site storm water improvements as defined herein.
D. Miscellaneous Development The Subdivision of any land, the construction of
roads or bridges, and the filling, grading, clearing, excavation or paving of any site
or parcel of land.
E. Drainage Improvements When required, the minimum drainage improvements
installed in a development shall be detention basins, detention basin controlled
outlet structures, detention basin overflow spillways and drainage systems. Other
improvements may be required as determined by the City Engineer. On-site
improvements are defined as improvements on private property; off-site
improvements are defined as improvements on dedicated public rights-of-way.
SECTION 38-3-3 DRAINAGE IMPACT FEES
Drainage impact fees have been established by the Cedar City Council and adopted in the
form of an Ordinance duly approved by said Council. Impact fees shall be paid in the amount
and at the time designated in the impact fee Ordinance. The impact fees are used to install
capital improvements as defined in the City’s drainage capital facilities plan. Under no condition
shall it be interpreted that the payment of impact fees is permission to drain storm water onto
another private property owner. As an alternative to paying established impact fees, a
commercial or industrial development can install on-site improvements as defined by this
Ordinance.
SECTION 38-3-4 IMPROVEMENT DESIGN AND INSTALLATION STANDARDS
A. Impact-Fee Assessed Development. Developments assessed drainage impact fees
will not be required to install storm water improvements unless the storm water
from the development flows to an adjoining private property owner; any
development creating such conditions will be required to install necessary
Chapter 38 - Page 11
improvements to prevent such flows or obtain appropriate drainage easements.
B. Impact-Fee-Exempt Development. Drainage improvements for impact-feeexempt
development, or any other development as defined herein requiring
drainage improvements, shall be designed and installed according to the following
minimum standards:
1. A comprehensive drainage study shall be performed for the development
by a licensed Professional Engineer. The drainage study shall provide all
necessary data required by this Ordinance or the City Engineer.
2. Detention basins shall be sized to detain a 25-year, 24 hour post
development rainfall event.
3. Detention basin outlet structures shall be designed to restrict flows to a
predevelopment 2-year, 24-hour rainfall event or 0.2 CFS/acre, whichever
is less.
4. Detention basins shall be constructed with emergency overflow spillways
with a post development 100-year rainfall peak capacity.
5. Storm water drainage systems, including pipes, streets and gutters, must be
designed to effectively convey flows to and from the detention basin for all
storm events up to and including the 100-year rainfall event.
6. Flows from detention basin outlet structures and emergency overflow
spillways shall be conveyed directly to a City designated storm drain
system or street right-of-way without impacting other private property.
This standard can be waived if a private property owner gives permission
to receive the flow through a deeded drainage easement.
7. All required improvements shall be designed and installed according to
City Engineering Standards.
C. Miscellaneous Development. Miscellaneous developments shall install off-site or
on-site drainage improvements if required by the City Engineer.
SECTION 38-3-5 IMPROVEMENT MAINTENANCE
All drainage improvements shall be maintained so as to ensure their design capacities and
effectiveness at all times. Drainage improvements installed off-site shall be maintained by the
City. Improvements installed on-site shall be maintained by the property owner.
SECTION 38-3-6 OVERSIZED IMPROVEMENTS
Whenever the City requires improvements sized in excess of the requirements for a
specific development, the City shall reimburse the developer for the actual cost of the increased
Chapter 38 - Page 12
size, including materials and installation. This does not include any costs for engineering,
interest, or profit. The reimbursement shall be made upon submission of verified invoices by the
developer to the City.
SECTION 38-3-7 REVIEW CRITERIA
The City Engineer has the authority to set forth storm water management and drainage
criteria so that the intent of the Ordinance is met. All drainage studies and designs for storm
water improvement projects shall be reviewed by the City Engineer to ensure compliance with
this Ordinance and City Engineering Standards.
SEVERABILITY
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this Ordinance are severable.
If any such section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase shall be declared invalid or
unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a Court of competent jurisdiction, such
invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not impair or otherwise affect any of the remaining
sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this Ordinance.
CHAPTER 39
CEDAR CITY FUNDING REQUEST ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I
RECREATION, ARTS, AND PARKS
LOCAL OPTION SALES TAX
SECTION 39-I-1 Purpose
SECTION 39-I-2 Statutory Authority
SECTION 39-I-3 Definitions
SECTION 39-I-4 Advisory Boards
SECTION 39-I-5 Use of Funds, and Certain Application Restrictions
SECTION 39-I-6 Allocation
SECTION 39-I-7 Application Information and Format
SECTION 39-I-8 Agreements and disbursement of RAP tax funds
SECTION 39-I-9 Unallocated funds
ARTICLE II
COMMUNITY EVENT PROMOTIONS AND NONMONITARY ASSISTANCE
SECTION 39-II-1 Purpose and Statutory Authority
SECTION 39-II-2 Definitions
SECTION 39-II-3 Nonmonitary Assistance
SECTION 39-II-4 Community Events Promotions
CHAPTER 39
CEDAR CITY FUNDING REQUEST ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I
RECREATION, ARTS, AND PARKS
LOCAL OPTION SALES TAX
SECTION 39-I-1 Purpose
SECTION 39-I-2 Statutory Authority
SECTION 39-I-3 Definitions
SECTION 39-I-4 Advisory Boards
SECTION 39-I-5 Use of Funds, and Certain Application Restrictions
SECTION 39-I-6 Allocation
SECTION 39-I-7 Application Information and Format
SECTION 39-I-8 Agreements and disbursement of RAP tax funds
SECTION 39-I-9 Unallocated funds
ARTICLE II
COMMUNITY EVENT PROMOTIONS AND NONMONETARY ASSISTANCE
SECTION 39-II-1 Purpose and Statutory Authority
SECTION 39-II-2 Definitions
SECTION 39-II-3 Nonmonetary Assistance
SECTION 39-II-4 Community Events Promotions
CHAPTER 39
CEDAR CITY FUNDING REQUEST ORDINANCE
ARTICLE I
RECREATION, ARTS, AND PARKS
LOCAL OPTION SALES TAX
Sections:
39-I-1 Purpose
39-I-2 Statutory Authority
39-I-3 Definitions
39-I-4 Advisory Board
39-I-5 Use of Funds, and Certain Application Restrictions
39-I-6 Allocations
39-I-7 Application Information and Format
39-I-8 Agreements and disbursement of RAP tax funds
39-I-9 Unallocated funds
SECTION 39-I-1 Purpose
Cedar City is host to numerous recreation and artistic events sponsored by public and
private entities. Cedar City has a thriving park system that is in need of expansion to provide
service to a growing community. In order to pay for some of the costs associated with
recreation, arts, and parks, a majority of the voters in the 2005 municipal election approved the
imposition of a one tenth of one percent (0.1%) sales tax (the RAP tax). Said tax was enacted
by a vote of the Cedar City Council. The purpose of this article is to provide a structure for the
distribution of the recreation, arts, and parks sales tax revenue, and to avoid conflicts between the
Community Events Promotions funding requests.
SECTION 39-I-2 Statutory Authority
Cedar City has enacted the local option sales tax to fund recreation, arts, and parks and
shall administer the disbursement of any funds generated by the same pursuant to the provisions
of Title 59, Chapter 12, Sections 1401 through 1404, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended.
Cedar City will continue to abide by the foregoing provisions of State law in their current form,
or as amended by the legislature.
SECTION 39-I-3 Definitions
As used in this article the following terms shall have the following definitions:
(1) “Administrative unit” means a division of a private or nonprofit organization or institution
that:
(A) would, if it were a separate entity, be a botanical organization or cultural
organization; and
(B) consistently maintains books and records separate from those of its parent
organization.
(2) “Application form” means the official document, with noted attachments and supporting
documentation to request funds collected pursuant to the RAP tax.
(3) “Arts” means botanical organizations, cultural facilities, cultural organizations, and
zoological organizations.
(4) “Botanical organization” means:
(A) a private nonprofit organization or institution having as its primary purpose the
advancement and preservation of plant science through horticultural display, botanical
research, and community education; or
(B) an administrative unit.
(5) “Cultural facility” means any publicly owned or operated museum, theater, art center, music
hall, or other cultural or arts facility.
(6) “Cultural organization” means:
(A) a private nonprofit organization or institution having as its primary purpose the
advancement and preservation of:
(I) natural history;
(II) art;
(III) music;
(IV) theater;
(V) dance; or
(VI) cultural arts, including literature, a motion picture, or storytelling;
and
(B) an administrative unit.
(7) “Cultural organization” does not include:
(A) any agency of the state;
(B) any political subdivision of the State of Utah; or
(C) any educational institution whose annual revenues are directly derived more than
50% from state funds.
(8) “Institution” means any of the following:
(A) the University of Utah;
(B) Utah State University;
(C) Weber State University;
(D) Southern Utah University;
(E) Snow College;
(F) Dixie State University;
(G) Utah Valley University;
(H) Salt Lake Community College;
(I) the Utah College of Applied Technology; and
(J) other public post-high school educational institutions as the Legislature may
designate.
(9) “Non-profit” means an organization or corporation that is not organized, created, operated or
maintained to generate a profit or distribute income to its members, directors, or officers, or
corporation. An organization automatically qualifies as a non-profit organization if it is
operating under section 501 (C)(3) of the internal revenue service code.
(10) “Organization” means an association, corporation, government, governmental subdivision,
agency, or partnership formally established to coordinate and carry out unified activities and
goals.
(11) "Preservation and replacement fund" shall mean a fund established with RAP tax revenue
that may be allowed to accumulate over time and shall only be spent on the preservation or
replacement of Cedar City owned cultural facilities or Cedar City owned recreational facilities
that would otherwise qualify for the use of RAP tax funding. All expenditures from the
preservation and replacement fund shall be made only after recommendations by the appropriate
RAP tax board and approval of the Cedar City Council.
(12) “Primary purpose” means the main goal, the fundamental intent, or the mission of an
organization.
(13) “Qualifying expenses” means (A) yearly operating expenses of qualifying botanical
organization or cultural organization; (B) yearly operating expenses or costs to construct
facilities for qualifying recreational facility, zoological facility, or cultural facility, or (C)
expenditures meeting the definition of the preservation and replacement fund.
(14) “Quorum” means a simple majority of the voting members.
(15) “Recipient organization” or “recipient” means an otherwise qualified organization or
individual that has been approved by the City Council to receive a specific amount of RAP tax
money for qualifying expenses.
(16) “Recreational facility” means any publicly owned or operated park, campground, marina,
dock, golf course, playground, athletic field, gymnasium, swimming pool, trail system, cultural
facility, or other facility used for recreational purposes.
(17) “Unallocated Funds” means any RAP tax funds that have accumulated due to earned
interest, are not spent on the approved projects, or otherwise accumulate in the RAP tax funds.
(18) “zoological organization” means a public, public-private partnership, or private nonprofit
organization having as its primary purpose the advancement and preservation of zoology.
SECTION 39-I-4 ADVISORY BOARDS
1. The Cedar City Council hereby creates two (2) advisory boards to be known as the arts
advisory board and the parks and recreation advisory board. The purpose of the arts advisory
board is to receive applications from arts groups that would qualify to receive RAP tax funds;
review the applications; and recommend allocation of the arts portion of the RAP tax revenue to
the Cedar City Council. The purpose of the parks and recreation advisory board is to receive
applications from parks and recreation groups that would qualify to receive RAP tax funds;
review the applications; and recommend allocation of the parks and recreation portions of the
RAP tax revenue to the Cedar City Council.
2. Each advisory board shall be comprised of seven (7) people appointed by the Mayor with
the approval of the City Council. Each member of the advisory board shall serve a term of four
(4) years, unless they are reappointed by the Mayor and approved by the City Council. The
advisory board shall nominate and elect one of its members to serve as the chairperson of the
board. The chairperson shall conduct all meetings of the board, but shall not vote unless there is
a tie. In order to conduct business, there must be a quorum present. If a member of either board
should resign, the Mayor shall appoint a replacement to serve out the remainder of the resigning
person’s term.
A. The terms of the initial appointees shall be staggered. The Mayor shall designate
three (3) members of each board to serve four (4) year terms, two (2) members to
serve three (3) year terms, and two (2) members to serve two (2) year terms. All
appointments after the initial formation of the board shall serve a complete four
(4) year term.
3. Each board shall meet once per year to consider applications, and make recommendations
to the City Council, this shall be the annual board meeting. The yearly meeting of each board
shall be as soon as reasonably possible after the Cedar City Council approves its next fiscal
year’s budget. Depending on the amount of revenue collected, the Mayor may suspend the
board meetings in 2006. The board may conduct additional meetings as necessary with the
consent of the majority of the board members.
4. All meetings of each board shall be open to the public and in compliance with the Utah
Open and Public Meetings Act, UCA §52-4-1 through 52-4-10.
5. In addition to the notice requirements of the Utah Open and Public Meetings Act, City
staff shall cause notice of the annual board meeting to be sent to applicable organizations that
qualify for RAP tax money and have registered with City staff. This notice shall be sent at least
thirty (30) days prior to the meeting and shall contain an application for RAP tax funding, and a
deadline for submission of the completed application not less than fourteen (14) days prior to the
scheduled meeting. Staff shall only be responsible to send the above notice to the
organization’s representative at the address given to City Staff by the organization. The
individual organizations shall be responsible to keep their contact information updated. Each
board shall cause to be published a notice in the local paper no less than thirty (30) days in
advance of the meeting stating that applications for RAP tax funds are being accepted; that
interested persons or groups should contact City Staff for information and applications; and
setting a deadline for the receipt of applications.
SECTION 39-I-5 Use of Funds, and Certain Application Restrictions
1. The funds generated by the RAP tax shall be used for qualifying expenses as defined in
this chapter, and defined by Utah Code Annotated Title 59, Chapter 12, Sections 1401 through
1404. It shall be the duty of the advisory boards and City staff to evaluate each application to
ensure that the proposed use of the funds complies with the qualifying expenses as defined in this
chapter.
2. In addition to the requirements of State Law adopted above, the following standards shall
apply to the use of and application for RAP tax funding:
A. In order to assure the fair distribution of the limited pool of RAP tax funds
available and to discourage double dipping no organization, cultural facility,
cultural organization, botanical organization, institution, recreational facility,
zoological organization, or administrative unit thereof shall be allowed to receive
funding for more than one application per year. Applications may contain requests
for multiple purposes, but only one application will be allowed. Also, no
organization, cultural facility, cultural organization, botanical organization,
institution, recreational facility, zoological organization, or administrative unit
thereof shall be allowed to receive funding from RAP tax money as well as
funding from the Community Promotions fund as set forth in article II of this
chapter.
B. During the application process the applicant shall designate, consistent with the
organization’s primary purpose, whether they are requesting funding from the
RAP tax arts fund, the RAP tax parks and recreation fund, the RAP tax arts
preservation and replacement fund, or the RAP tax parks and recreation
preservation and replacement fund. The applicant may request and receive
assistance from staff when making this determination. Once the designation is
made by the applicant it shall be reviewed by City staff to determine if the
applicant qualifies for RAP tax funding from the selected fund. If it is
determined that the applicant has requested RAP tax funding from a fund for
which the applicant does not qualify, the applicant may choose to apply for RAP
tax funding from the fund for which the applicant does qualify.
C. The deadline for returning the applications shall be specified in both the
newspaper advertisement and the application form. Applications received after
the application deadline shall be rejected by staff and may not be considered by
either the advisory board or City Council. It is the responsibility of the
individual organizations to make sure their applications are turned in prior to the
deadline.
SECTION 39-I-6 Allocation
The entire amount of RAP tax collected shall be budgeted every year. Of the entire
amount of RAP tax collected 10% shall be budgeted in a preservation and replacement fund.
After the allocation of the initial 10% the remaining funds shall be allocated 1/3 to recreation,
1/3 to arts, and 1/3 to parks. All recommendations made by the advisory boards and
expenditures made by the City Council shall comply with this basic allocation of funds.
The entire preservation and replacement fund shall be allocated 1/3 to recreation, 1/3 to
arts, and 1/3 to parks. All allocations made by the advisory boards and expenditures of the
preservation and replacement fund made by the City Council shall comply with this basic
allocation.
SECTION 39-I-7 Application Information and Format
All applications for RAP tax funds shall contain the following information:
1. Applicant’s name;
2. Applicant’s mailing address;
3. Applicant’s physical address;
4. Applicant’s phone number;
5. Applicant’s email address;
6. Applicant’s fax number;
7. Proof of applicant’s non-profit status;
8. An attachment showing the applicant’s detailed financial statement for the
last year, including:
A. Sources of income;
B. Amounts of income;
C. Types of expenses; and
D. Amounts of expenses;
9. Proposed qualifying expenses to be paid with the RAP tax money;
10. The amount of RAP tax revenue the applicant is requesting;
11. A detailed statement describing what the RAP tax money will be used to
pay for, including, if applicable, bids for proposed improvements;
12. If the applicant has received RAP tax money within the past three (3)
years, an accounting showing how the prior RAP tax appropriations have
been spent, and
13. Any other information that is reasonably related to determining where the
RAP tax money should be spent and is requested by the board.
The following is a sample of the application to be used for funding requests. It is
illustrative only and may from time to time be altered by the Mayor, City Council, or City Staff
as long as it requires the information stated above:
RAP TAX FUNDING APPLICATION
NOTICE TO APPLICANT:
The information provided on this application constitutes a request to receive funding from the
RAP tax revenues. Please complete the application in its entirety. If more space is necessary,
please attach additional information to the form and reference the attachment in the appropriate
section. Applications received after the due date shall be rejected.
All information on this application must be, to the best of your knowledge, true and accurate.
Making a false statement on this form is a criminal act in violation of Title 76, Chapter 8, Section
504, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended. In addition to criminal punishment, any
application containing false or misleading information will be rejected.
Choose which RAP tax fund the applicant is applying for:
Arts
Arts Preservation and Replacement
Parks and Recreation
Parks and Recreation Preservation and Replacement
1. Applicant’s name: __________________________________________________
2. Applicant’s mailing address: __________________________________________
3. Applicant’s physical address:
__________________________________________
4. Applicant’s phone number: ___________________________________________
5. Applicant’s fax number: _____________________________________________
6. Applicant’s email address: ____________________________________________
7. Proof of applicant’s non-profit status: ___________________________________
8. Attach a detailed financial statement showing the following information for the
applicant’s prior fiscal year:
A. Sources of income;
B. Amounts of income;
C. Types of expenses; and
D. Amounts of expenses;
9. Proposed qualifying expenses to be paid with RAP tax money:
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
10. Amount of RAP tax money the applicant is requesting: _____________________
11. Detailed statement describing what the RAP tax money will be used for,
including, if applicable, bids for proposed improvements:
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
12. If the applicant has received RAP tax money within the past three (3) years,
provide an accounting showing how the prior RAP tax appropriations have been
spent, or if applicable, the amount of RAP tax money granted to the applicant that
is saved for a future project:
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
13. Any other information the applicant would like to provide:
________________________________________________________________________
________________________________________________________________________
A notice stating the application due date.
SECTION 39-I-8 AGREEMENTS AND DISBURSEMENT OF RAP TAX FUNDS
1. RAP tax funding agreements. Organizations receiving RAP tax allocations shall enter
into an agreement with Cedar City prior to receiving any RAP tax funds. At a minimum the
agreement between the City and the organization receiving RAP tax funding shall include the
following items:
A. A statement that to the greatest extent possible funds shall be expended within
Cedar City. Also, that the funds shall be spent for the qualified expenditures
approved by the City Council.
B. A statement that the organization receiving the RAP tax funding will agree to
submit a detailed income/expenditure report showing how the RAP taxes were
spent.
C. The following statement related to the nature of the RAP tax funds being public
funding:
For purposes of this section “public funds” means monies, funds, accounts,
regardless of the source from which they are derived and includes funds allocated
through the Cedar City RAP tax program. Public funds also include accounts or
funds that have been transferred through the Cedar City RAP tax program to
private or public entities that have contracted with Cedar City for the expenditure
of said funds. Recipient organization’s responsibility for public funds. The
recipient organization expressly understands that it, its officers, and employees
are obligated to receive, keep safe, transfer, disburse and use these public funds as
authorized by law and this agreement. The recipient organization understands
that it, its officers, and employees may be criminally liable under Utah Code
Annotated §76-8-402, for misuse of public funds. The recipient organization
understands that the City may monitor recipient organization’s expenditure of the
public funds.
D. Cedar City reserves the right to audit the use of the RAP tax funds and the
accounting of the use of the RAP tax funds received by the recipient organization
under this agreement. If an audit is requested by the City the recipient
organization shall cooperate fully with Cedar City and/or its auditors in the
performance of said audit.
E. The Recipient organization expressly understands that Cedar City may withhold
RAP tax funds or require repayment of funds from the recipient organization for
noncompliance with the terms and conditions of this agreement; failure to comply
with directives regarding the use of public funds contained in this agreement;
and/or the misuse of public funds. The recipient organization expressly
understands and agrees that the City’s ability to require repayment of funds
extends not only to the public funds that are allocated pursuant to this agreement,
but to all funding the recipient organization has received through RAP tax
funding.
F. A statement limiting the agreement to a period of one (1) year after the agreement
is signed by both parties and requiring that any funds not spent within the one (1)
year period be returned to the City to be reallocated as RAP tax funds. Also, this
statement shall include a provision that if the agreement is not signed and returned
to City staff within thirty (30) days that the City may void the agreement and re
allocate the money as RAP tax funds.
i) The City Council may approve an exception to 39-I-8(1)(F) by
allowing RAP tax funds to be saved and rolled over from year to
year for individually approved capital projects. These saved RAP
tax funds will be governed by the following rules:
a. The saved RAP tax funds will be held in a City account and
only disbursed once the project is fully funded.
b. The saved RAP tax funds must be expended for their
permissible use within (3) years of the date they were
approved by the City Council.
c. Any unspent RAP tax funds that are older than three (3)
years will be automatically returned to the City to be
reallocated as RAP tax funds.
d. If the project/entity these funds are assigned to fails, these
funds will be returned to the City to be reallocated as RAP
tax funds.
2. City as recipient organization. From time to time Cedar City is the recipient of RAP tax
money to fund various qualifying projects. When the City is the recipient organization it is not
required to enter an agreement. The City is required to abide by all provisions of the minimum
contract provisions as stated above and the City is required to abide by all of the requirements for
disbursement of RAP tax funding as stated below.
3. General procedure for the disbursement of RAP tax funds. After the recipient
organization has entered an agreement with Cedar City, RAP tax funds shall be disbursed using
the following procedures:
A. Unless otherwise provided for herein, one half of the RAP tax funding shall be
disbursed to the recipient organization once the organization signs the agreement
with the City. If the recipient organization is awarded an amount equal to or less
than $5,000.00 it shall receive 80% of the award when it signs the agreement with
the City.
B. Prior to receiving the second half, or the remaining 20% in the case of an award
equal to or less than $5,000.00, of the funding the recipient organization shall
provide to the City a detailed income and expenditure report showing the amount
of RAP tax that was received with the first half of the disbursement and how it
was spent. Also on the same report the recipient organization shall show the
amount of RAP tax that is to be received with the second disbursement and the
manner in which it is projected to be spent. It is not intended that the report
detail all funding and expenditures by the recipient organization, the report is only
concerned with RAP tax income and expenditures. Below is a fictitious example
of the required report:
Cedar City RAP tax income and expenditure report
Miscellaneous City cultural organization
(name of organization receiving RAP tax funds)
Reporting period Cedar City Fiscal year 2012-2013
(Time period covered by report)
Income:
RAP tax funds received $5,000.00
Expenditures:
Office supplies $500.00
Costumes $2,000.00
Employee wages $1,000.00
Music $500.00
Fuel $1,000.00
Remaining Allocation: $5,000.00
Anticipated Expenditures:
Scenery for production of South Pacific $5,000.00
Actual Expenditures for remaining allocation:
C. In addition to the above report the recipient organization shall be required to
submit a final report once the second half of the RAP tax funding has been
received and spent. The final report shall be submitted prior to the recipient
organization being eligible for any future RAP tax funding.
4. Procedure for a lump sum RAP tax disbursement. From time to time RAP tax funds are
appropriated for purposes that require a one-time disbursement of funds. Examples of this type
of funding include, but are not limited to, a single purchase of equipment or a single purchase of
multiple pieces of equipment. This procedure may be used as an exception to the above general
and preferred disbursement method.
A. The recipient organization will be required to show that it has received three
written price quotes for the proposed item(s) to be purchased. As an alternative
to the three price quotes the recipient organization may follow the City’s adopted
purchasing policy.
B. Once the recipient organization has provided the information required above, the
RAP tax funds will be disbursed to the recipient organization pursuant to the
City’s accounts payable process. If mutually agreed, the City may issue payment
directly to the vendor designated by the recipient organization.
C. Prior to receiving any future RAP tax funding the recipient organization shall
submit the same written report as required in section 2 above.
5. Failure to supply income and expenditure report. If a recipient organization fails to
provide the required income and expenditure report, the recipient organization will be in breach
of its agreement with City. Failure to supply a required income and expenditure report may lead
to an audit into how the recipient organization has spent public funds. In addition to the
remedies available for the breach of the agreement, a possible audit, and the criminal penalties
provided for misuse of public funds, the recipient organization shall not receive further RAP tax
allocations and/or disbursements until the required income and expenditure reports are provided.
SECTION 39-I-9 UNALLOCATED FUNDS
1. From time to time unallocated funds will accumulate in the City’s accounts. The City’s
Finance Department shall account for the unallocated funds and disclose the amount thereof
annually in conjunction with the City’s budget. The City shall spend these funds on RAP tax
eligible projects in accordance with the terms of this section.
A. When in the Mayor’s discretion the unallocated funds have accumulated a
sufficient balance the Mayor shall direct staff to include the unallocated funds in
the budget for the next round of RAP tax allocations.
B. The unallocated funds shall be divided 1/3 for arts, 1/3 for parks, and 1/3 for
recreation. The unallocated funds may be allocated and spent on projects to
preserve or restore City owned facilities that are otherwise eligible for RAP tax
funding and as approved in accordance with this ordinance.
C. The RAP Tax Advisory Boards shall receive applications from the City for
projects that qualify for expenditure of the unallocated funds. The RAP Tax
Advisory Boards shall review the applications and make recommendations to the
Cedar City Council. The RAP Tax Advisory Boards may also recommend to the
Cedar City Council the use of unallocated funds even if no application is received.
D. Upon receipt of the recommendations from the RAP Tax Advisory Boards the
City Council may approve, deny, or modify the recommendations.
E. Upon the City Council’s approval of qualifying projects upon which to spend the
unallocated RAP Tax funds the City shall comply with all rules set forth in this
ordinance otherwise related to expenditure of RAP Tax funds.
Adopted 7/06.
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0513-09
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 1209-09-1
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0425-12
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0513-15
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0413-16
Amended by Cedar City Ordinance No. 0708-20
CHAPTER 39
CEDAR CITY FUNDING REQUEST ORDINANCE
ARTICLE II
COMMUNITY EVENT PROMOTIONS AND NONMONITARY ASSISTANCE
SECTION 39-II-1 Purpose
SECTION 39-II-2 Definitions
SECTION 39-II-3 Nonmonetary Assistance
SECTION 39-II-4 Community Events Promotions
SECTION 39-II-1 Purpose
Title 10, Chapter 8, Section 2, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended authorizes Cities
in the State of Utah to appropriate money for corporate purposes. This same statute includes as
a corporate purpose the appropriation of money when in the municipal legislative body’s
judgment, the purpose will provide for the safety, health, prosperity, moral well-being, peace,
order, comfort, or convenience of the City’s inhabitants. The State Legislature has also given
the City a limited ability to waive fees or provide non-monetary assistance to non-profit
organizations. Additionally, the City has established a RAP tax for the collection and
distribution of money for Arts, Parks, and Recreation. The purpose of this article is to set forth
regulations in compliance with Utah State Law for the community events promotions requests
and other nonmonetary assistance. Furthermore, it is the purpose of this article to distinguish
eligibility between the RAP tax, community events promotions and nonmonetary assistance.
SECTION 39-II-2 Definitions
As used in this Chapter the following terms shall have the following definitions:
(1) “Community events promotions” shall mean a line item established by the City Council
through the yearly budget process, and administered in accordance with this chapter.
(2) “Intangible benefit” means a benefit to the City that is not capable of being quantified in
terms of money, real property, personal property, or demonstrable economic benefit but in the
opinion of the City Council the benefit does provide for the safety, health, prosperity, moral
well-being, peace, order, comfort, or convenience of the inhabitants of Cedar City.
(3) “Nonmonetary assistance” shall mean a benefit to a non-profit entity in terms of labor,
fee waivers, or other services provided by the City. Nonmonetary assistance does not include
waiver or adjustment of impact fees as such waivers or adjustments are provided for under the
City’s impact fee ordinance.
(4) “Non-profit” shall mean an organization or corporation that is not organized, created,
operated or maintained to generate a profit or distribute income to its members, directors, or
officers, or corporation. An organization automatically qualifies as a non-profit organization if
it is operating under section 501 (C)(3) of the internal revenue service code.
(5) “Public hearing notice” shall mean a notice published in a newspaper of general
circulation and/or on the State of Utah’s public notice website, as state law may require. Said
public notice shall be published no less than fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing. Said
notice shall contain information so that a reasonable person would be able to understand the
following information about the public hearing: general topic, location, date, and time.
(6) “Tangible benefit” means a benefit to the City that can be measured in terms of money,
real property, personal property, or demonstrable economic benefit pursuant to the standards set
forth in this chapter.
SECTION 39-II-3 Nonmonetary Assistance
(1) The City Council may authorize nonmonetary assistance when in the judgement of the
City Council said nonmonetary assistance provides for the safety, health, prosperity, moral
well-being, peace, order, comfort, or convenience of the inhabitants of Cedar City. In making
this determination the City Council may consider both tangible and intangible benefits to the
City.
(2) Nonmonetary assistance may only be provided to non-profit organizations, and the total
amount of nonmonetary assistance approved by the City Council in any given fiscal year shall
not exceed 1% of the City’s budget for that fiscal year. City staff shall provide to the Council
an estimate of the dollar value of the nonmonetary assistance requested.
(3) Prior to considering approval of nonmonetary assistance, the City shall receive an
application from a non-profit organization, and allow staff reasonable time to provide an estimate
of the dollar amount of assistance requested. No nonmonetary assistance shall be approved
without first publishing a public hearing notice and holding a public hearing before the Cedar
City Council.
SECTION 39-II-4 COMMUNITY EVENTS PROMOTIONS.
(1) If through its yearly budget process, the City Council funds the community events
promotions budget this chapter shall govern the expenditure of those funds.
(2) Other than RAP tax funding, persons or organizations requesting funds from the City
must complete a Fund Request application and provide the relevant supplemental information
stated in the application. The application and supplemental, information will be submitted to a
designated City Staff member for review and economic evaluation based upon intangible
benefits and the following formula:
Economic Evaluation
Estimated expenses subject to sales tax incurred by event sponsor
Estimated expenses subject to sales tax incurred by event participants
Estimated expenses subject to sales tax incurred by event spectators
Total estimated expenses subject to sales tax
Economic multiplier 1.3
Total estimated expenses after multiplier
Cedar City tax rate on sales X .009
Estimated sales tax revenue for Cedar City as a result of the event
Other methods/justification:
(3) The Council must hold a public hearing in order to consider the requests. Public hearing
notice shall be published by staff. The public hearings to consider funding requests shall be
held once a year in conjunction with the City’s annual budget process. With the consent of the
Mayor and any two (2) members of the City Council, a public hearing may be advertised and
held during the year at a time other than in conjunction with the budget.
(4) The City Council shall not consider any request for funding from community events
promotions when the applicant is eligible to apply for funding from the RAP tax. Also, the City
Council shall not consider any request for funding where the applicant has not submitted an
application or when the application is received after the yearly established deadline.
ADOPTED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 1209-09-1 and AMENDED BY CEDAR
CITY ORDINANCE NO. 1026-16.
CHAPTER 40 - PAGE 1
CHAPTER 40
TRANSIENT ROOM TAX
SECTION 40-1 ENACTMENT
SECTION 40-2 DEFINITIONS
SECTION 40-3 USE OF REVENUE AND BUDGETING
SECTION 40-4 ACCOUNTING
SECTION 40-1 ENACTMENT
Pursuant to the authority given to municipalities under the current Title 59, Chapter 12,
Part 3a, Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended, in 2013 the Cedar City Council enacted a 1%
transient room tax. Said tax is collected by the State Tax Commission in accordance with the
provisions of UCA § 59-12-354, and the State Tax Commission is permitted to keep an
administrative fee as therein defined.
SECTION 40-2 DEFINITIONS
This section incorporates all definitions currently applicable to the provisions of Title 59,
Chapter 12, Part 3a of the Utah Code. In addition to the definitions under current state law for
purposes of this ordinance the following terms shall have the following definitions:
(A) “Community improvements” shall mean additional equipment and/or
infrastructure needed to accommodate sporting events, entertainment, business
conferences, conventions, and spectator events resulting in whole or in part from
the City’s recruiting efforts.
(B) “Event support” shall mean efforts including monetary support for an event,
activity or organization which enhances tourism in Cedar City. It could also
include use of City facilities and City staff in a capacity that is beyond their
regular work duties. Event support shall have a primary focus on large festivals,
activities, or organizations that may have a positive impact on travel and tourism
in Cedar City.
( C) “Marketing” shall mean to communicate with current and potential associates on
the benefits of holding sporting, entertainment, business and spectator events in
Cedar City. This may include contributing to Cedar City’s branding efforts in
marketing and promoting the image of Cedar City.
(D) “Recruitment” shall mean proactive efforts by City staff to reach out to
individuals and/or organizations which may result in bringing sporting events,
entertainment, business conferences, conventions, and spectator events to Cedar
City.
CHAPTER 40 - PAGE 2
SECTION 40-3 USE OF REVENUE AND BUDGETING
Pursuant to UCA §59-12-352(4) the revenue generated by the transient room tax may be
used for general fund purposes. Transient Room Tax revenue should be directed toward
recruitment, community improvements, event support and marketing, as those terms are defined
herein.
Transient Room Tax revenue shall also be used to establish a reserve fund not to exceed
fifty thousand dollars ($50,000). As of the enactment of this amendment there exists a reserve
fund that has been collected since the establishment of the Transient Room Tax. The existing
reserve fund exceeds fifty thousand ($50,000) dollars. Amounts in the reserve fund already
collected and exceeding fifty thousand ($50,000) dollars shall be allowed to either remain in the
reserve account or be budgeted and spent in accordance with the terms of this ordinance. The
reserve fund may, with the recommendation of the Mayor and approval of the City Council on a
project by project basis, be budgeted and spend for community improvements, event support,
marketing, and/or recruitment related to securing major events.
Each year during Cedar City’s budget process the Mayor will solicit from the members of
the City Council suggested uses for the transient room tax. The Mayor may also request input
from staff, community organizations and citizens as to possible uses for the revenue generated by
the transient room tax. As part of the Mayor’s proposed budget, recommendations as to the
expenditure of transient room tax revenue shall be presented for the City Council’s approval.
In addition to the provisions contained herein the budgeting, expenditure and use of
transient room tax revenue shall be in accordance with the laws of the State of Utah and all
applicable ordinances and policies of Cedar City.
SECTION 40-4 ACCOUNTING
The City’s Finance department will separately account for transient room tax revenue in a
special revenue fund that shall be known as the transient room tax special revenue fund. For
accounting purposes, the transient room tax special revenue fund shall be separate and distinct
from the City’s General Fund and all other revenue funds. The transient room tax special revenue
fund account balance will be reported by the Mayor to the Council as part of the City’s yearly
audit.
ENACTED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 0424-13.
AMENDED BY CEDAR CITY ORDINANCE NO. 0513-15 and 0412-17-2.