
			
PREFACE
The Municipal Code of Ephraim, UT began in-­house in 2019 with the assistance of Municipal Code Corporation. This Municipal Code shall be cited as the Ephraim City Code or “ECC” as an acronym.

This Municipal Code maintains a structure by subject matter using a hyphenated numbering system identifying the Title, Chapter, and Section (for example: 1.01.010).

The first number in the sequence (1.01.010) designates the TITLE level, as written in the table of contents
The second series of numbers (1.01.010) designates the CHAPTER level, as written in the table of contents
The last series (1.01.010) designates the Section level, and is expressed using three numerical values
If a fourth series exists comprising letters or numbers beyond the section level, it designates a Subsection level
To outline, give structure, and more granularly reference the legislation herein, the following list order or pattern of ascending alphanumeric characters is used: A, 1, a, (1), (A), (a). Drafting future legislation with this list order reconciles it with the online code’s list order. To forego the naming of each list item and to more granularly reference legislation that employs alphanumeric characters, use “Paragraph” (always capitalized) followed by the desired alphanumeric reference(s), comma separated. For example, “Paragraph B,7,d”, specifically references item “d”, of item “7”, of item “B”—whereas  “Paragraph B” refers more generally to any or all of Paragraph B’s descendants.

References herein revealing “Utah Code” implies a reference to the "Utah State Legislature".

Vacant titles, chapters, or sections may be designed for future use and may be marked “Reserved” to ease internal expansion. The legislative history identifies the specific legal sources of a section as may be provided in footnotes.

This Municipal Code is supplemented from time to ­time with amendments and additions made by Ephraim City. The specific legal sources that comprise this Municipal Code have been adapted during the codification process from the original formatting of the official hard copy. In the event of discrepancies between the online Municipal Code and the official hard copy, the official hard copy governs. Municipal Code Online, Inc., provides a searchable database of the Municipal Code for easy reference and convenience.

NOTICE: THE MUNICIPAL CODE MAY NOT REFLECT ALL OR THE MOST CURRENT VERSION OF LEGISLATION ADOPTED BY THE CITY COUNCIL THAT HAS YET TO BE UPDATED ONLINE. IN THE EVENT OF CONFLICT BETWEEN THE MUNICIPAL CODE AND A WRITTEN ORDINANCE, THE ORDINANCE TYPICALLY GOVERNS. ALSO, THE MUNICIPAL CODE MAY NOT REFLECT RULES OR OTHER REGULATIONS PROMULGATED UNDER THE AUTHORITY OF THE CODE, INCLUDING TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS. FOR MORE INFORMATION, CONTACT THE CITY RECORDER.

1 ADMINISTRATION
1.04 OFFICIAL CITY CODE
1.08 SAVING CLAUSE
1.12 DEFINITIONS - ADMINISTRATION
1.16 GENERAL PENALTY
1.20 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1.24 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1.28 CITY MANAGER
1.32 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
1.36 HOUSING AUTHORITY
1.40 RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
1.44 DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY

1.04 OFFICIAL CITY CODE
1.04.010 Title
1.04.020 Acceptance
1.04.030 Amendments
1.04.040 Code Alterations
1.04.050 Incorporation Of Statutes

1.04.010 Title
Upon the adoption by the City Council, this City Code is hereby declared to be and shall hereafter constitute the Official City Code of Ephraim. This City Code of ordinances shall be known and cited as the EPHRAIM CITY CODE and is hereby published by authority of the City Council and shall be supplemented to incorporate the most recent legislation of the City as provided in ECC 1.04.030. Any reference to the number of any section contained herein shall be understood to refer to the position of the same number, its appropriate chapter and title heading, and to the general penalty clause relating thereto, as well as to the section itself, when reference is made to this City Code by title in any legal documents. (1983 Code § 1-001; amd. 1998 Code)

1.04.020 Acceptance
The City Code, as hereby presented in printed form, shall hereafter be received without further proof in all courts and in administrative tribunals of this State as the ordinances of the City of general and permanent effect, except the excluded ordinances enumerated in ECC 1.08.010. (1998 Code)

1.04.030 Amendments
Any ordinance amending the City Code shall set forth the title, chapter and section number of the section or sections to be amended, and this shall constitute sufficient compliance with any statutory requirement pertaining to the amendment or revision by ordinance of any part of this City Code. All such amendments or revisions by ordinance shall be immediately forwarded to the codifiers, and the said ordinance material shall be prepared for insertion in its proper place in each copy of this City Code. Each such replacement page shall be properly identified and shall be inserted in each individual copy of the City Code. (1998 Code)

1.04.040 Code Alterations
It shall be deemed unlawful for any person to alter, change, replace or deface in any way any section or any page of this City Code in such a manner that the meaning of any phrase or order may be changed or omitted. Replacement pages may be inserted according to the official instructions when so authorized by the City Council. The City Recorder shall see that the replacement pages are properly inserted in the official copies maintained in the office of the City Recorder. Any person having custody of a copy of the City Code shall make every effort to maintain said Code current as to the most recent ordinances passed. Such person shall see to the immediate insertion of new or replacement pages when such are delivered or made available to such person through the office of the City Recorder. Said Code books, while in actual possession of officials and other interested persons, shall be and remain the property of the City and shall be returned to the office of the City Recorder when directed so to do by order of the City Council. (1998 Code)

1.04.050 Incorporation Of Statutes
Any reference or citation to any statute shall not be interpreted or construed to include, incorporate or make the citation or statute part of this Code unless the provisions of this Code specifically include, incorporate or make the citation or statute part of this Code by reference or incorporation, and any such reference or citation not specifically included or incorporated may be changed, amended or deleted without publication on an order of the City Council. (1983 Code § 1-009)

1.08 SAVING CLAUSE
1.08.010 Repeal Of General Ordinances
1.08.020 Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
1.08.030 Court Proceedings
1.08.040 Severability Clause

1.08.010 Repeal Of General Ordinances
Repealer; Exceptions: All general ordinances of the City passed prior to the adoption of this City Code are hereby repealed, except such as are included in this City Code or are by necessary implication herein reserved from repeal (subject to the saving clauses contained in the following sections), and excluding the following ordinances which are not hereby repealed: tax levy ordinances; appropriation ordinances; ordinances relating to boundaries and annexations; franchise ordinances and other ordinances granting special rights to persons or corporations; contract ordinances and ordinances authorizing the execution of a contract or the issuance of warrants; salary ordinances; fee ordinances; ordinances establishing, naming or vacating streets, alleys or other public places; improvement ordinances; bond ordinances; ordinances relating to elections; ordinances relating to the transfer or acceptance of real estate by or from the City; and all special ordinances. (1998 Code)
Effect Of Repealing Ordinances: The repeal of the ordinances provided in paragraph A above, shall not affect any debt or fee which is accrued, any duty imposed, any penalty incurred, nor any action or proceeding commenced under or by virtue of the ordinances repealed or the term of office of any person holding office at the time these ordinances take effect; nor shall the repeal of any ordinance have the effect of reviving any ordinance heretofore repealed or superseded. (1983 Code § 1-003)
Fee Ordinances: The fees or charges established by the ordinances repealed this Code of revised ordinances shall remain in effect until subsequently changed by ordinance or resolution, except that the fees and charges established by this Code of revised ordinances shall prevail in the event of a conflict. (1983 Code § 1-002C)
1.08.020 Public Ways And Public Utility Ordinances
No ordinance relating to railroad crossings with streets and other public ways, or relating to the conduct, duties, service or rates of public utilities shall be repealed by virtue of the adoption of this City Code or by virtue of the preceding Section, excepting as the City Code may contain provisions for such matters, in which case, this City Code shall be considered as amending such ordinance or ordinances in respect to such provisions only. (1998 Code)

1.08.030 Court Proceedings
Prior Acts: No new ordinance shall be construed or held to repeal a former ordinance whether such former ordinance is expressly repealed or not, as to any offense committed against such former ordinance or as to any act done, any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred, or any right accrued or claim arising under the former ordinance, or in any way whatever to affect any such offense or act so committed or so done, or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment so incurred or any right accrued or claim arising before the new ordinance takes effect, save only that the proceedings thereafter shall conform to the ordinance in force at the time of such proceeding, so far as practicable. If any penalty, forfeiture or punishment may be mitigated by any provision of a new ordinance, such provision may be, by consent of the party affected, applied to any judgment announced after the new ordinance takes effect.
Scope Of Section: This Section shall extend to all repeals, either by express words or implication, whether the repeal is in the ordinance making any new provisions upon the same subject or in any other ordinance.
Actions Now Pending: Nothing contained in this Chapter shall be construed as abating any action now pending under or by virtue of any general ordinance of the City herein repealed, and the provisions of all general ordinances contained in this Code shall be deemed to be continuing provisions and not a new enactment of the same provisions; nor shall this Chapter be deemed as discontinuing, abating, modifying or altering any penalty accrued or to accrue, or as affecting the liability of any person, firm or corporation, or as waiving any right of the City under any ordinance or provision thereof in force at the time of the adoption of this City Code. (1998 Code)
1.08.040 Severability Clause
If any section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase of this City Code or any part thereof is for any reason held to be unconstitutional or invalid or ineffective by any court of competent jurisdiction, such decision shall not affect the validity or effectiveness of the remaining portions of this Code, or any part thereof. The City Council hereby declares that it would have passed each section, subsection, subdivision, paragraph, sentence, clause or phrase thereof irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, subdivisions, paragraphs, sentences, clauses or phrases be declared unconstitutional, invalid or ineffective. (1983 Code § 1-007; amd. 1998 Code)

1.12 DEFINITIONS - ADMINISTRATION
1.12.010 Construction Of Words
1.12.020 Definitions, General - Administration
1.12.030 Catchlines

1.12.010 Construction Of Words
Whenever any word in any section of this City Code importing the plural number is used in describing or referring to any matters, parties or persons, any single matter, party or person shall be deemed to be included, although distributive words may not have been used. When any subject matter, party or person is referred to in this City Code by words importing the singular number only, or a particular gender, several matters, parties or persons and the opposite gender and bodies corporate shall be deemed to be included; provided, that these rules of construction shall not be applied to any section of this City Code which contains any express provision excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context may be repugnant thereto. The use of any verb in the present tense shall include the future and past tense when applicable. (1998 Code)
All words and phrases shall be constructed and understood according to the common use and understanding of the language; the technical words and phrases and such other words and phrases as may have acquired a particular meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such particular meaning. (1983 Code § 1-005A)
The word "ordinance" contained in the ordinances of the City has been changed in the content of this City Code to "Title", "Chapter", "Section" and/or "subsection" or words of like import for organizational and clarification purposes only. Such change to the City's ordinances is not meant to amend passage and effective dates of such original ordinances.
Nothing in this Chapter shall modify the definitions in ECC 8.04, effective as of January 1, 1998. Those definitions shall apply as to the utilities of electric service, water and sewer service to the extent that they are treated in said Chapter. (1998 Code)
1.12.020 Definitions, General - Administration
Whenever the following words or terms are used in this Code, they shall have such meanings herein ascribed to them, unless the context makes such meaning repugnant thereto:

AGENT: A person acting on behalf of another with authority conferred, either expressly or by implication.

BUSINESS: Includes all activities engaged in within the City carried on for the purpose of gain or economic profit, except that the acts of employees rendering service to employers shall not be included in the term business unless otherwise specifically provided.

CITY: The City of Ephraim, Utah.

CODE: The City Code of the City of Ephraim, Utah.

COUNCIL: Unless otherwise indicated, the City Council of the City of Ephraim, Utah.

COUNTY: Sanpete County, Utah.

EMPLOYEES: Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City employee by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of Ephraim".

FEE: A sum of money charged by the City for the carrying on of a business, profession or occupation.

GENDER: A word importing either the masculine or feminine gender only shall extend and be applied to the other gender and to persons.

HIGHWAY; ROAD: Includes public bridges, and may be equivalent to the words "county way", "county road", "common road", and "State road".

LICENSE: Includes public bridges, and may be equivalent to the words "county way", "county road", "common road", and "State road".

LOCATION: Whenever any act, conduct or offense is prohibited or required and no reference is made to location, unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the act, conduct, or offense prohibited or required shall be within the boundaries of this City.

NUISANCE: Anything offensive to the sensibilities of reasonable persons, or any act or activity creating a hazard which threatens the health and welfare of inhabitants of the City, or any activity which by its perpetuation can reasonably be said to have a detrimental effect on the property of a person or persons within the community.

OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land whether alone or with others.

OFFENSE: Any act forbidden by any provision of this Code or the omission of any act required by the provisions of this Code.

OFFICERS OR OFFICIALS: Any elected or appointed person employed by the City, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise. Whenever reference is made in this Code to a City officer or official by title only, this shall be construed as though followed by the words "of the City of Ephraim".

OPERATOR: The person who is in charge of any operation, business or profession.

OWNER: As applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or of a part of such building or land.

PERSON: Any public or private corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization, government or any other group acting as a unit, as well as a natural person.

PERSONAL PROPERTY: Shall include every description of money, goods, chattels, effects, evidence of rights in action and all written instruments by which any pecuniary obligation, right or title to property is created, acknowledged, transferred, increased, defeated, discharged or diminished and every right or interest therein.

PROPERTY: Includes both real and personal property.

REASONABLE TIME: In all cases where any ordinance requires that an act be done in a reasonable time or that reasonable notice be given, such reasonable time for such notice shall be deemed to mean such time as may be necessary for the expeditious performance of such duty or compliance with such notice.

RECORDER: The individual appointed to act as the Recorder of the City.

RETAILER: Unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things direct to the consumer.

RIGHT OF WAY: The privilege of the immediate use of the roadway or other property.

STATE: The State of Utah.

STREET: Shall include alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places, sidewalks, gutters and culverts, crosswalks and intersections.

TENANT OR OCCUPANT: As applied to a building or land, shall include any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land, whether alone or with others.

TIME COMPUTED: The time within which an act is to be done as provided in any ordinance or in any resolution or order of this City, when expressed in days, shall be determined by excluding the first day and including the last day, except if the last day be a Sunday or a legal holiday, then the last day shall be the day next following such Sunday or legal holiday which is not a Sunday or legal holiday. When time is expressed in hours, Sunday and all legal holidays shall be excluded.

WEEK: Shall be construed to mean any seven (7) day period.

WHOLESALER: The terms "wholesaler" and "wholesale dealer" as used in this Code, unless otherwise specifically defined, shall be understood to relate to the sale of goods, merchandise, articles or things to persons who purchase for the purpose of resale.

WRITTEN, IN WRITING: May include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters, but when the written signature of any person is required by law to any official or public writing or bond, it shall be in the proper handwriting of such person, or in case such person is unable to write, by such person's proper mark. (1983 Code § 1-005; amd. 1998 Code)

1.12.030 Catchlines
The catchlines of the several sections of the City Code are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the content of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor be deemed to govern, limit, modify or in any manner affect the scope, meaning or intent of the provisions of any division or section hereof, nor unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. (1983 Code § 1-006; amd. 1998 Code)

1.16 GENERAL PENALTY
1.16.010 Sentencing
1.16.020 Offenses Designated; Classified

1.16.010 Sentencing
Penalty For Violation Of Ordinance1: Unless otherwise specifically authorized by statute, the City Council may provide a penalty for the violation of any City ordinance by a fine not to exceed the maximum Class B misdemeanor fine under Utah Code § 76-3-301, or by a term of imprisonment up to six (6) months, or by both the fine and term of imprisonment. The City Council may prescribe a minimum penalty for the violation of any City ordinance and may impose a civil penalty for the unauthorized use of City property, including, but not limited to, the use of parks, streets, and other public grounds or equipment. Rules of civil procedure shall be substantially followed. (1983 Code § 3-703; amd. 1998 Code)
Combination Of Sentences Allowed: Within the limits prescribed by this Code, a court may sentence a person adjudged guilty of an offense to any one of the following sentences or a combination of such sentences:
To pay a fine; or
To probation; or
To imprisonment; or (1983 Code § 1-321)
To pay restitution as follows:
Any court of competent jurisdiction enforcing this Code may, in any case where restitution is deemed appropriate, order the defendant or any party to any criminal or civil action to make restitution to any person damaged sufficient fully or as nearly possible to compensate a crime victim or any person whose property, person or services have been taken, damaged, destroyed or injured, or been the subject of any loss consequential to the improper act or criminal or civil conduct.
It shall be discretionary with the judge in any proceeding to impose restitution as a part of the sentence in any case and restitution may be required either in addition to the sentence for penalty of fine or imprisonment. Where ordered, restitution may be made a condition of probation or suspension of all or any part of a penalty imposed by the court. There shall be no limitation on the amount of the court's jurisdiction in ordering restitution, since there is no limitation by statute or case law on restitution to an injured or aggrieved party as a supplement or an augmentation of the penalty imposed by the court. (1998 Code)
Term Of Imprisonment For Misdemeanors2: A person who has been convicted of a misdemeanor may be sentenced to imprisonment as follows:
In the case of a Class B misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding six (6) months;
In the case of a Class C misdemeanor, for a term not exceeding ninety (90) days. (1983 Code § 1-322)
Infractions:
A person convicted of an infraction may not be imprisoned but may be subject to a fine, forfeiture and disqualification, or any combination.
Whenever a person is convicted of an infraction and no punishment is specified, the person may be fined as for a Class C misdemeanor. (1983 Code § 1-323; amd. 1998 Code)
Fines Of Persons3: A person who has been convicted of an offense may, in addition to any term of imprisonment imposed, be sentenced to pay a fine not to exceed:
One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the conviction is of a Class B misdemeanor; and
Seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00) when the conviction is of a Class C misdemeanor or infraction. (1983 Code § 1-331; amd. 1998 Code)
Fines Of Corporations4: The sentence to pay a fine, when imposed upon a corporation, association, partnership or governmental instrumentality for an offense defined in this Code, or the ordinances of the City, or for an offense defined outside of this Code over which this City has jurisdiction, for which no special corporate fine is specified, shall be to pay an amount fixed by the court, not exceeding:
Five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) when the conviction is for a Class B misdemeanor; and
One thousand dollars ($1,000.00) when the conviction is for a Class C misdemeanor or for an infraction. (1983 Code § 3-332; amd. 1998 Code)
1 Utah Code § 10-3-703.
2 Utah Code § 76- 3-204.
3 Utah Code § 76-3-301.
4 Utah Code § 76-3-302.

1.16.020 Offenses Designated; Classified
Sentencing In Accordance With Chapter:
A person adjudged guilty of an offense under this Code or the ordinances of this City shall be sentenced in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.
Ordinances enacted after the effective date of this Code which involve an offense should be classified for sentencing purposes in accordance with this Chapter, unless otherwise expressly provided. (1983 Code § 1-311)
Designation Of Offenses: Offenses are designated as misdemeanors or infractions. (1983 Code § 1-312)
Misdemeanors Classified1:
Misdemeanors are classified into two (2) categories:
Class B misdemeanors;
Class C misdemeanors.
An offense designated as a misdemeanor or any act prohibited or declared to be unlawful in this Code or any ordinance of this City when no other specification as to punishment or category is made, is a Class B misdemeanor. (1983 Code § 1-313)
Infractions:
Infractions are not classified.
Any offense which is made an infraction in this Code or other ordinances of this City, or which is expressly designated an infraction and any offense designated by this Code or other ordinances of this City which is not designated as a misdemeanor and for which no penalty is specified is an infraction. (1983 Code § 1-314)
Continuing Violation: In all instances where the violation of this Code or any ordinance hereinafter enacted is a continuing violation, a separate offense shall be deemed committed on each day during or on which the violation occurs or continues to occur. (1983 Code § 1-315)
1 Utah Code § 76-3-104.

1.20 MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL
1.20.010 City Council
1.20.020 Membership, Vacancies And Power To Vote
1.20.030 Mayor As Member Of City Council
1.20.040 Meetings, Procedure And Conduct; Voting
1.20.050 Ordinances And Resolutions; Procedures
1.20.060 Municipal Administration

1.20.010 City Council
Number Of Members: The City Council shall be a Council of six (6) persons, one of whom shall be the Mayor and the remaining five (5) shall be Councilmembers. (1983 Code § 3-105; amd. 1998 Code)
Election Of Governing Body:
Each elected officer of the City shall hold office for the term for which he is elected and until his successor is chosen and qualified, unless the office becomes vacant under Utah Code § 10-3-301. (1983 Code § 3-202; amd. 1998 Code)
On the Tuesday after the first Monday in November, 1977, and biennially thereafter, an election shall be held to fill all elective offices vacated by twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the first Monday in the January following the election. The officers elected shall continue in the office to which they were elected for four (4) years except in case of death, resignation, removal or disqualification from office.
The officers so elected shall begin their term of office at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the first Monday in January following their election. (1983 Code § 3-201; amd. 1998 Code)
Election Of Officers: The election and terms of office of the officers shall be as follows:
The offices of Mayor and two (2) Councilmembers shall be filled in Municipal elections held in 1977. The terms shall be for four (4) years. These offices shall be filled every four (4) years in Municipal elections.
The offices of the other three (3) Councilmembers shall be filled in a Municipal election held in 1979. The terms shall be for four (4) years. These offices shall be filled every four (4) years in Municipal elections.
The offices shall be filled in at-large elections which shall be held at the time and in the manner provided for electing Municipal officers. (1983 Code § 3-205; amd. 1998 Code)
Determining Two And Four Year Terms: Where both two (2) and four (4) year terms are to be filled by election or appointment, the election ballot or appointment shall clearly state which persons are to be elected or appointed to the shorter term and to the longer term. (1983 Code § 3-207; amd. 1998 Code)
1.20.020 Membership, Vacancies And Power To Vote
Eligibility And Residency Requirements:
A person filing a declaration of candidacy for a City office shall:
Have been a resident of the City for at least one year immediately before the date of the election; and
Meet the other requirements of Utah Code § 20A-9-203.
A person living in an area annexed to the City meets the residency requirement of this paragraph if that person resided within the area annexed to the City for at least one year before the date of the election.
Any person elected to City office shall be a registered voter in the City.
Each elected officer of the City shall maintain residency within the boundaries of the City during his term of office.
If an elected officer of the City establishes his principal place of residence as provided in Utah Code § 20A-2-105 outside of the City during his term of office, the office is automatically vacant.
If an elected City officer is absent from the City any time during his term of office for a continuous period of more than sixty (60) days without the consent of the City Council, the City office is automatically vacant. (1983 Code § 3-301; amd. 1998 Code)
Vacancy In Office Of Mayor Or Councilmember: Vacancies shall be filled as provided in Utah Code § 20A-1-510. (1983 Code § 3-302; amd. 1998 Code)
1.20.030 Mayor As Member Of City Council
Voting Member: The Mayor shall not vote, except in the case of a tie vote of the City Council. (1983 Code § 3-402; amd. 1998 Code)
Mayor As Presiding Officer; Mayor Pro Tempore: The Mayor shall be the chairman and preside at the meetings of the City Council. In the absence of the Mayor or because of his inability or refusal to act, the City Council may elect a member of the City Council to preside over the meeting as Mayor Pro Tempore, who shall have all the powers and duties of the Mayor during his absence or disability. The election of a Mayor Pro Tempore shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting. (1983 Code § 3-403; amd. 1998 Code)
No Veto: The Mayor shall have no power to veto any act of the City Council unless otherwise specifically authorized by statute. (1983 Code § 3-404; amd. 1998 Code)
1.20.040 Meetings, Procedure And Conduct; Voting
Regular Meetings:
The City Council shall hold two (2) regular meetings which shall be held on the first and third Wednesday of each month at Ephraim City Hall.
The meetings held on the dates specified in paragraph A,1 shall begin promptly at seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.; provided, that:
If the meeting date is a legal holiday, then the meeting shall be held at the same time and place above described on the next following day which is not a legal holiday.
The City Council may, by resolution, provide for a different time and place for holding regular meetings of the City Council. (1983 Code § 3-502; amd. 1998 Code)
Special Meetings: If at any time the business of the City requires a special meeting of the City Council, such meeting may be ordered by the Mayor or any two (2) members of the City Council. The order shall be entered in the minutes of the City Council. The order shall provide at least three (3) hours' notice of the special meeting and notice thereof shall be served by the City Recorder on each member who did not sign the order by delivering the notice personally or by leaving it at the member's usual place of abode. The personal appearance by a Councilmember at any specially called meeting constitutes a waiver of the notice required in this paragraph. (1983 Code § 3-503; amd. 1998 Code)
Open Meetings: Every meeting is open to the public unless closed pursuant to Utah Code §§ 52-4-4 and 52-4-5. (1983 Code § 3-601; amd. 1998 Code)
Quorum:
Defined: The number of members of the City Council necessary to constitute a quorum is three (3) or more. (1983 Code § 3-505; amd. 1998 Code)
Necessary: No action of the City Council shall be official or of any effect except when a quorum of the members are present. Fewer than a quorum may adjourn from time to time. (1983 Code § 3-504; amd. 1998 Code)
Voting:
How Vote Is Taken: A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded for all ordinances, resolutions and any other action which would create a liability against the City and in any other case at the request of any member of the City Council by a "yes" or a "no" vote and shall be recorded. Every resolution or ordinance shall be in writing before the vote is taken. (1983 Code § 3-507; amd. 1998 Code)
Minimum Vote Required: The minimum number of votes required to pass any ordinance, resolution or to take any action by the city council, unless otherwise prescribed by law, shall be a majority of the members of the quorum, but shall never be less than three (3).
Any ordinance, resolution or motion of the city council having fewer favorable votes than required herein shall be deemed defeated and invalid, except a meeting may be adjourned to a specific time by a majority vote of the city council even though such majority vote is less than that required herein.
A majority of the members of the city council, regardless of number, may fill any vacancy in the city council. (1983 Code § 3-508; amd. 1998 Code)
Reconsideration: Any action taken by the city council shall not be reconsidered or rescinded at any special meeting unless the number of members of the city council present at the special meeting is equal to or greater than the number of members present at the meeting when the action was approved. (1983 Code § 3-509; amd. 1998 Code)
Electronic Meetings:
Definitions: The following terms are defined as follows for the purpose of this paragraph G:

ANCHOR LOCATION: The council chambers located in the city offices at 5 South Main Street, Ephraim, UT 84627, in Sanpete County, Utah, where interested persons and the public may attend and monitor the open portions of the meeting.

ELECTRONIC ATTENDANCE: Participation in a meeting via telephonic or electronic means, including, but not limited to, telephone, video conference or internet enabled attendance.

MEETING ADMINISTRATOR: The city recorder or another employee of the city specifically assigned and designated to operate the electronic meeting equipment at the anchor location to assure that all members of the city council are continuously able to participate in the electronic meeting and to advise the party conducting the meeting of the initiation, recess, if appropriate, or adjournment of an electronic meeting.
Notice Of Electronic Attendance At Meetings: The city council may convene meetings and enable electronic attendance by those council members unable to attend the meeting in person when necessary pursuant to specific public notice of a meeting. Notice of any city council member requesting to attend a meeting electronically must be made to the meeting administrator at least twenty four (24) hours before the meeting (except in case of emergency), including a description of how the member will be connected to the electronic meeting. Notice back to the council member will include telephone numbers, access codes, internet addresses, etc., in order to connect to the electronic meeting.
Quorum Verification: Before electronic attendance can be permitted, all members of the city council shall be given an opportunity to participate in the meeting and no meeting shall be convened unless a quorum of the city council is able to participate either in person or electronically in the meeting.
Public Attendance: Each meeting shall be convened by the mayor or mayor pro tern by announcing the parties present at the meeting and by making available to members of the public at the anchor location an amplified speaker enabling members of the public to hear the comments of any city council members participating electronically and participate if appropriate.
Conduct Of The Meeting: Upon determining that a sufficient number of the city council is present for the electronic meeting to be convened and members of the public can adequately hear the comments of all members of the city council and participate if appropriate, the mayor or mayor pro tern shall formally convene the meeting and take or cause a roll call of those participating. The mayor or mayor pro tern shall provide opportunity for each matter on the agenda to be presented and discussed, in an order set forth in the agenda, as amended.
Compliance With Law: In all other respects, electronic meetings shall be conducted, recorded, and minutes shall be kept as required by law. (Ord. 10-01, 5-5-2010)
1.20.050 Ordinances And Resolutions; Procedures
Power Exercised By Ordinance: The city council may pass any ordinance to regulate, require, prohibit, govern, control or supervise any activity, business, conduct or condition authorized by statute or any other provision of law. An officer of the city shall not be convicted of a criminal offense where he relied on or enforced an ordinance he reasonably believed to be a valid ordinance. It shall be a defense to any action for punitive damages that the official acted in good faith in enforcing an ordinance or that he enforced an ordinance on advice of legal counsel. (1983 Code § 3-702; amd. 1998 Code)
Form Of Ordinance: Any ordinance passed by the city council shall contain and be in substantially the following order and form:
A number;
A title which indicates the nature of the subject matter of the ordinance;
A preamble which states the need or reason for the ordinance;
An ordaining clause which states "Be it ordained by the City of Ephraim:";
The body or subject of the ordinance;
When applicable, a statement indicating the penalty for violation of the ordinance or a reference that the punishment is covered by an ordinance which prescribes the fines and terms of imprisonment for the violation of the city ordinance; or, the penalty may establish a classification of penalties and refer to such ordinance in which the penalty for such violation is established;
A statement indicating the effective date of the ordinance or the date when the ordinance shall become effective after publication or posting as required by this section;
A line for the signature of the mayor or acting mayor to sign the ordinance;
A place for the city recorder to attest the ordinance and affix the seal of the city; and 10. Where the mayor may disapprove an ordinance passed by the city council, the ordinance must show that it was passed with the mayor's approval or that if the mayor disapproved the ordinance, it was passed over his disapproval. If the mayor neither approves nor disapproves an ordinance, the ordinance should show that it became effective without the approval or disapproval of the mayor. (1983 Code § 3-704; amd. 1998 Code)
Requirements As To Form; Effective Date:
Ordinances passed or enacted by the city council shall be signed by the mayor, or if he is absent, by the mayor pro tempore, or by a quorum of the city council, and shall be recorded before taking effect. No ordinance shall be void or unlawful by reason of its failure to conform to the provisions of Utah Code § 10-3-704(1), (2), (3) or (4). (1983 Code § 3-705; amd. 1998 Code)
Ordinances shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication or posting or thirty (30) days after final passage by the city council, whichever is closer to the date of final passage, but ordinances may become effective at an earlier or later date after publication or posting if so provided in the ordinance. (1983 Code § 3-712; amd. 1998 Code)
Ordinances which do not have an effective date shall become effective twenty (20) days after publication or posting, or thirty (30) days after final passage by the City Council, whichever is sooner. (1983 Code § 3-705, amd. 1998 Code)
Publication And Posting Of Ordinances: All ordinances, except those enacted pursuant to Utah Code §§ 10-3-706 to 10-3-710, before taking effect shall be deposited in the office of the City Recorder and a short summary of the ordinance published at least once in a newspaper published within the City, or if there is no newspaper published therein, then by posting complete copies in three (3) public places within the City. Any ordinance, code or book, other than Utah Code, relating to building or safety standards, City functions, administration, control or regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further publication or posting, if reference is made to the code or book and at least one copy has been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Recorder prior to the adoption of the ordinance by the City Council. Any State law relating to building or safety standards, City functions, administration, control or regulations, may be adopted and shall take effect without further publication or posting if reference is made to Utah Code. The ordinance adopting the code or book shall be published in the manner provided in Utah Code §§ 10-3-709 and 10-3-710. (1983 Code § 3-711; amd. 1998 Code)
Recording, Numbering And Certification Of Passage: The City Recorder shall record, in a book used exclusively for that purpose, all ordinances passed by the City Council. The City Recorder shall give each ordinance a number, if the City Council has not already so done. Immediately following each ordinance, or codification of ordinances, the City Recorder shall make or cause to be made a certificate stating the date of passage and of the date of publication or posting, as required. The record and memorandum, or a certified copy thereof, shall be prima facie evidence of the contents, passage, and publication or posting of the ordinance or codification. (1983 Code § 3-713; amd. 1998 Code)
Resolutions:
Purpose Of Resolutions: Unless otherwise required by law, the City Council may exercise all administrative powers by resolution, including, but not limited to: a) establishing water and sewer rates; b) charges for garbage collection and fees charged for City services; c) establishing personnel policies and guidelines; and d) regulating the use and operation of the City property. Punishment, fines or forfeitures may not be imposed by resolution. (1983 Code § 3-717; amd. 1998 Code)
Form Of Resolution: Any resolution passed by the City Council shall be in a form and contain sections substantially similar to that prescribed for ordinances. (1983 Code § 3-718; amd. 1998 Code)
No Publication Of Resolutions; Effective Date: Resolutions may become effective without publication or posting and may take effect upon passage or at a later date as the City Council may determine but resolutions may not become effective more than three (3) months from the date of passage. (1983 Code § 3-719; amd. 1998 Code)
1.20.060 Municipal Administration
Administration Vested In Mayor: The administrative powers, authority and duties are vested in the Mayor. (1983 Code § 3-808; amd. 1998 Code)
Powers Of Mayor: The Mayor shall:
Be the chief executive officer to whom all employees of the City shall report;
Keep the peace and enforce the laws of the City;
Remit fines and forfeitures and may release any person imprisoned for violation of any City ordinance;
Report such remittance or release to the City Council at its next regular session;
Perform all duties prescribed by law, resolution or ordinance;
Ensure that all the laws and ordinances and resolutions are faithfully executed and observed;
May at any reasonable time examine and inspect the books, papers, records or documents of the City or of any officer, employee or agent of the City;
Report to the City Council the condition of the City and recommend for Council consideration any measures as deemed to be in the best interests of the City;
When necessary, call on the residents of the City over the age of twenty one (21) years to assist in enforcing the laws of the State and ordinances of the City; and
Appoint, with the advice and consent of the City Council, persons to fill City offices or vacancies on commissions or committees of the City. (1983 Code § 3-809; amd. 1998 Code)
Additional Powers And Duties Of Elected Officials: The City Council may, by resolution, prescribe additional duties, powers and responsibilities for any elected or appointed official which are not prohibited by any specific statute, except that the Mayor may not serve as Recorder and neither the Mayor nor the Recorder may serve as Treasurer. A Justice Court Judge may not hold any other City office or position of employment with the City. (1983 Code § 3-810; amd. 1998 Code)
Members Of Council May Be Appointed To Administration: The Mayor may, with the advice and consent of the majority of the City Council, assign or appoint any member of the City Council to administer one or more departments of the City and shall by ordinance provide the salary for the administrator. (1983 Code § 3-811; amd. 1998 Code)
Change Of Duties: The Mayor may, with the concurrence of a majority of the City Council, change the administrative assignment of any member of the City Council who is serving in any administrative position in the City government. (1983 Code § 3-812; amd. 1998 Code)
General Administrative Powers: The City Council shall, from time to time, prescribe the powers and duties to be performed by the superintendents, supervisors, department directors and all of its officers and employees. (1983 Code § 3-813; amd. 1998 Code)
Personnel Assigned To One Or More Departments: The City Council may assign any individual to one or more positions in one or more departments. (1983 Code § 3-814; amd. 1998 Code)
Rules And Regulations For Administration: The City Council shall prescribe rules and regulations which are not inconsistent with the laws of this State, as it deems best for the efficient administration, organization, conduct and business of the City. (1983 Code § 3-815; amd. 1998 Code)
Appointed Officers; Residency Requirements: The City Council may require by ordinance that any or all appointed officers reside in the City. (1983 Code § 3-816; amd. 1998 Code)
1.24 OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES
1.24.010 Creating Offices; Filling Vacancies
1.24.020 Compensation
1.24.030 Bond Requirements
1.24.040 Oaths
1.24.050 Official Neglect And Misconduct
1.24.060 City Recorder And City Treasurer
1.24.070 Chief Of Police
1.24.080 City Attorney
1.24.090 Declaration Of Candidacy For Elective Office

1.24.010 Creating Offices; Filling Vacancies
Offices Created By Council: The city council may create any office deemed necessary for the government of the city and provide for filling vacancies in elective and appointive offices. (1983 Code § 3-901; amd. 1998 Code)
Mayor To Appoint And Fill Vacancies: The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, may appoint and fill vacancies in all offices provided for by law or ordinance.
Continuation In Office: All appointed officers shall continue in office until their successors are appointed and qualified. (1983 Code § 3-916; amd. 1998 Code)
1.24.020 Compensation
The salary of the officers and employees of this city shall be paid in the amount and at such times as is established by ordinance of the city council. (1983 Code § 3-818; amd. 1998 Code)

1.24.030 Bond Requirements
Approval Of Bonds: The bonds of the council members shall be approved by the mayor and the bond of the mayor shall be approved by the city council at the first meeting of the city council in January following a city election. (1983 Code § 3-822; amd. 1998 Code)
Premium Paid By City: The premium charged by a corporate surety for any bond required by the city shall be paid by the city. (1983 Code § 3-823; amd. 1998 Code)
Additional Bonds: The city council may at any time require further and additional bonds of any or all officers elected or appointed. All bonds given by the officers, except as otherwise provided by law, shall be filed with the city recorder, except that the bond of the recorder shall be filed with the treasurer. (1983 Code § 3-825; amd. 1998 Code)
Bond Amounts: Before taking the oath of office and entering on the duties of their respective office, the following named city officials shall each give a bond with good and sufficient securities, payable to the city, conditioned for the faithful performance of the duties of their office and the payment of all monies received by such officers according to law and any ordinance of the city, in the following amounts:

Mayor	$1,000.00
Council member	1,000.00
Treasurer	750,000.00
Recorder	750,000.00
Treasurer's Bond:
The city treasurer's bond, or the bond of any person who acts as city treasurer, may be set by resolution or ordinance in any amount, not less than that established by the state money management council. (1983 Code § 3-821; amd. 1998 Code)
The treasurer's bond shall be superseded by any rules, regulation or directive of the state money management council when such rule, regulation or directive is binding on the city. (1983 Code § 3-819B)
Blanket Bond: The bonds required in this section may be a blanket bond. (1983 Code § 3-8190)
(1983 Code § 3-819A; amd. 1998 Code)

1.24.040 Oaths
Constitutional Oath Of Office: All officers, whether elected or appointed, before entering on the duties of their respective offices shall take, subscribe and file the constitutional oath of office. (1983 Code § 3-827; amd. 1998 Code)
Oath; Filing: The oath of office required under this section shall be administered by any judge, notary public, or by the city recorder. Elected officials shall take their oath of office at twelve o'clock (12:00) noon on the first Monday in January following their election or as soon thereafter as is practical. Appointed officers shall take their oath at any time before entering on their duties. All oaths of office shall be filed with the city recorder. (1983 Code § 3-828; amd. 1998 Code)
Acts Of Officials Not Voided: No official act of any city officer shall be invalid for the reason that he failed to take the oath of office. (1983 Code § 3-829; amd. 1998 Code)
1.24.050 Official Neglect And Misconduct
In case any city officer shall at any time wilfully omit to perform any duty, or wilfully and corruptly be guilty of oppression, malconduct, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office, the person is guilty of a class A misdemeanor1, shall be removed from office, and is not eligible for any city office thereafter. (1983 Code § 3-826; amd. 1998 Code)

1 Utah Code § 76-3-204.

1.24.060 City Recorder And City Treasurer
Appointment: On or before the first Monday in February following a city election, the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council, shall appoint a qualified person to each of the offices of recorder and treasurer.
Ex Officio Auditor: The city recorder is ex officio city auditor and shall perform the duties of that office. (1983 Code § 3-916; amd. 1998 Code)
1.24.070 Chief Of Police
Authority: The chief of police has the same authority as the sheriff within the boundaries of the city of appointment. The chief has authority to:
Suppress riots, disturbances and breaches of the peace;
Apprehend all persons violating state laws or city ordinances;
Diligently discharge his duties and enforce all ordinances of the city to preserve the peace, good order and protection of the rights and property of all persons; and
Attend the municipal justice court located within the city when required, provide security for the court and obey its orders and directions.
Statewide Authority: This section is not a limitation of a police chief's statewide authority as otherwise provided by law. (1983 Code § 3-913; amd. 1998 Code)
Duties: The chief of police shall exercise and perform such duties as may be prescribed by the city council. The chief of police shall be under the direction, control and supervision of the mayor. The chief of police may, with the consent of the mayor, appoint assistants. (1983 Code § 3-918; amd. 1998 Code)
1.24.080 City Attorney
The city attorney may prosecute violations of city ordinances, and under state law, infractions and misdemeanors occurring within the boundaries of the city and has the same powers in respect to the violations as are exercised by a county attorney, including, but not limited to, granting immunity to witnesses. The city attorney shall represent the interests of the state or the city in the appeal of any matter prosecuted in any trial court by the city attorney. (1983 Code § 3-928; amd. 1998 Code)

1.24.090 Declaration Of Candidacy For Elective Office
Every person filing a declaration of candidacy for elective office in Ephraim City shall pay a filing fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00). (Ord. 11-02, 5-18-2011)

1.28 CITY MANAGER
1.28.010 Established
1.28.020 Powers And Duties
1.28.030 Term Of Office
1.28.040 Powers Of Mayor Not Delegated To Manager

1.28.010 Established
In accordance with Utah Code § 10-3-924, a manager form of government is officially established for the City.

(1983 Code § 3-924; amd. 1998 Code)

1.28.020 Powers And Duties
The powers and duties of the City Manager shall be set by resolution of the City Council and kept on file in the office of the City Recorder1. (1983 Code § 3-926; amd. 1998 Code)

1 Utah Code § 10-3-926.

1.28.030 Term Of Office
The City Manager shall serve at the pleasure of the City Council, except that the City Council may employ the Manager for a term not to exceed three (3) years. The term of employment may be renewed at any time. Any person serving as Manager under this Article may be removed with or without cause by a majority vote of the City Council. (1978 Code § 3-925; amd. 1998 Code)

1.28.040 Powers Of Mayor Not Delegated To Manager
The legislative and judicial powers of the Mayor, his position as chairman of the City Council and any ex officio position the Mayor shall hold shall not be delegated to the City Manager. (1978 Code § 3-927; amd. 1998 Code)

1.32 ADMINISTRATIVE HEARINGS
1.32.010 Request
1.32.020 Form Of Request
1.32.030 Procedure
1.32.040 Not Additional Remedy

1.32.010 Request
Unless otherwise specifically provided in any ordinance of the City or any code adopted by reference, a hearing before the City Council may be requested by any person:

Who is denied or refused a permit or license by any officer, agent or employee of this City.
Whose permit or license is revoked, restricted, qualified or limited from that for which it was first issued. (1983 Code § 1-411)
1.32.020 Form Of Request
The request for hearing must be made in writing to the Mayor or City Recorder and made within thirty (30) days following the date notice denying, refusing, revoking, qualifying or restricting the license or permit is mailed by the City to the applicant or license holder at his address as it appears on the application or license. (1983 Code § 4-412)

1.32.030 Procedure
Time And Place: Following receipt of a request for hearing, the City Council shall inform the person requesting a hearing of the time and place the hearing is to be held.
Witnesses; Evidence: At the hearing, the aggrieved party shall have the right to hear and examine any witnesses the City may produce to support its decision and to present his own evidence in support of his contention.
Decision Of City Council: The City Council shall, within ten (10) days following the conclusion of the hearing, in writing, inform the person who requested the hearing of the decision of the City Council. (1983 Code § 1-413)
1.32.040 Not Additional Remedy
This Chapter shall not be construed so as to afford any aggrieved party more than one hearing before the City Council nor shall the hearing provided in this Chapter apply to any criminal complaint or proceeding. (1983 Code § 1-414)

1.36 HOUSING AUTHORITY
1.36.010 Authority Established
1.36.020 Commissioners
1.36.030 Officers And Additional Personnel
1.36.040 Meetings
1.36.050 Amendments To Bylaws
1.36.060 Banking And Transactions
1.36.070 Indemnification

1.36.010 Authority Established
Name: The name of the Authority shall be the Ephraim City Housing Authority (hereinafter the "Authority").
Seal: The seal of the Authority shall be in the form of a circle and shall bear the name of the Authority.
Office: The principal office of the Authority shall be at such place in the City, as the Commissioners (as defined in ECC 1.36.020) may from time to time designate by resolution.
Controlling Law: The Authority shall be governed by and shall have all of the powers, duties and responsibilities as set forth in Utah Code 9-4 Part 6, as amended (hereinafter, the "Housing Authorities Act"). These bylaws are subject to the Housing Authorities Act and in the event of any conflict between the Housing Authorities Act and these bylaws or any resolution of the Authority, the Housing Authorities Act shall prevail. (Ord. 6-17-97, 6-17-1997)
1.36.020 Commissioners
General Powers: The powers of the Authority shall be vested in its Commissioners in office from time to time (herein the "Commissioners"). The property, affairs and business of the Authority shall be managed by the Commissioners. The Commissioners may exercise all of the powers of the Authority, whether derived from the Housing Authorities Act or from other law.
Number, Tenure And Qualifications: The number of Commissioners shall be six (6), all of whom shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. Commissioners shall be appointed for a term of five (5) years, with each Commissioner's term expiring in a different year. Any vacancy which arises shall be filled for the vacating Commissioner's unexpired term. Each Commissioner shall take the official oath of office prescribed by general statute. Each Commissioner shall hold office until his successor has been appointed and taken the oath of office. A certificate of appointment or reappointment of each Commissioner shall be filed with the Authority by the Mayor or City Recorder. This certificate shall be conclusive evidence of the due and proper appointment of the Commissioner.
Compensation: A Commissioner shall receive no compensation for his services but is entitled to the necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in the discharge of his duties.
No Preferential Treatment: No Commissioners shall be given preferential treatment with respect to any housing project, or in any contract or proposed contract with the Authority. (Ord. 6-17-97, 6-17-1997)
1.36.030 Officers And Additional Personnel
Officers: The officers of the Authority shall be a chairman and a vice chairman, elected by the Commissioners from among their number as provided in paragraph H and an executive director selected by the Commissioners under paragraph F and employed as such by the Authority. The Commissioners may also appoint other officers, as allowed under paragraph L.
Chairman: The chairman presides at all meetings of the Commissioners. At each meeting, the chairman shall submit recommendations and information as he considers proper concerning the business, affairs and policies of the Authority. The chairman shall sign all deeds, mortgages, deeds of trust, notes, bonds, contracts or other instruments authorized by the Commissioners to be executed, except in cases in which the execution thereof shall be expressly delegated by the Commissioners by these bylaws to some other officer or agent of the Authority, or shall be required by law to be otherwise signed or executed. The chairman shall perform all duties incident to the office of chairman and such other duties as may be prescribed by the Commissioners from time to time.
Vice Chairman: The vice chairman has all powers and duties of the chairman in the absence of the chairman or the inability or refusal of the chairman to pe_rform his duties. Upon the resignation, death or removal of the chairman, the vice chairman has the powers and shall perform the duties of the chairman until the Commissioners elect a new chairman.
Temporary Chairman: If a quorum is present at any meeting, but both the chairman and the vice chairman are absent, the Commissioners present shall select one of the present Commissioners as temporary chairman for the meeting. The temporary chairman shall have all powers and duties of the chairman with respect to the meeting.
Compensation Of Chairman And Vice Chairman: Neither the chairman nor the vice chairman may receive any compensation for their services, but are entitled to reimbursement of necessary expenses, including travel expenses, incurred in the discharge of their duties.
Executive Director:
The executive director shall be selected by the Commissioners and serve at the Commissioners' pleasure. No Commissioner shall be eligible to serve as executive director except as a temporary uncompensated appointee.
The executive director shall have general supervision over the administration of the Authority's business and affairs, but at all times subject to the direction of the Commissioners.
The compensation of the executive director shall be determined by the Commissioners; provided, that a temporary appointee selected from among the Commissioners shall serve without compensation (other than the payment of necessary expenses).
The executive director shall keep the records of the Authority and act as secretary of the meetings of the Commissioners for the purpose of taking written minutes and recording all votes. In meetings where the executive director is absent or excused, the chairman shall appoint a temporary taker of minutes. The executive director shall keep a record of the proceedings of the meetings of the Commissioners in a journal of proceedings to be kept for such purpose. The executive director shall keep in safe custody the seal of the Authority and may affix the seal to all contracts and instruments authorized to be executed by the Commissioners.
The executive director shall properly care and account for funds of the Authority and shall deposit the same in the name of the Authority in such bank or banks as the Commissioners may designate pursuant to ECC 1.36.060. The executive director may not sign bonds, notes or other evidences of indebtedness issued by the Authority to finance projects. The executive director shall keep regular books of accounts showing receipts and expenditures and shall render to the Commissioners, at each regular meeting and at all other times, when requested, an account of his transactions and also of the financial condition of the Authority.
Additional Duties: The executive director of the Authority shall perform such other duties and functions as may from time to time be required by the Commissioners or by the Authority's bylaws.
Election Of Chairman And Vice Chairman: The chairman and vice chairman shall be elected at the annual meeting of the Commissioners from among the Commissioners, and shall hold office for one year or until their successors are elected and take the oath of office.
Vacancies: Should the offices of the chairman or vice chairman become vacant, the Commissioners shall elect a successor from its membership at a subsequent regular or special meeting, and such election shall be for the unexpired term of said office. When the office of the executive director becomes vacant, the Commissioners shall appoint a successor as provided in paragraph F.
Resignations: The executive director may resign at any time by delivering a written resignation to the Commissioners, the chairman or the vice chairman. Unless otherwise specified therein, such resignation shall take effect upon delivery. These bylaws do not address the matter of resignation of a Commissioner from his position as Commissioner. Commissioners remain in office until successors are appointed and take the oath of office (see Utah Code § 55-18-6). Requests by a Commissioner to resign from office and to appoint a replacement shall be directed to the Mayor, with a copy to be sent to the chairman or in the case of the chairman, to the vice chairman. Should either the chairman or vice chairman resign from those positions (but not necessarily as Commissioners), replacements shall be selected for the unexpired one year term as provided under paragraph I.
Removal: A Commissioner may be removed from the office of chairman or vice chairman (but not as Commissioner) and the executive director may be removed from office, either for or without cause, at any annual or regular meeting of the Commissioners or at any special meeting of the Commissioners, by the affirmative vote of at least four (4) Commissioners, whenever in the judgment of the Commissioners the best interests of the Authority will be served thereby. Any officer, agent or employee hired or retained under paragraph L may also be removed, either for or without cause, by the Commissioners or by the executive director. Commissioners may be removed from office pursuant to Utah Code § 55-18-8.
Additional Personnel: The Authority may, upon approval of the Commissioners, from time to time employ such legal and technical experts and such other officers, agents and employees, permanent and temporary, as it may require and shall determine their qualifications, duties and compensation.
Delegation: The Authority, by resolution of the Commissioners, may delegate to one or more of its agents or employees, including the executive director, any powers or duties it deems proper, and which it may lawfully delegate. In particular, without limiting the foregoing, the Commissioners from time to time by resolution may delegate to any such person the power to hire (and discharge) experts, officers, agents or employees necessary or desirable in the furtherance of the executive director's duties, but all such employment decisions must be approved by the Commissioners unless otherwise provided by resolution.
No Preferential Treatment: No officer or employee of the Authority may be given preferential treatment in respect of any housing project, or in any contract or proposed contract with the Authority.
Gender: As used herein, all words of a masculine gender shall be deemed to include the masculine or feminine gender. The terms "chairman" and "vice chairman" are terms of title only and may apply either to the masculine or feminine gender. (Ord. 6-17-97, 6-17-1997)
1.36.040 Meetings
Annual Meeting: The annual meeting of the Commissioners shall be held on the fourth Monday of February at four o'clock (4:00) P.M. at the regular meeting place of the Commissioners. However, the Commissioners by resolution may change the date, time and/or place of a forthcoming annual meeting, in which event the Authority shall provide written notice of the change in date, time and/or place of such annual meeting by mailing such notice to each Commissioner and the executive director at his business or home address at least thirty (30) days prior to the date specified in this Section for the annual meeting. In the event the annual meeting date falls on a legal holiday, the annual meeting shall be held on the next succeeding weekday (Monday through Friday) which is not a legal holiday. Failure to hold the annual meeting has no legal consequence.
Regular Meetings: Regular meetings may be held at such time and place as may from time to time be determined by resolution of the Commissioners. In the event the day of regular meeting shall be a legal holiday, said meeting shall be held on the next succeeding weekday (Monday through Friday) which is not a legal holiday.
Special Meetings: The chairman or the executive director may, when he deems it expedient, and shall, upon the written request of two (2) or more Commissioners, call a special meeting of the Commissioners for the purpose of transacting any business designated in the call. The call of a special meeting shall be mailed to each Commissioner and the executive director at his business or home address at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the date of such special meeting, or shall be personally delivered or personally telephoned to such person at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the date of such special meeting. If unforeseen matters of an emergency or urgent nature arise, the chairman or executive director may call an emergency special meeting of the Commissioners to consider such matters; provided, that an attempt has been made to notify all of the Commissioners and the executive director, and at least four (4) of the Commissioners vote to hold the meeting. Whenever a Commissioner waives or is deemed to waive notice as provided in paragraph D, he shall be deemed to have received notice in a timely manner pursuant to this Section.
Waiver Of Notice: Any Commissioner may waive in writing any notice of a meeting of the Commissioners required to be given by these bylaws, or any defect of such notice, if any. The attendance of a Commissioner at any meeting shall constitute a waiver of notice of the meeting by the Commissioner, except in case a Commissioner shall attend a meeting for the express purpose of objecting to the transaction of any business on the grounds that the meeting has not been lawfully called or convened. The failure to give any notice of a meeting of the Commissioners to the executive director required to be given by these bylaws or any defect of such notice, if any, shall not invalidate any action taken by the Commissioners at the meeting.
Place Of Meetings: All meetings of the Commissioners shall be held in the City as required under Utah Code § 55-18-6.
Open Meetings: The annual meeting and all regular and special meetings of the Commissioners shall be open to the public, except for meetings closed pursuant to paragraph G. The Authority shall give "public notice" of the date, time and place of the annual meetings of the Commissioners at least once each year; provided, that failure to have given such notice shall not invalidate or otherwise adversely affect any proceedings or actions of the Authority at any meeting. In addition to this yearly notice requirement, for each meeting of the Commissioners, including the annual meeting, the Commissioners shall give "public notice" of the agenda, date, time and place of such meeting, not less than twenty four (24) hours prior to such meeting. When because of unforeseen circumstances it is necessary for the Commissioners to hold a special meeting to consider matters of an emergency or urgent nature, the foregoing "public notice" requirements may be disregarded and the best notice practicable given. For purposes of this Section, "public notice" shall mean: 1) posting written notice at the principal office of the Authority or, if no such office exists, at the building where any of the meetings are to be held; and 2) providing notice to at least one newspaper of general circulation within the City or to a local media correspondent. The executive director is responsible to give the required notice.
Closed Meetings:
A closed meeting of the Commissioners may be held upon the affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Commissioners present at an open meeting for which notice has been given pursuant to paragraph F; provided, that a quorum of the Commissioners is present. No closed meeting shall be allowed except as to matters enumerated below in this Section; provided, that no resolution, contract, appointment, ordinance, rule or regulation shall be approved by the Commissioners at a closed meeting. The reason or reasons for holding a closed meeting and the vote, either for or against the proposition to hold such a meeting, cast by each Commissioner by name, shall be entered on the minutes of the meeting. Nothing in this Section shall be construed to require any meeting to be closed to the public.
A closed meeting may be held as provided above for any of the following purposes:
Discussion of the character, professional competence or physical or mental health of an individual;
Strategy and decision making sessions with respect to collective bargaining, litigation, purchase or other acquisition of real property or interests in real property, or disposition of real property or interests in real property;
Discussion regarding the employment of security personnel or devices;
Investigative proceedings regarding allegations of criminal misconduct; and
Other purposes, to the extent authorized or permitted by law.
Nothing in this Section shall apply to any chance meeting or social meeting of the Commissioners, but no chance meeting or social meeting shall be used to circumvent the limitations herein concerning the holding of closed meetings. Nothing in this Section shall prohibit the removal of any person who wilfully disrupts a meeting to the extent that orderly conduct is seriously compromised. To the extent State law applicable to the Authority governing the conduct of open and closed meetings shall be or become inconsistent with the provisions of these bylaws, then these bylaws shall automatically change to the extent necessary to eliminate such inconsistency.
Quorum: Four (4) Commissioners shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of conducting the business of the Authority and exercising its powers and for all other purposes. When a quorum is in attendance, action may be taken by the Commissioners upon a vote of the majority of the Commissioners present. If less than four (4) Commissioners are present at a meeting, the Commissioners present by at least fifty percent (50%) affirmative vote may adjourn the meeting.
Order Of Business: At the regular meetings of the Commissioners, the following shall be the order of business unless a majority of the Commissioners present shall determine otherwise:
Opening prayer and roll call.
Reading and approval of the minutes of previous regular and special meetings.
Other matters.
Adjournment.
Resolutions: Resolutions adopted by the Commissioners shall be signed by the chairman and attested by the executive director or the vice chairman. Each resolution shall become effective immediately upon such execution and attestation, unless it shall expressly provide otherwise. All resolutions shall be in writing and shall be designated by number reference which shall be inscribed in the minutes. An executed and attested original of the written resolution or a duplicate copy thereof certified as a true and complete copy of the original by the executive director, shall be filed in the official records of the Authority.
Manner Of Voting: The voting on all questions coming before the Commissioners shall be by roll call, and the yeas and nays shall be entered upon the minutes of such meeting, except on the election of officers which may be by ballot.
Minutes:
Open Meetings: Written minutes shall be kept of each open meeting. Such minutes shall include:
The date, time and place of the meeting;
The names of the Commissioners and executive director present and absent;
The substance of all matters proposed, discussed or decided, and a record, by individual Commissioner, of votes taken;
The names of all persons who appeared and the substance in brief of their testimony or comments; and
Any other information that any Commissioner requests be entered in the minutes.
Closed Meetings: Written minutes shall be kept of each closed meeting. Such minutes shall include:
The date, time and place of the meeting;
The names of the Commissioner and executive director present and/or absent; and
The names of all others present, except where such disclosure would infringe on the confidence necessary to fulfill the original purpose of closing the meeting.
Availability To Public: The minutes of any meeting shall be available for examination by the public within a reasonable time after the subsequent meeting wherein the minutes were approved. The minutes are not an official record of the affairs of the Authority until approved by the Commissioners.
Recording Meetings: All or any part of an open meeting may be recorded by any person in attendance; provided, that such recording does not interfere with the conduct of the meeting. (Ord. 6-17-97, 6-17-1997)
1.36.050 Amendments To Bylaws
The bylaws of the Authority may be amended at any annual meeting, regular meeting or special meeting of the Commissioners; provided, that written notice of the proposed amendment or amendments to the bylaws and the proposal to consider such amendment or amendments is mailed to each Commissioner and the executive director at his business or home address at least forty eight (48) hours prior to the date of such meeting, or is personally delivered or personally telephoned to such person at least twenty four (24) hours prior to the date of such meeting. (Ord. 6-17-97, 6-17-1997)

1.36.060 Banking And Transactions
Bank Accounts: The bank accounts of the Authority shall be maintained at such banks as the Commissioners may from time to time designate by resolution.
Payment And Deposit Procedures: All notes, drafts, acceptances, checks, endorsements and evidence of indebtedness of the Authority shall be signed by such officer or officers or such agent or agents of the Authority and in such manner as the Commissioners by resolution from time to time may determine. Endorsements for deposit to the credit of the Authority in any of its duly authorized depositories shall be in such manner as the Commissioners by resolution from time to time may determine.
Sale, Transfer, Etc., Of Securities: Sales, transfers, endorsements and assignments of shares of stock, bonds and other securities owned by or standing in the name of the Authority and the execution and delivery on behalf of the Authority of any and all instruments in writing incident to such sale, transfer, endorsement or assignment, shall be effected by the chairman, except as may be otherwise provided by resolution of the Commissioners. (Ord. 6-17-97, 6-17-1997)
1.36.070 Indemnification
The Authority shall indemnify its Commissioners, officers, agents and employees with respect to personal liability arising from acts or omissions of such individuals committed during the performance of their duties, within the scope of their employment or under color of authority, in accordance with and to the full extent permitted under Utah Code 63-30 and 63-30a, as amended, and all other laws of the State, as such may be amended or supplemented, hereinafter collectively referred to as "Utah law". The Authority shall be empowered to take all action and pay all expenses, including, but not limited to, providing legal defense for Commissioners, officers, agents or employees. Furthermore, the Authority shall pay all judgments, compromises or settlements of any claim against any Commissioner, officer, agent, or employee with respect to liability arising out of or connected with the performance of said individual's duties, within the scope of his employment or under color of authority. The extent of the Authority's indemnification of its Commissioners, officers, agents and employees shall be to the full extent authorized by Utah law, but shall not exceed the authority to indemnify granted by Utah law. (Ord. 6-17-97, 6-17-1997)

1.40 RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
1.40.010 Short Title
1.40.020 Purpose And Intent
1.40.030 Definitions - Records Access And Management Program
1.40.040 Right Of Public Access
1.40.050 Access To Nonpublic Records
1.40.060 Fees
1.40.070 Procedures For Access
1.40.080 Denials; Notice
1.40.090 Records That Must Be Disclosed
1.40.100 Private Records
1.40.110 Controlled Records
1.40.120 Protected Records
1.40.130 Records Classification And Designation
1.40.140 Records Retention
1.40.150 Segregation Of Records
1.40.160 Appeals
1.40.170 Judicial Review
1.40.180 Confidential Treatment Of Records For Which No Exemption Applies
1.40.190 Request To Amend A Record
1.40.200 Rights Of Individuals On Whom Data Is Maintained
1.40.210 Criminal Penalties

1.40.010 Short Title
This chapter is known as the EPHRAIM GOVERNMENT RECORDS ACCESS AND MANAGEMENT ACT. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)

1.40.020 Purpose And Intent
In enacting this act, the city recognizes two (2) fundamental constitutional rights: 
The right of privacy in relation to personal data gathered by the city; and
The public's right of access to information concerning the conduct of the public's business.
It is the intent of the city to:
Establish fair information practices to prevent abuse of personal information by the city while protecting the public's right of easy and reasonable access to unrestricted public records; and
Provide guidelines of openness to government information and privacy of personal information consistent with nationwide standards.
Establish and maintain an active, continuing program for the economical and efficient management of the city's records as provided in this chapter. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.030 Definitions - Records Access And Management Program
As used in this chapter:

AUDIT:

A systematic examination of financial, management, program, and related records for the purpose of determining the fair presentation of financial statements, adequacy of internal controls, or compliance with laws and regulations; or
A systematic examination, of program procedures and operations for the purpose of determining their effectiveness, economy, efficiency, and compliance with statutes and regulations.
CHRONOLOGICAL LOGS: The regular and customary summary records of law enforcement agencies and other public safety agencies that show the time and general nature of police, fire, and paramedic calls made to the agency and any arrests or jail bookings made by the agency.

CLASSIFICATION, CLASSIFY (And Their Derivative Forms): Determining whether a record series, record, or information within a record is public, private, controlled, or protected, or exempt from disclosure under Utah Code § 63-2-201 (3)(b).

COMPUTER PROGRAM: A series of instructions or statements that permit the functioning of a computer system in a manner designed to provide storage, retrieval, and manipulation of data from the computer system, and any associated documentation and source material that explain how to operate the computer program.

"Computer program" does not mean:

The original data, including numbers, text, voice, graphics, and images;
Analysis, compilation, and other manipulated forms of the original data produced by use of the program; or
The mathematical or statistical formulas (excluding the underlying mathematical algorithms contained in the program) that could be used if the manipulated forms of the original data were to be produced manually.
CONTRACTOR:

Any person who contracts with the city to provide goods or services directly to the city; or
Any private, nonprofit organization that receives funds from the city.
"Contractor" does not mean a private provider.

CONTROLLED RECORD: A record containing data on individuals that is controlled as provided by ECC 1.40.110.

DESIGNATION, DESIGNATE (And Their Derivative Forms): Indicating, based on the city's familiarity with a record series or based on the city's review of a reasonable sample of a record series, the primary classification that a majority of records in a record series would be given if classified and the classification that other records typically present in the record series would be given if classified.

GROSS COMPENSATION: Every form of remuneration payable for a given period to an individual for services provided including salaries, commissions, vacation pay, severance pay, bonuses, and any board, rent, housing, lodging, payments in kind, and any similar benefit received from the individual's employer.

INDIVIDUAL: A human being.

INITIAL CONTACT REPORT: An initial written or recorded report, however titled, prepared by peace officers engaged in public patrol or response duties describing official actions initially taken in response to either a public complaint about or the discovery of an apparent violation of law, which report may describe: 

The date, time, location, and nature of the complaint, the incident, or offense;
Names of victims;
The nature or general scope of the agency's initial actions taken in response to the incident;
The general nature of any injuries or estimate of damages sustained in the incident;
The name, address, and other identifying information about any person arrested or charged in connection with the incident;
The identity of the public safety personnel (except undercover personnel) or prosecuting attorney involved in responding to the initial incident.
Initial contact reports do not include follow-up or investigative reports prepared after the initial contact report. However, if the information specified in this definition appears in follow-up or investigative reports, it may only be treated confidentially if it is private, controlled, protected, or exempt from disclosure under Utah Code § 63-2-201 (3)(b).

PERSON: Any individual, nonprofit or profit corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other type of business organization.

PRIVATE PROVIDER: Any person who contracts with the city to provide services directly to the public.

PRIVATE RECORD: A record containing data on individuals that is classified private as provided by ECC 1.40.100.

PROTECTED RECORD: A record that is classified protected as provided by ECC 1.40.120.

PUBLIC RECORD: A record that has not been appropriately classified private, controlled, or protected as provided in ECC 1.40.100 through ECC 1.40.120.

RECORD: All books, letters, documents, papers, maps, plans, photographs, films, cards, tapes, recording, or other documentary materials, and electronic data regardless of physical form or characteristics, prepared, owned, used, received, or retained by the city.

"Record" does not mean:

Temporary drafts or similar materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the originator for the personal use of an individual for whom he is working;
Materials that are legally owned by an individual in his private capacity;
Materials to which access is limited by the laws of copyright or patent unless the copyright or patent is owned by the city;
Proprietary software;
Junk mail or commercial publications received by the city or an official or employee of the city;
Books and other materials that are cataloged, indexed, or inventoried and contained in the collections of libraries open to the public, regardless of physical form or characteristics of the material;
Daily calendars and other personal notes prepared by the originator for the originator's personal use or for the personal use of an individual for whom he is working;
Computer programs as defined that are developed or purchased by or for the city for its own use; or
Notes or internal memoranda prepared as part of the deliberative process by a member of the judiciary, an administrative law judge, a member of the board of pardons, or a member of any other body charged by law with performing a quasi-judicial function.
RECORD SERIES: A group of records that may be treated as a unit for purposes of designation, description, management, or disposition.

RECORDS OFFICER: The city recorder and other individuals as appointed by the mayor to work in the care, maintenance, scheduling, designation, classification, disposal, and preservation of records.

SUMMARY DATA: Statistical records and compilations that contain data derived from private, controlled, or protected information but that do not disclose private, controlled, or protected information. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)

1.40.040 Right Of Public Access
Every person has the right to inspect a public record free of charge and the right to take a copy of a public record during normal working hours, subject to the payment of costs and fees pursuant to ECC 1.40.060.
All records are public unless otherwise expressly provided by this chapter or state or federal law or regulation.
The following records are not public:
Records that are appropriately classified private, controlled, or protected as allowed by ECC 1.40.100 through ECC 1.40.120; and
Records to which access is restricted pursuant to court rule, another state statute, federal statute, or federal regulation, including records for which access is governed or restricted as a condition of participation in a state or federal program or for receiving state or federal funds.
Only those records specified in ECC 1.40.100, ECC 1.40.110 or ECC 1.40.120 may be classified private, controlled, or protected.
The city may not disclose a record that is private, controlled, or protected to any person except as provided in paragraph E,2 or ECC 1.40.050.
The city may, at its discretion, disclose records that are private under ECC 1.40.100 Paragraph B, or protected under ECC 1.40.120 to persons other than those specified in ECC 1.40.050 if the city council, or a designee, determines that there is no interest in restricting access to the record, or that the interests favoring access outweigh the interest favoring restriction of access.
The disclosure of records to which access is governed or limited pursuant to court rule, another state statute, federal statute, or federal regulation, including records for which access is governed or limited as a condition of participation in a state or federal program or for rece1v1ng state or federal funds, is governed by the specific provisions of that statute, rule or regulation.
This chapter applies to records described in paragraph F,1 of this section insofar as this chapter is not inconsistent with the statute, rule, or regulation.
The city shall provide a person with a certified copy of a record if:
The person requesting the record has a right to inspect it;
Identifies the record with reasonable specificity; and
Pays the lawful fees.
The city is not required to create a record in response to a request.
Nothing in this chapter requires the city to fulfill a person's records request if the request unreasonably duplicates prior records requests from that person.
If a person requests copies of more than fifty (50) pages of records, and it the records are contained in tiles that do not contain records that are exempt from disclosure, the city may:
Provide the requester with the facilities tor copying the requested records and require that the requester make the copies himself; or
Allow the requester to provide his own copying facilities and personnel to make the copies at the city offices, and waive the fees for copying the records.
It the city owns an intellectual property right and otters the intellectual property right tor sale, or license, the city may control by ordinance or policy the duplication, and distribution of the material based on terms the city considers to be in the public interest.
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to limit or impair the rights or protections granted to the city under federal copyright or patent law as a result of its ownership of the intellectual property right.
The city may not use the physical form, electronic or otherwise, in which a record is stored to deny, or unreasonably hinder the rights of persons to inspect and receive copies of a record under this chapter. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.050 Access To Nonpublic Records
Upon request the city shall disclose a private record to:
The subject of the record;
The parent or legal guardian of an unemancipated minor who is the subject of the record;
The legal guardian of a legally incapacitated individual who is the subject of the record;
Any other individual who:
Has a power of attorney from the subject of the record; or
Submits a notarized release from the subject of the record or his legal representative dated no later than ninety (90) days before the date the request is made; or
Any person to whom the record must be provided pursuant to court order.
Upon request, the city shall disclose a controlled record to:
A physician, psychologist, or certified social worker upon submission of a notarized release from the subject of the record that is dated no more than ninety (90) days prior to the date the request is made and a signed acknowledgement of the terms of disclosure of controlled information as provided by paragraph B,2; and
Any person to whom a record must be disclosed pursuant to court order.
A person who receives a record from the city in accordance with paragraph B,1,a may not disclose controlled information from that record to any person, including the subject of the record.
If there is more than one subject of a private or controlled record, the portion of the record that pertains to another subject shall be segregated from the portion that the requester is entitled to inspect.
Upon request the city shall disclose a protected record to:
The person who submitted the information in the record;
Any other individual who:
Has a power of attorney from all persons, governmental entities, or political subdivisions whose interests were sought to be protected by the protected classification; or
Submits a notarized release from their legal representatives dated no more than ninety (90) days prior to the date the request is made; or
Any person to whom a record must be provided pursuant to a court order.
The city may disclose a record classified private, controlled, or protected to another governmental entity, city, another state, the United States, or a foreign government only as provided by Utah Code § 63-2-206.
Before releasing a private, controlled, or protected record, the city shall obtain evidence of the requester's identity.
The city shall disclose a record pursuant to the terms of a court order signed by a judge from a court of competent jurisdiction, provided that:
The record deals with a matter in controversy over which the court has jurisdiction.
The court has considered the merits of the request for access to the record; and
The court has considered and, where appropriate, limited the requester's use and further disclosure of the record in order to protect privacy interests in the case of private or controlled records, business confidentiality interests in the case of records protected under Utah Code § 63-2-304(1) and (2), and privacy interests or the public interest in the case of other protected records;
To the extent the record is properly classified private, controlled, or protected, the interests favoring access, considering limitations thereon, outweigh the interests favoring restriction of access; and
Where access is restricted by a rule, statute, or regulation referred to in ECC 1.40.040 Paragraph C,2, the court has authority independent of this chapter to order disclosure.
The city may disclose or authorize disclosure of private or controlled records for research purposes if the city:
Determines that the research purpose cannot reasonably be accomplished without use of disclosure of the information to the researcher in individually identifiable form;
Determines that the proposed research is bona fide, and that the value of the research outweighs the infringement upon personal privacy;
Requires the researcher to assure the integrity, confidentiality, and security of the records and requires the removal or destruction of the individual identifiers associated with the records as soon as the purpose of the research project has been accomplished;
Prohibits the researcher from disclosing the record in individually identifiable form except as provided in paragraph H,2, or from using the record for purposes other than the research approved by the city; and
Secures from the researcher a written statement of his understanding of and agreement to the conditions of this paragraph and his understanding that violation of the terms of this paragraph may subject him to criminal prosecution under Utah Code § 63-2-801.
A researcher may disclose a record in individually identifiable form if the record is disclosed for the purpose of auditing or evaluating the research program and no subsequent use or disclosure of the record in individually identifiable form will be made by the auditor or evaluator except as provided by this section.
The city may require indemnification as a condition of permitting research under this paragraph H.
Under ECC 1.40.040 Paragraph E,2 and ECC 1.40.160 Paragraph D the city may disclose records that are private under ECC 1.40.100, or protected under ECC 1.40.120 to persons other than those specified in this section.
Under ECC 1.40.160 the city council may require the disclosure of records that are private under ECC 1.40.100, controlled under ECC 1.40.110, or protected under ECC 1.40.120 to persons other than those specified in this section.
Under Utah Code § 63-2-404(8) the court may require the disclosure of records that are private under ECC 1.40.100, controlled under ECC 1.40.110, or protected under ECC 1.40.120 to persons other than those specified in this section. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.060 Fees
The city may charge a reasonable fee to cover the city's actual cost of duplicating a record or compiling a record in a form other than that maintained by the city. The fees may be set by resolution. The initial fee, until changed by resolution, is as set forth in exhibit A attached to ordinance dated July 15, 1992 on file in the city recorder's office.
The city may fulfill a record request without charge when it determines that:
Releasing the record primarily benefits the public rather than a person;
The individual requesting the record is the subject of the record; or
The requester's legal rights are directly implicated by the information in the record, and the requester is impecunious.
The city may not charge a fee for:
Reviewing a record to determine whether it is subject to disclosure; or
Inspecting a record. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.070 Procedures For Access
A person making a request for a record shall furnish the city with a written request containing his name, mailing address, daytime telephone number if available, and a description of the records requested that identifies the record with reasonable specificity.
As soon as reasonably possible, but no later than ten (10) business days after receiving a written request, or five (5) business days after receiving a written request if the requester demonstrates that expedited response to the record request benefits the public rather than the person, the city shall respond to the request by:
Approving the request and providing the record;
Denying the request;
Notifying the requester that it does not maintain the record and providing, if known, the name and address of where the record can be found; or
Notifying the requester that because of one of the extraordinary circumstances listed in paragraph D, it cannot immediately approve or deny the request. The notice shall describe the circumstances relied upon and specify the earliest time and date when the records will be available.
Any person who requests a record to obtain information for a story or report for publication or broadcast to the general public is presumed to be acting to benefit the public rather than a person.
The following circumstances constitute "extraordinary circumstances" that allow the city to delay approval or denial by an additional period of time as specified in paragraph E if the city determines that due to the extraordinary circumstances it cannot respond within the time limits provided in paragraph B:
Another governmental entity is using the record, in which case the city shall promptly request that the governmental entity currently in possession return the record;
Another governmental entity is using the record as part of an audit and returning the record before the completion of the audit would impair the conduct of the audit;
The request is for a voluminous quantity of records;
The city is currently processing a large number of records requests;
The request requires the city to review a large number of records to locate the records requested;
The decision to release a record involves legal issues that require the city to seek legal counsel for the analysis of statutes, rules, ordinances, regulations, or case law;
Segregating information that the requester is entitled to inspect from information that the requester is not entitled to inspect requires extensive editing; or
Segregating information that the requester is entitled to inspect from information that the requester is not entitled to inspect requires computer programming.
If one of the extraordinary circumstances listed in paragraph D precludes approval or denial within the time specified in paragraph B, the following time limits apply to the extraordinary circumstances:
For claims under paragraph D,1, the governmental entity currently in possession of the record shall return the record to the originating entity within five (5) business days of the request for the return unless returning the record would impair the holder's work.
For claims under paragraph D,2, the originating city shall notify the requester when the record is available for inspection and copying;
For claims under paragraphs D,3 through D,5, the city shall:
Disclose the records that it has located which the requester is entitled to inspect;
Provide the requester with an estimate of the amount of time it will take to finish the work required to respond to the request; and
Complete the work and disclose those records that requester is entitled to inspect as soon as reasonably possible;
For delays under paragraph D,6, the city shall either approve or deny the request within five (5) business days after the response time specified for the original request has expired;
For delays under paragraph D,7, the city shall fulfill the request within fifteen (15) business days from the date of the original request; or
For delays under paragraph D,8, the city shall complete its programming and disclose the requested records as soon as reasonably possible.
If the city fails to provide the requested records or issue a denial within the specified time period, that failure is considered the equivalent of a determination denying access to the records. (Ord., 7-15-1992 eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.080 Denials; Notice
If the city denies the request in whole or part, it shall provide a notice of denial to the requester either in person or by sending the notice to requester's address.
The notice of denial shall contain the following information:
A description of the record or portions of the record to which access was denied, provided that the description does not disclose private, controlled, or protected information or records to which access is restricted pursuant to court rule, another state statute, federal statute, or federal regulation, including records for which access is governed or restricted as a condition of participation in a state or federal program or for receiving state or federal funds.
Citations to the provisions of this chapter, another state statute, federal statute, court rule or order or federal regulation that exempt the record or portions of the record from disclosure, provided that the citations do not disclose private, controlled or protected information;
Statement that the requester has the right to appeal the denial to the city council; and
A brief summary of the appeals process, and the time limits for filing an appeal.
Unless otherwise required by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, the city may not destroy or give up custody of any record to which access was denied until the period for an appeal has expired or the end of the appeals process, including judicial appeal. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.090 Records That Must Be Disclosed
The following records are public:
Laws and ordinances;
Names, gender, gross compensation, job titles, job descriptions, business addresses, business telephone numbers, number of hours worked per pay period, dates of employment, and relevant education, previous employment, and similar job qualification of the city's former and present employees and officers excluding undercover law enforcement personnel or investigative personnel if disclosure could reasonably be expected to impair the effectiveness of investigations or endanger any individual's safety;
Final opinions, including concurring and dissenting opinions, and orders that are made by the city in an administrative, adjudicative, or judicial proceeding except that if the proceedings were properly closed to the public, the opinion and order may be withheld to the extent that they obtain information that is private, protected, or controlled;
Final interpretation of statutes or rules by the city unless classified as protected as provided in ECC 1.40.120 Paragraphs O through Q;
Information contained in or compiled from a transcript, minutes, or report of the open portion of a meeting of the city including the records of all votes of each member of the city council;
Judicial records unless a court orders the records to be restricted under the rules of civil or criminal procedure or unless the records are private under this chapter;
Records filed with or maintained by county recorders, clerks, treasurers, surveyors, zoning commissions, the division of state lands and forestry, the division of oil, gas and mining, the division of water rights, or other governmental entities that give public notice of:
Titles or encumbrances to real property;
Restrictions on the use of real property;
The capacity of persons to take or convey title to real property; or
Tax status for real and personal property;
Records of the department of commerce that evidence incorporations, mergers, name changes, and uniform commercial code filings;
Data on individuals that would otherwise be private under this chapter if the individual who is the subject of the record has given the city written permission to make the records available to the public;
Documentation of the compensation that the city pays to a contractor or private provider; and
Summary data.
The following records are normally public, but to the extent that a record is expressly exempt from disclosure, access may be restricted under ECC 1.40.040 paragraph C,2 or ECC 1.40.100, ECC 1.40.110 or ECC 1.40.120:
Administrative staff manuals, instructions to staff, and statements of policy;
Records documenting a contractor's or private provider's compliance with the terms of a contract with the city;
Records documenting the services provided by a contractor or a private provider to the extent the records would be public if prepared by the city;
Contracts entered into by the city;
Any account, voucher, or contract that deals with the receipt or expenditure of funds by the city;
Records relating to governmental assistance or incentives publicly disclosed, contracted for, or given by the city, encouraging a person to expand or relocate a business in Utah, except as provided in Utah Code § 63-2-304(34);
Chronological logs and initial contact reports;
Correspondence by and with the city in which the city determines or states an opinion upon the rights of the state, a political subdivision, the public, or any person;
Empirical data contained in drafts if:
The empirical data is not reasonably available to, the requester elsewhere in similar form; and
The city is given a reasonable opportunity to correct any errors or make nonsubstantive changes before release;
Drafts that are circulated to anyone other than the city, state or to anyone other than a federal agency if the city, state or federal agency are jointly responsible for implementation of a program or project that has been legislatively approved;
Drafts that have never been finalized but were relied upon by the city in carrying out action or policy;
Original data in a computer program if the city chooses not to disclose the program;
Arrest warrants after issuance, except that, for good cause, a court may order restricted access to arrest warrants prior to service;
Search warrants after execution and filing of the return, except that a court, for good cause, may order restricted access to search warrants prior to trial;
Records that would disclose information relating to formal charges or disciplinary actions against a past or present city employee if:
The disciplinary action has been completed and all time periods for administrative appeal have expired; and
The formal charges were sustained;
Records maintained by the division of state lands and forestry or the division of oil, gas and mining that evidence mineral production on government lands;
Final audit reports;
Occupational and professional licenses;
Business licenses; and
A notice of violation, a notice of agency action under Utah Code § 63-46b-3, or similar records used to initiate proceedings for discipline or sanctions against persons regulated by the city, but not including records that initiate employee discipline.
The list of public records in this section is not exhaustive and should not be used to limit accesses to records. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.100 Private Records
The following records are private:
Records concerning an individual's eligibility for unemployment insurance benefits, social services, welfare benefits, or the determination of benefit levels;
Records containing data on individuals describing medical history, diagnosis, condition, treatment, evaluation, or similar medical data;
Records of publicly funded libraries that when examined alone or with other records identify a patron;
Records received or generated in a Senate or House ethics committee concerning any alleged violation of the rules on legislative ethics if the ethics committee meeting was closed to the public;
Records concerning a current or former employee of, or applicant for employment with the city that would disclose that individual's home address, home telephone number, social security number, insurance coverage, marital status, or payroll deductions.
The following records are private if properly classified by the city:
Records concerning a current or former employee of, or applicant for employment with the city, including performance evaluations and personal status information such as race, religion, or disabilities, but not including records that are public under ECC 1.40.090 Paragraph A,2 and ECC 1.40.090 Paragraph B,15 or private under paragraph A,5.
Records describing an individual's finances, except that the following are public:
Records described in ECC 1.40.090 Paragraph A;
Information provided to the city for the purpose of complying with a financial assurance requirement; or
Records that must be disclosed in accordance with another statute.
Records of independent state agencies if the disclosure of those records would conflict with the fiduciary obligations of the agency.
Other records containing data on individuals the disclosure of which constitutes a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy.
Records provided by the United States or by a governmental entity outside the state that are given with the requirement that the records be managed as private records, if the providing entity states in writing that the record would not be subject to public disclosure if retained by it. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.110 Controlled Records
A record is controlled only if:

The record contains medical, psychiatric, or psychological data about an individual;
The city reasonably believes that:
Releasing the information in the record to the subject of the record would be detrimental to the subject's mental health or to the safety of any individual; or
Releasing the information would constitute a violation of normal professional practice and medical ethics; and
The city has properly classified the record. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.120 Protected Records
The following records are protected if properly classified by the city:

Trade secrets as defined in Utah Code § 13-24-2 if the person submitting the trade secret has provided the city with the information specified in Utah Code § 63-2-308;
Commercial or nonindividual financial information obtained from a person if:
Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to result in unfair competitive injury to the person submitting the information or would impair the ability of the city to obtain necessary information in the future;
The person submitting the information has a greater interest in prohibiting access than the public in obtaining access; and
The person submitting the information has provided the city with the information specified in Utah Code § 63-2-308;
Commercial or financial information acquired or prepared by the city to the extent that a disclosure would lead to financial speculations in currencies, securities, or commodities that will interfere with a planned transaction by the city or cause substantial financial injury to the city or cause substantial financial injury to the city or state economy;
Test questions and answers to be used in future license, certification, registration, employment, or academic examinations;
Records the disclosure of which would impair governmental procurement or give an unfair advantage to any person proposing to enter into a contract or agreement with the city, except that this paragraph does not restrict the right of a person to see bids submitted to or by the city after bidding has closed;
Records that would identify real property or the appraisal or estimated value of real or personal property, including intellectual property, under consideration for public acquisition before any rights to the property are acquired unless:
Public interest in obtaining access to the information outweighs the city's need to acquire the property on the best terms possible;
The information has already been disclosed to persons not employed by or under a duty of confidentiality to the entity;
In the case of records that would identify property, potential sellers of the property described have already learned of the city's plans to acquire the property;
In the case of records that would identify the appraisal or estimated value of property, the potential sellers have already learned of the city's estimated value of the property;
Records prepared in contemplation of sale, exchange, lease, rental, or other compensated transaction of real or personal property including intellectual property, which, if disclosed prior to completion of the transaction, would reveal the appraisal or estimated value of the subject property, unless:
The public interest in access outweighs the interests in restricting access, including the city's interest in maximizing the financial benefit of the transaction; or
When prepared by or on behalf of the city, appraisals or estimates of the value of the subject property have already been disclosed to persons not employed by or under a duty of confidentiality to the city;
Records created or maintained for civil, criminal, or administrative enforcement purposes or audit purposes, or for discipline, licensing, certification, or registration purposes if release of the records:
Reasonably could be expected to interfere with investigations undertaken for enforcement, discipline, licensing, certification, or registration purposes;
Reasonably could be expected to interfere with audits, disciplinary, or enforcement proceedings;
Would create a danger of depriving a person of a right to a fair trial or impartial hearing;
Reasonably could be expected to disclose the identity of a source who is not generally known outside of government and, in the case of a record compiled in the course of an investigation, disclose information furnished by a source not generally known outside of government if disclosure would compromise the source; or
Reasonably could be expected to disclose investigative or audit techniques, procedures, policies, or orders not generally known outside of government if disclosure would interfere with enforcement or audit efforts;
Records the disclosure of which would jeopardize the life or safety of an individual;
Records the disclosure of which would jeopardize the security of governmental property, governmental programs, or governmental record keeping systems from damage, theft, or other appropriation or use contrary to law or public policy;
Records that, if disclosed, would jeopardize the security or safety of a correctional facility, or records relating to incarceration, treatment, probation, or parole, that would interfere with the control and supervision of an offender's incarceration, treatment, probation or parole;
Records that if disclosed, would reveal recommendations made to the board of pardons by an employee of or contractor for the department of corrections, the board of pardons, or the department of human services that are based on the employee's or contractor's supervision, diagnosis, or treatment of any person within the board's jurisdiction;
Records and audit work papers that identify audit, collection, and operational procedures and methods used by the Utah state tax commission if disclosure would interfere with audits or collections;
Records of a governmental audit agency relating to an ongoing or planned audit until the final audit is released;
Records prepared by or on behalf of the city solely in anticipation of litigation that are not available under the rules of discovery;
Records disclosing an attorney's work product, including the mental impressions or legal theories of an attorney or other representative of the city concerning litigation;
Records of communications between the city and an attorney representing, retained or employed by the city if the communications would be privileged as provided in Utah Code § 78-24-8;
Drafts, unless otherwise classified as public;
Records concerning the city's strategy about collective bargaining or pending litigation;
Records of investigations of loss occurrences and analyses of loss occurrences;
Records, other than personnel evaluations, that contain a personal recomr:nendation concerning an individual if disclosure would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, or disclosure is not in the public interest;
Records that reveal the location of historic, prehistoric, paleontological, or biological resources that if known would jeopardize the security of those resources or of valuable historic, scientific, educational, or cultural information;
Records of independent state agencies if the disclosure of the records would conflict with the fiduciary obligations of the agency;
Records provided by the United States or by a government entity outside the state that are given to the city with a requirement that they be managed as protected records if the providing entity certifies that the record would not be subject to public disclosure if retained by it;
Transcripts, minutes, or reports of the closed portion of a meeting of a public body except as provided in section 52-4-7 of the open and public meeting act;
Records that would reveal the contents of settlement negotiations, but not including final settlements or empirical data to the extent that they are not otherwise exempt from disclosure;
Memoranda prepared by staff and used in the decision-making process by an administrative law judge, a member of the board of pardons, or a member of any other body charged by law with performing a quasi-judicial function;
Records that would reveal negotiations regarding assistance or incentives offered by or requested from the city for the purpose of encouraging a person to expand or locate a business in Utah, but only if disclosure would result in actual economic harm to the person or place the city at a competitive disadvantage, but this section may not be used to restrict access to a record evidencing a final contract; and
Materials to which access must be limited for purposes of securing or maintaining the city's proprietary protection of intellectual property rights including patents, copyrights, and trade secrets. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.130 Records Classification And Designation
The city shall:
Evaluate all record series that it uses or creates;
Designate those record series as provided by this chapter;
Report the designation of its record services to the state archives.
The city may classify a particular record, record series, or information within a record at any time, but is not required to classify a particular record, record series, or information until access to the record is requested.
The city may redesignate a record series or reclassify a record or record series, or information within a record at any time. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.140 Records Retention
The city shall by resolution establish a retention schedule for each record series. The initial retention schedule shall be as set forth in exhibit B attached to ordinance dated July 15, 1992 on file in the city recorder's office. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)

1.40.150 Segregation Of Records
Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter, if the city receives a request for access to a record that contains both information that the requester is entitled to inspect and information that the requester is not entitled to inspect under this chapter, and, if the information the requester is entitled to inspect is intelligible, the city:

Shall allow access to information in the record that the requester is entitled to inspect under this chapter; and
May deny access to information in the record if the information is exempt from disclosure to the requester, issuing a notice of denial. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.160 Appeals
Any person aggrieved by the city's access determination under this chapter, including a person not a party to the city's proceeding, may appeal the determination to the mayor and city council by filing a notice of appeal.
If the city claims extraordinary circumstances and specifies the date when the records will be available and, if the requester believes the extraordinary circumstances do not exist or that the time specified is unreasonable, the requester may appeal the city's claim of extraordinary circumstances or date for compliance within thirty (30) days after notification of a claim of extraordinary circumstances by the city, despite the lack of a "determination" or its equivalent.
If the appeal involves a record that is the subject of a business confidentiality claim under Utah Code § 63-2-308, the city recorder shall:
Send notice of the requester's appeal to the business confidentiality claimant within three (3) business days after receiving notice, except that if notice under this section must be given to more than thirty five (35) persons, it shall be given as soon as reasonably possible;
Send notice of the business confidentiality claim and the schedule for the city recorder's determination to the requester within three (3) business days after receiving notice of the requester's appeal.
The claimant shall have seven (7) business days after notice is sent by the city recorder to submit further support, for the claim of business confidentiality.
The mayor shall make a determination on any appeal within the following period of time:
Within five (5) business days after the mayor's receipt of the notice of appeal; or
Within twelve (12) business days after the city sends the requester's notice of appeal to a person who submitted a claim of business confidentiality.
If the mayor fails to make a determination within the time specified in paragraph C,1, the failure shall be considered the equivalent of an order denying the appeal.
The provisions of this section notwithstanding, the parties participating in the proceeding may, by agreement, extend the time periods specified in this section.
The mayor may, upon consideration and weighing of the various interests and public policies pertinent to the classification and disclosure or nondisclosure, order the disclosure of information properly classified as private under ECC 1.40.100 Paragraph B or protected under ECC 1.40.120 if the interests favoring access outweigh the interest favoring restriction of access.
The city shall send written notice of the determination of the mayor to all participants. If the mayor affirms the denial in whole or in part, the denial shall include a statement that the requester has the right to appeal the denial to the city council, and the time limits for filing an appeal.
The duties of the mayor under this section may be delegated.
The notice of appeal to the city council must be filed with the city recorder no later than thirty (30) days after the mayor has denied the appeal or fails to make a determination within the time specified in paragraph C,1.
The notice of appeal shall contain the following information:
The petitioner's name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number; and
The relief sought.
The petitioner may file a short statement of facts, reasons, and legal authority in support of the appeal.
No later than three (3) days after receiving a notice of appeal, the recorder shall:
Schedule a hearing for the city council to discuss the appeal which shall be held no sooner than fifteen (15) days and no later than thirty (30) days from the date of the filing of the appeal.
At the hearing, the city council shall allow the parties to testify, present evidence, and comment on the issues. The city council may allow other interested persons to comment on the issues.
No later than three (3) business days after the hearing, the city council shall issue a signed order either granting the petition in whole or in part or upholding the determination of the city in whole or in part.
The order of the city shall include:
A statement of reasons for the decision, including citations to this chapter or federal regulation that governs disclosure of the record, provided that the citations do not disclose private, controlled, or protected information;
A description of the record or portions of the record to which access was ordered or denied, provided that the description does not disclose private, controlled, or protected information;
A statement that any party to the appeal may appeal the city's decision to district court; and
A brief summary of the appeal, and a notice that in order to protect its rights on appeal, the party may wish to seek advice from an attorney.
A person aggrieved by the city's classification or designation determination under this chapter, but who is not requesting access to the records, may appeal that determination using the procedures provided in this section. If a nonrequester is the only appellant, the procedures provided in this section shall apply, except that the determination on the appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days after receiving the notice of appeal. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.170 Judicial Review
Any party to a proceeding before the city council may petition for judicial review by the district court of the city council's order. The petition shall be filed no later than thirty (30) days after the date of the city council's order. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)

1.40.180 Confidential Treatment Of Records For Which No Exemption Applies
A court may, on appeal or in a declaratory or other action, order the confidential treatment of records for which no exemption from disclosure applies if:
There are compelling interests favoring restriction of access to the record; and
The interests favoring restriction of access clearly outweigh the interests favoring access.
If the city requests a court to restrict access to a record under this section, the court shall require the city to pay the reasonable attorney fees incurred by the lead party in opposing the city's request, if:
The court finds that no statutory or constitutional exemption from disclosure could reasonably apply to the record in question; and
The court denies confidential treatment under this section.
This section does not apply to records that are specifically required to be public under ECC 1.40.090 or Utah Code § 63-2-301, except as provided in paragraph D.
Access to drafts and empirical data in drafts may be limited under this section, but the court may consider, in its evaluation of interests favoring restriction of access, only those interests that relate to the underlying information, and not to the deliberative nature of the record.
Access to original data in a computer program may be limited under this section, but the court may consider, in its evaluation of interests favoring restriction of access, only those interests that relate to the underlying information, and not to the status of that data as part of a computer program. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.190 Request To Amend A Record
Subject to paragraph G, an individual may contest the accuracy or completeness of any public, or private, or protected record concerning him by requesting the city to amend the record. However, this section does not affect the right of access to private or protected records.
The request shall contain the following information:
The requester's name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number; and
A brief statement explaining why the city should amend the record.
The city shall issue an order either approving or denying the request to amend no later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the request.
If the city approves the request, it shall correct all of its records that contain the same incorrect information as soon as practical. The city may not disclose the record until it has amended it.
If the city denies the request it shall:
Inform the requester in writing; and
Provide a brief statement giving its reasons for denying the request.
If the city denies a request to amend a record, the requester may submit a written statement contesting the information in the record.
The city shall:
File the requester's statement with the disputed record if the record is in a form such that the statement can accompany the record or make the statement accessible if the record is not in a form such that the statement can accompany the record; and
Disclose the requester's statement along with the information in the record whenever the city discloses the disputed information.
The requester may appeal the denial of the request to amend a record pursuant to ECC 1.40.160.
This section does not apply to records relating to title to real or personal property, medical records, judicial case files, or any other records that the city determines must be maintained in their original form to protect the public interest and to preserve the integrity of the record system. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.200 Rights Of Individuals On Whom Data Is Maintained
The city shall file with the state archivist a statement explaining the purposes for which record series designated private or controlled are collected and used by that city.
That statement is a public record.
Upon request, the city shall explain to an individual:
The reasons the individual is asked to furnish to the city information that could be classified private or controlled;
The intended uses of the information; and
The consequences for refusing to provide the information.
The city may not use private or controlled records for purposes other than those given in the statement filed with the state archivist under paragraph A or for purposes other than those for which another governmental entity could use the record under Utah Code § 63-2-206. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.40.210 Criminal Penalties
A public employee or other person who has lawful access to any private, controlled, or protected record under this chapter, and who intentionally discloses or provides a copy of a private, controlled or protected record to any person knowing that such disclosure is prohibited, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
It is a defense to prosecution under paragraph A,1 that the actor released private, controlled or protected information in the reasonable belief that the disclosure of the information was necessary to expose a violation of law involving government corruption, abuse of office, or misappropriation of public funds or property.
It is a defense to prosecution under paragraph A,1 that the record could have lawfully been released to the recipient if it had been properly classified.
A person who by false pretenses, bribery, or theft, gains access to or obtains a copy of any private, controlled, or protected record to which he is not legally entitled is guilty of a class B misdemeanor.
No person shall be guilty under paragraph B,1 who receives the record, information, or copy after the fact and without prior knowledge of or participation in the false pretenses, bribery, or theft.
A public employee who intentionally refuses to release a record the disclosure of which the employee knows is required by law or by final unappealed order from a city, the records committee, or a court, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord., 7-15-1992, eff. 7-15-1992)
1.44 DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY
1.44.010 Real Property

1.44.010 Real Property
For the purpose of disposing of significant parcels of real property, the following definitions shall apply:

REASONABLE NOTICE: Publishing notice of a public hearing, along with a general description of the significant parcel of real property being disposed of, in a newspaper of local circulation fourteen (14) days prior to the public hearing concerning the disposition.

SIGNIFICANT PARCEL OF REAL PROPERTY: Any land and anything growing on, attached to, or erected on it, excluding anything that may be severed without injury to the land, owned by the city.
Regardless of whether or not a parcel of property is deemed to be a significant parcel as defined in paragraph A, a public hearing shall be required to be held by the city council on any disposal of land owned by the city, and reasonable notice given according to paragraph A. (Ord. 14-03, 6-4-2014)
2 BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS
2.04 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.08 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BOARD
2.12 MISS EPHRAIM SCHOLARSHIP BOARD
2.16 RECREATION BOARD

2.04 PLANNING COMMISSION
2.04.010 Established
2.04.020 Organization
2.04.030 Authority, Duties, And Powers
2.04.040 Appointments; Contracts

2.04.010 Established
Membership:
There is hereby created a planning commission of eight (8) members to be appointed by the city council.
One member of the city council shall be an ex officio member of the planning commission. The other seven (7) members shall be selected from among the duly qualified electors of the city for terms of three (3) years; provided, that the terms of the members of the first planning commission so appointed shall be such that the terms of two (2) members shall expire the second year, and the terms of the three (3) members shall expire one year thereafter.
Two (2) alternate voting members may be selected with the same qualifications as listed above, who shall serve in the absence of a member or members of the planning commission, for terms of three (3) years; such that the first appointed alternate shall serve for two (2) years; at which time the appointment will expire; and the second alternate's term shall expire one year thereafter.
Vacancies; Removal: Any vacancy occurring on said planning commission by reason of death, resignation, removal or disqualification shall be promptly filled by the city council for the unexpired term of such member. The city council may remove any member of the planning commission for ca use, upon written charges and after public hearing.
Compensation: Members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation, except for reasonable expense1. (Ord. 06-02, 9-20-2006)
1 Utah Code § 10-9a-301(2).

2.04.020 Organization
Chairman; Adoption Of Rules: The members of the planning commission shall select from their own members a chairman and such other officers as deemed necessary and shall adopt rules and regulations for their organization and for the transaction of business and the conduct of their proceedings.
Reports To City Council: Reports of official acts and recommendation of the planning commission shall be public and made by the chairman in writing to the city council and shall indicate how each member of the planning commission voted with respect to such act or recommendation. Any member of the planning commission may also make a concurring or dissenting report or recommendation to the city council.
Meetings: The planning commission shall meet at least quarterly and at such other times as the planning commission may determine.
Quorum: Four (4) members of the planning commission shall constitute a quorum. (Ord. 06-02, 9-20-2006)
2.04.030 Authority, Duties, And Powers
Planning commission members are appointed by the city council to make a recommendation to the legislative body for:

A general plan and amendments to the general plan;
Land use ordinances, zoning maps, official maps, and amendments;
Any delegating of power to a person or group of persons to hear and act on a land use application;
Any delegating of power to a person or group of persons to hear and act on an appeal from a decision by the person or persons authorized to hear and act on a land use application;
An application process that:
After proper application and notice, allows for a streamlined review and decision process for routine land use decisions which are uncontested.
Shall protect the right of each:
Applicant and third party to require formal consideration of any application by those responsible to hear and act on a land use application.
Applicant, adversely affected party or municipal officer or employee to appeal a decision on a land use application to a separate person or group of persons which have the authority to hear and act on appeals to land use decisions; and
Participant to be heard in each public hearing on a contested application. (Ord. 06-02, 9-20-2006)
Utah Code § 10-9a-302.

2.04.040 Appointments; Contracts
The planning commission may appoint employees and may contract with city planners and other consultants, provided its expenditures, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city council. (Ord. 06-02, 9-20-2006)

2.08 ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BOARD
2.08.010 Title For Citation
2.08.020 Membership
2.08.030 Terms
2.08.040 Meetings; Compensation; Purpose
2.08.050 Recommendations To City Council
2.08.060 Chairperson
2.08.070 Removal Of Member; Vacancies

2.08.010 Title For Citation
The provisions codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT BOARD ORDINANCE. (Ord. 10-02, 8-8-2010)

2.08.020 Membership
There is hereby created an advisory board to the city council which shall be known as the Ephraim City economic development board (referred to herein as the board). The board shall be comprised of five (5) individuals and one alternate who are residents of Ephraim City selected and appointed by the city council. (Ord. 10-02, 8-8-2010)

2.08.030 Terms
Members of the board shall hold office for a period of three (3) years or until a successor for a member whose term has expired is appointed by the city council. Initial terms for members of the board shall be staggered to provide that all terms of office do not expire at the same date. To establish staggered terms of office for the initial board, one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, two (2) members of the board shall be appointed for terms of two (2) years and two (2) members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. (Ord. 10-02, 8-8-2010)

2.08.040 Meetings; Compensation; Purpose
The board shall meet as often as necessary and shall serve without compensation. The board shall investigate methods of economic development in the city and propose to the city council for official confirmation and authorization such actions as may be lawful and deemed appropriate by the board to encourage economic development in the city. (Ord. 10-02, 8-8-2010)

2.08.050 Recommendations To City Council
All recommendations and proposals from the board shall be to the city council in writing and shall be considered by the city council in open public meetings. The city council may invite the members of the board to meet with the city council at regularly scheduled meetings or special meetings from time to time in compliance with the provisions of the Utah open meetings act. (Ord. 10-02, 8-8-2010)

2.08.060 Chairperson
After the initial appointment of a chairperson, the board shall annually elect one of its members as chair of the board and the chair of the board shall be the contact agent with the board to the city council. (Ord. 10-02, 8-8-2010)

2.08.070 Removal Of Member; Vacancies
Any board member may be removed by the city council for misconduct or neglect of duty.
Vacancies in the board shall be filled for the unexpired term of office by the city council. (Ord. 10-02, 8-8-2010)
2.12 MISS EPHRAIM SCHOLARSHIP BOARD
2.12.010 Title For Citation
2.12.020 Membership
2.12.030 Terms
2.12.040 Meetings; Compensation; Purpose
2.12.050 Recommendations To City Council
2.12.060 Director
2.12.070 Judges
2.12.080 Removal Of Member; Vacancies

2.12.010 Title For Citation
The provisions codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the MISS EPHRAIM SCHOLARSHIP PAGEANT BOARD ORDINANCE. (Ord. 10-03, 10-6-2010)

2.12.020 Membership
There is hereby created an advisory board to the city council which shall be known as the Miss Ephraim scholarship board (referred to herein as the board). The board shall be comprised of five (5) individuals and one alternate who are residents of Ephraim City selected and appointed by the city council. (Ord. 10-03, 10-6-2010)

2.12.030 Terms
Members of the board shall hold office for a period of three (3) years or until a successor for a member whose term has expired is appointed by the city council. Initial terms for members of the board shall be staggered to provide that all terms of office do not expire at the same date. To establish staggered terms of office for the initial board, one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, two (2) members of the board shall be appointed for terms of two (2) years and two (2) members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. (Ord. 10-03, 10-6-2010)

2.12.040 Meetings; Compensation; Purpose
The board shall meet as often as necessary and shall serve without compensation. The board shall organize and conduct all necessary functions related to the Miss Ephraim Scholarship Pageant. (Ord. 10-03, 10-6-2010)

2.12.050 Recommendations To City Council
All recommendations and proposals from the board shall be to the city council in writing and shall be considered by the city council in open public meetings. The city council may invite the members of the board to meet with the city council at regularly scheduled meetings or special meetings from time to time in compliance with the provisions of the Utah open meetings act. (Ord. 10-03, 10-6-2010)

2.12.060 Director
After the initial appointment of a pageant director, the board shall annually elect one of its members as pageant director. Furthermore, the pageant director shall act as the Miss Ephraim scholarship board chairperson and shall be the contact agent with the board to the city council. (Ord. 10-03, 10-6-2010)

2.12.070 Judges
No member of the Miss Ephraim Scholarship Pageant board may participate in the pageant as a judge. (Ord. 10-03, 10-6-2010)

2.12.080 Removal Of Member; Vacancies
Any board member may be removed by the city council for misconduct or neglect of duty.
Vacancies in the board shall be filled for the unexpired term of office by the city council. (Ord. 10-03, 10-6-2010)
2.16 RECREATION BOARD
2.16.010 Title For Citation
2.16.020 Membership; Compensation
2.16.030 Terms
2.16.040 Meetings; Purpose
2.16.050 Powers And Duties
2.16.060 Funds
2.16.070 Recommendations To City Council
2.16.080 Director
2.16.090 Removal Of Member; Vacancies

2.16.010 Title For Citation
The provisions codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the EPHRAIM RECREATION BOARD ORDINANCE. (Ord. 10-06, 12-1-2010)

2.16.020 Membership; Compensation
There is hereby created an advisory board to the city council which shall be known as the Ephraim recreation board (referred to herein as the board). The board shall be comprised of five (5) individuals and one alternate who are residents of Ephraim City selected and appointed by the city council. The members of the board shall elect a chairman from among the voting members of the board. Members of the board shall serve without compensation. (Ord. 10-06, 12-1-2010)

2.16.030 Terms
Members of the board shall hold office for a period of three (3) years or until a successor for a member whose term has expired is appointed by the city council. Initial terms for members of the board shall be staggered to provide that all terms of office do not expire at the same date. To establish staggered terms of office for the initial board, one member shall be appointed for a term of one year, two (2) members of the board shall be appointed for terms of two (2) years and two (2) members shall be appointed for terms of three (3) years. (Ord. 10-06, 12-1-2010)

2.16.040 Meetings; Purpose
The board shall meet monthly or as often as necessary. The board shall operate and administer recreation sports programs for the citizens of Ephraim City and other qualified participants and to recommend to the city council the establishment of policies, budget and program authority necessary to the accomplishment of a citywide recreation sports program for the youth and adults of Ephraim City. (Ord. 10-06, 12-1-2010)

2.16.050 Powers And Duties
Members of the board shall define the recreation sports programs to be offered by the city, propose a budget to the city council for each sport deemed appropriate by the board, recruit volunteer program supervisors, coaches, and other personnel necessary to the operation of the sports programs and encourage financial sponsorship and donations from private organizations to assist in the operation of the sports programs. (Ord. 10-06, 12-1-2010)

2.16.060 Funds
Funds budgeted by the city for the recreation sports programs shall be expended in accordance with the program recommendations after approval by the city council. All funds raised by the sports program operations shall be used exclusively for the operation of the recreation department. (Ord. 10-06, 12-1-2010)

2.16.070 Recommendations To City Council
All recommendations and proposals from the board shall be to the city council in writing and shall be considered by the city council in open public meetings. The city council may invite the members of the board to meet with the city council at regularly scheduled meetings or special meetings from time to time in compliance with the provisions of the Utah open meetings act. (Ord. 10-06, 12-1-2010)

2.16.080 Director
Ephraim City shall hire a recreation director that shall work with the board and receive his/her objectives from the board in conjunction with the city council and city manager. The recreation director shall report to the city manager for administrative matters. (Ord. 10-06, 12-1-2010)

2.16.090 Removal Of Member; Vacancies
Any board member may be removed by the city council for misconduct or neglect of duty.
Vacancies in the board shall be filled for the unexpired term of office by the city council. (Ord. 10-06, 12-1-2010)
3 BUSINESS AND LICENSE REGULATIONS
3.04 GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
3.08 LIQUOR CONTROL
3.12 SALES AND USE TAX
3.16 HIGHWAYS TAX
3.20 SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT TAXES
3.24 SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
3.28 PAWNBROKERS
3.32 UTILITY LICENSE FEE
3.36 LANDLORD REGISTRY LICENSE
3.40 CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS
3.44 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO SALES
3.48 SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND EMPLOYEES
3.52 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX

3.04 GENERAL LICENSE PROVISIONS
3.04.010 Definitions - General License Provisions
3.04.020 License Assessor And Collector
3.04.030 Business License Required; Penalty
3.04.040 Application For License
3.04.050 License Fee Levied
3.04.060 Payment Dates
3.04.070 Interstate Commerce
3.04.080 Contents Of Certificate Of License
3.04.090 Display Certificate Of License
3.04.100 Transfer Of License Prohibited
3.04.110 Branch Establishments
3.04.120 Joint Business Licenses
3.04.130 Reciprocal Recognition; Delivery Of Goods
3.04.140 Exemptions To License
3.04.150 Records Required By Licensee
3.04.160 Revocation Or Denial Of License

3.04.010 Definitions - General License Provisions
As used in this Title: 

BUSINESS: Includes all activities engaged in within the City carried on for the purpose of gain or economic profit, except that the acts of employees rendering service to employers shall not be included in the term business unless otherwise specifically provided.

EACH SEPARATE PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate establishment or place of operation, whether or not operating under the same name, within the City, including a home or other place of lodging if the same is held out by advertisements, listings or otherwise as the establishment or place of operation of a person engaging in the business of selling tangible, personal property at either retail or wholesale, or both, in the City.

EMPLOYEE: The operator or manager of a place of business and any persons employed in the operation of said place of business in any capacity and also any salesman, agent or independent contractor engaged in the operation of the place of business in any capacity.

ENGAGING IN BUSINESS: Includes, but is not limited to, the sale of tangible personal property at retail or wholesale, the manufacturing of goods or property and the rendering of personal services for others for a consideration by persons engaged in any profession, trade, craft, business, occupation or other calling, except the rendering of personal services by an employee to his employer under any contract of personal employment.

PLACE OF BUSINESS: Each separate location maintained or operated by the licensee within the City from which business activity is conducted or transacted.

WHOLESALE: A sale of tangible personal property by wholesalers to retail merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers for resale, and does not include a sale by wholesalers or retailers to users or consumers not for resale, except as otherwise specified.

WHOLESALER: A person doing a regularly organized wholesale or jobbing business and selling to retail merchants, jobbers, dealers or other wholesalers, for the purpose of resale. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)

3.04.020 License Assessor And Collector
The City Recorder is designated and appointed as ex officio assessor of license fees for the City. On receipt of any application for a license, the City Recorder shall assess the amount due thereon and shall collect all license fees based upon the rate established by resolution of the City Council.

He/she shall enforce all provisions of this Title, and shall cause to be filed complaints against all persons violating any of the provisions of this Title. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)

3.04.030 Business License Required; Penalty
It shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, for any person to transact, engage in or carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or to operate a vending, pinball or coin-operated machine without first receiving the class or type of license required by the City. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)

3.04.040 Application For License
Required: All applications for a business license shall be made in writing to the City Recorder and filed for each place of business, service or profession within the City.
Information: All applications shall be verified and contain the following information:
The name of the person desiring a license; if a partnership, the names of all of the partners, and if a corporation, the names of the principal officers thereof.
The kind of license desired, stating the business, calling, trade or profession to be performed, practiced or carried on.
The class of license desired, if such licenses are divided into classes.
The place where such business, calling, trade or profession is to be carried on, giving the street number if the business, calling, trade or profession is to be carried on in any building or enclosure having such number. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
The tax identification number and any other information that may be deemed pertinent for such application. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
3.04.050 License Fee Levied
Fixed By Resolution: The license fee payable by persons engaging in or carrying on any business within the City shall be periodically fixed by resolution of the City Council.
Addition To Other Fees: Except as otherwise expressly provided, the license fee imposed by this Chapter shall be in addition to any and all other taxes or licenses imposed by any other provisions of the ordinances of the City.
License Year: The license year herein shall be the calendar year. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
3.04.060 Payment Dates
All license fees shall be due and payable as follows, except as may be otherwise provided: (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)

Annual Fees Due: All license fees provided for herein shall be due and payable on or before January 5 of any calendar year, or before commencing a new business.
Delinquent; Penalty: In the event any fee is not paid on or before such date, a penalty of fifty percent (50%) of the amount due shall be imposed and shall become a part of the license fee imposed by this Chapter. The date of delinquency and the amount of the penalty may be amended periodically by resolution of the City Council; provided, that the application of the amended date and penalty be prospective only, effective the next calendar year. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
3.04.070 Interstate Commerce
None of the license taxes provided for by ECC 3.04, ECC 3.08, ECC 3.24, and ECC 3.28 shall be applied as to occasion an undue burden on interstate commerce. In any case, where a license tax is believed by a licensee or applicant for license to place an undue burden upon such commerce, he may apply to the license assessor and collector for an adjustment of the tax so that it shall not be discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to such commerce. Such application may be made before, at or within six (6) months after payment of the prescribed license tax. The applicant shall, by affidavit and supporting testimony, show his method of business and the gross volume or estimated gross volume of business and such other information as the license assessor and collector may deem necessary in order to determine the extent, if any, of such undue burden on such commerce. The license assessor and collector shall then conduct an investigation, comparing applicant's business with other businesses of like nature and shall make findings of fact from which he shall determine whether the tax fixed by ECC 3.04, ECC 3.08, ECC 3.24, and ECC 3.28 is discriminatory, unreasonable or unfair as to applicant's business and shall recommend to the City Council a license tax for the applicant in an amount that is nondiscriminatory, reasonable and fair, and if the City Council is satisfied that such license tax is the amount that the applicant should pay, it shall fix the license tax in such amount. If the regular license tax has already been paid, the City Council shall order a refund of the amount over and above the tax fixed by the City Council. In fixing the fee to be charged, the license assessor and collector shall have the power to base the fee upon a percentage of gross sales, or employees, or may use any other method which will assure that the fee assessed shall be uniform with that assessed on businesses of like nature. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)

3.04.080 Contents Of Certificate Of License
All certificates of license shall be signed by the City Recorder and shall contain the following information:

Name: The name of the person to whom such certificate has been issued.
Amount: The amount paid.
Type: The type of license and the class of such license if licenses are divided into classes.
Term: The term of the license with the commencing date and the date of its expiration.
Location: The place where such business, calling, trade or profession is to be conducted. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
3.04.090 Display Certificate Of License
Posted In Conspicuous Place: Every certificate of license issued under this Title shall be posted by the licensee in a conspicuous place upon the wall of the building, room or office of the place of business so that the same may be easily seen. When such certificate of license has expired, it shall be removed by the licensee from such place in which it has been posted, and no certificate of license which is not in force and effect shall be permitted to remain posted upon the wall or any part of any room within the place of business. If the licensee's business is such that a license cannot be displayed due to the transient or mobile nature of the business, then the licensee shall carry the license on his person, ready to be shown upon request by an authorized officer during all such time or times while the licensee is engaged in or pursuing the business for which a license is granted. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
Coin-Operated Machine: In the event the license is for a coin operated machine or device, the certificate shall be attached or displayed in the immediate vicinity of the machine for which it has been issued. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
3.04.100 Transfer Of License Prohibited
No license granted or issued under any ordinance of the City shall be assigned or transferred to any other person. It shall not be deemed to authorize any person other than therein named to do business or to authorize any other business, calling, trade or profession than is therein named unless by permission of the City Council. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)

3.04.110 Branch Establishments
A separate license must be obtained for each separate place of business in the City and each license shall authorize the license e to engage only in the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license; provided, that warehouses and distributing places used in connection with or incident to a business licensed under this Title shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)

3.04.120 Joint Business Licenses
Whenever any person is engaged in two (2) or more businesses at the same location within the City, such person shall not be required to obtain separate licenses for conducting each of such businesses, but shall be issued one license which shall specify on its face all such businesses. The license tax to be paid shall be computed at the highest license fee applicable to any of the businesses being conducted at such location. The sale of beer or any other product or service requiring an additional license shall be subject to such additional licensing requirement. Where two (2) or more persons conduct separate businesses at the same location, each such person shall obtain a license for such business and pay the required license tax for such business. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)

3.04.130 Reciprocal Recognition; Delivery Of Goods
Exceptions: No license shall be required for operation of any vehicle or equipment in the City when:
Such vehicle is merely passing through the City.
Such vehicle is used exclusively in intercity or interstate commerce. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
Delivery Of Property: No license shall be required by ECC 3.04 and ECC 3.24 of any person whose only business activity in the City is the mere delivery in the City of property sold by him at a regular place of business maintained by him outside the City where: (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
Such person's business is at the time of such delivery licensed by the Utah municipality or county in which such place of business is situated; and
The authority licensing such business grants to licensees of the City making deliveries within its jurisdiction the same privileges, upon substantially the same terms, as are granted by this Section; and
Neither the property delivered nor any of the facilities by which it was manufactured, produced or processed are subject to inspection by authority of the City for compliance with health or sanitary standards prescribed by the City; and
The truck or other conveyance by which such delivery is made prominently displays at all times a license plate or symbol issued by the said licensing authority to evidence such business license. Such plate or symbol shall identify the licensing authority by which it is issued, shall indicate that it evidences a license issued thereby, and shall specify the year or term for which it is effective.
Certification Of Section: The City Recorder shall, at the request of any person, certify a copy of this Section to any municipality or county of the State to which a copy has not previously been certified. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
3.04.140 Exemptions To License
Tax Exempt Businesses: No license fee shall be imposed under ECC 3.04, ECC 3.08, ECC 3.24 and ECC 3.28 on any person engaged in business for solely religious, charitable, eleemosynary or other types of strictly nonprofit purpose which is tax exempt in such activities under the laws of the United States and the State, nor shall any license fee be imposed on any person engaged in a business specifically exempted from municipal taxation and fees by the laws of the United States or the State; nor shall any license fee be imposed upon any person not maintaining a place of business within the City who has paid a like or similar license tax or fee to some other taxing unit within the State and which taxing unit exempts from its license tax or fee, by reciprocal agreement or otherwise, businesses domiciled in the City and doing business in such taxing unit. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
Reciprocal Agreements With Other Agencies: The license assessor and collector may, with approval of the City Council, enter into reciprocal agreements with the proper officials of other taxing units, as may be deemed equitable and proper in effecting the exemption provided for in paragraph A. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
3.04.150 Records Required By Licensee
Records Maintained: It shall be the duty of every person liable for the payment of any license fee imposed by this Chapter to keep and preserve for a period of three (3) years such books and records as will allow the City to determine the amount of any license fee for which he may be liable under the provisions of this Chapter. This will include records accurately reflecting the amount of his gross annual receipts of goods and services and the number of persons employed by the business.
Returns Not Public: Actual returns of gross receipts or gross income or the amounts thereof made to the City Recorder as required by this Chapter shall not be made public nor shall such be subject to the inspection of any person except the City Recorder or his authorized agent, or those persons authorized by order of the City Council. It shall be unlawful for any person to make public or to inform any other person as to the contents of any return, except as is in this Section authorized.
False Information; Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person to provide false information to the City in relation to the application for, issuance of, or continuation of, a business license, or to knowingly cause or permit the same to be done. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
3.04.160 Revocation Or Denial Of License
Failure To Comply; Unlawful Activities: Any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this Code or of any ordinance of the City may be revoked and any application denied by the City Council because of:
The failure of the licensee or applicant to comply with the conditions and requirements of this Code or any ordinance of the City.
Unlawful activities conducted or permitted on the premises where the business is conducted.
Notice To Licensee: Prior to the revocation of a license or denial of an application to renew business license, the licensee or applicant shall be given a notice which shall state in substance that the City Council intends to revoke the business license or deny the application to renew, together with the reason or reasons therefor, at a regular or special meeting of the City Council (which shall be at least 10 days and not more than 30 days from the date notice is sent), and that the licensee or applicant has a right to appear, to be represented by counsel, to hear the evidence against him, to cross-examine witnesses and to present evidence as to why the license should not be revoked or the application denied.
Not Applicable To Businesses Not Previously Licensed: The preceding paragraph shall not apply to applications for licenses for businesses which have not previously been licensed by the City, and such applicants need only be informed that their application has been denied. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
3.08 LIQUOR CONTROL
3.08.010 Definitions - Liquor Control
3.08.020 Qualifications Of Applicant
3.08.030 Application For License And Renewal License
3.08.040 Fees
3.08.050 Referral To Chief Of Police
3.08.060 Bond Requirement
3.08.070 Department Of Health Permit
3.08.080 Alcohol Training And Education
3.08.090 Classifications Of Licenses
3.08.100 Purchase Of Beer For Resale
3.08.110 Separate License For Each Place Of Business; Display
3.08.120 License Not Transferrable
3.08.130 Restrictions
3.08.140 Sunday Sales Prohibited (Rep By Ord., 6-21-2003)
3.08.150 Inspection Of Premises
3.08.160 Beer In Kegs
3.08.170 Revocation Or Suspension
3.08.180 Penalty

3.08.010 Definitions - Liquor Control
The words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meanings specified in the alcoholic beverage control act, Utah Code Part 1, § 32A-1-105, unless a different meaning is clearly evident. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)

3.08.020 Qualifications Of Applicant
No license shall be granted to any retailer to sell beer within the city unless he shall be of good moral character, over the age of twenty one (21) years, and a citizen of the United States, or to anyone who has been convicted of a felony or of any violation of any law of the state or provision of the ordinances of the city relating to intoxicating liquors, or of keeping a gambling or disorderly house, or who has pleaded guilty to or has forfeited his bail on a charge of having committed a felony or of having violated any such law or ordinance, or to any partnership, any member of which lacks any of the qualifications set forth in this section, or to any corporation, of which any director or officer lacks any such qualifications. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)

3.08.030 Application For License And Renewal License
Verified: All applications for licenses authorized by this chapter shall be verified and shall be filed with the city recorder. The applications must state the applicant's name in full and that he understands and has read and complied with the requirements and possesses the qualifications specified in the alcoholic beverage control act and this chapter. If the applicant is a copartnership, the names and addresses of all partners, and if a corporation, the names and addresses of all officers and directors, must be stated. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
Subscribed: The application must be subscribed by the applicant who shall state under oath that the facts therein contained are true.
Renewal: All applications for renewal licenses filed by the holders of existing licenses shall be filed with the city recorder at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date of the then issued license. Any person who fails to file such application within the time limit shall close his licensed premises on the expiration date of the then issued license and shall keep the premises closed for any and all business for the sale of beer until the date his new license is issued by the city council. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
3.08.040 Fees
Annual Regulatory License Fee: In addition to any other business license fee which any person or place of business may be required to pay, there is hereby imposed on the business location of every person engaged in the sale or dispensing of beer annual license fees which shall be periodically fixed by resolution or motion of the city council. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
License Fee To Accompany Application: Applications provided for in this chapter shall be accompanied by the fees provided in this Section. The fee shall be returned to the applicant if the application is denied. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
3.08.050 Referral To Chief Of Police
All applications filed in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter shall be referred to the Chief of Police for inspection and report. The Chief of Police shall, when possible, within ten (10) days after receiving such application, make a report to the City Council of the general reputation and character of the persons who habitually frequent such place; the nature and kind of business conducted at such place by the applicant, by any other person or by the applicant at any other place; whether the place is or has been conducted in a lawful, quiet and orderly manner; the nature and kind of entertainment, if any, at such place; whether gambling is or has been permitted on the premises or by the applicant at any other place; and the proximity of such premises to any school or church. The Chief of Police shall also add to such report his recommendation as to whether or not the application should be granted. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)

3.08.060 Bond Requirement
Required: No license required by this Chapter shall be granted by the City Council until the applicant shall have filed with the City Recorder a bond in a sum and as required by Utah Code Title 32A. The bond shall be made in favor of the City. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
Forfeiture: In the event any license is revoked, licensee shall forfeit any performance bond which may have been posted. In addition, after said license is revoked, the City Council will not consider a new application for the same licensee for a period of thirty (30) days from the date of revocation. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
3.08.070 Department Of Health Permit
No license under this Chapter shall be issued until the applicant therefor shall have first procured from the Central Utah District Health Department a permit which shall show that the premises to be licensed are in a sanitary condition and that the equipment used in the storage, distribution or sale of beer complies with all the health regulations of the City and the State. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)

3.08.080 Alcohol Training And Education
Required: No person shall be granted a license to operate or maintain a trade, profession or calling, the transaction or carrying on of which requires a license, within the City if such person operates an establishment which, as part of its business, serves alcoholic beverages as defined in Utah Code § 32A-1-105(2), to the public for consumption on the premises, unless that person shall show by certificate granted by the Utah Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control, or by adequate proof of the existence of such certificate, that each employee of the business engaging in the serving, selling or furnishing of such alcohol on the premises has completed the Alcoholic Training and Education Seminar, as required in Utah Code § 62A-8-403.
New Employees: Every new employee hired after the licensee has been licensed in compliance with paragraph A, who is required to complete this seminar, shall complete the seminar within six (6) months of commencing employment. Violation of this Section will result in revocation of the license granted, unless compliance is completed within two (2) months of the time that licensee first became aware that such violation occurred. (1998 Code)
3.08.090 Classifications Of Licenses
Retail licenses issued hereunder shall be of the following three (3) kinds and shall carry the following privileges, and shall be known as: Class A, Class B and Class C licenses.

Class A License: Class A retail licenses shall entitle the licensee to sell beer on the premises licensed in original containers for consumption off the premises, in accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and the ordinances of the City.
Class B License: Class B retail licenses shall entitle the licensee to sell beer in the original containers on the premises for consumption on or off the premises in accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and the ordinances of the City.
Class C License: Class C licenses for retail shall entitle the licensee to sell draft beer for consumption on or off the premises and to sell beer in accordance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and the ordinances of the City. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
3.08.100 Purchase Of Beer For Resale
It is a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, for any licensee to purchase or acquire, or to have or possess for the purpose of sale or distribution, any beer except that which he shall have lawfully purchased from a brewer or wholesaler licensed under the provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)

3.08.110 Separate License For Each Place Of Business; Display
A separate license shall be required for each place of sale and the license shall at all times be conspicuously displayed in the place to which it shall refer or for which it shall be issued. All licensees shall comply with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act and the regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)

3.08.120 License Not Transferrable
Licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall not be transferrable, and if revoked by the City Council, the fee paid by the licensee to the City for the license shall be forfeited to the City. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)

3.08.130 Restrictions
Sales; Places And Persons: It is unlawful for any person to sell beer at any public dance or to any person intoxicated, or under the influence of any intoxicating beverage. It is unlawful for any person to sell beer in any dance hall or theater.
Dance Halls, Theaters, Churches And Schools: No license shall be granted to sell beer in any dance hall, theater, or within fifty (50) yards of any church or within one hundred (100) yards of any school.
Minors; Unlicensed Premises: It shall be unlawful to sell beer to any person under the age of twenty-one (21), or to sell beer for consumption on the premises unless so licensed, or to permit the drinking of liquor on such premises.
Hours Of Sales, Consumption: It shall be unlawful to sell or otherwise furnish or dispose of beer, or allow it to be drunk or consumed on the premises or to allow beer out of original containers to remain on the licensed premises, whether or not open to the public, after the closing hour of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and before five o'clock (5:00) A.M. of any day, except that the closing hour on the day following December 31 of any year shall be two o'clock (2:00) A.M.
Class B And C License:
Hours: Any person having a Class B or C beer license, or his agents or employees, shall remove or cause to be removed from the licensed premises all patrons, customers or individuals not employed on the premises by the time stated in paragraph D.
Employees On Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person having a Class B or C beer license or for his agents or employees to permit any patron, customer or individual not employed on the premises to remain on such premises after the closing time above provided; provided however, no licensed premises may employ more than two (2) persons on the premises after the closing hour without the permission of the Chief of Police or the Mayor. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
Illumination Of Premises: Licensed premises shall be kept brightly illuminated at all times while it is occupied or open for business, and no booth, or kind of stall shall be maintained unless all tables, chairs and occupants are kept open to full view from the main floor and the entrance of such licensed premises. It shall be unlawful to advertise the sale of beer except under such regulations as are made by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission of the State; provided, that a simple designation of the fact that beer is sold under a City license may be placed in or upon the window or front of the licensed premises. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
Unlawful Sales: It shall be unlawful for any person to sell beer except in the manner for which he has been so licensed pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
Nuisance: It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain a nuisance. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
Number Of Business: The total number of businesses licensed to sell beer in the City shall not exceed five (5) Class A, four (4) Class B, and two (2) Class C licenses; provided, that this paragraph shall not operate to reduce the number of businesses now licensed to sell beer whether issued by this City or by the County if such business is annexed, nor shall it affect reapplication for such licenses.
Bowling Alley: Any premises known as a "bowling alley" shall be considered the premises in entirety and may be licensed as an on premises retail beer establishment. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
3.08.140 Sunday Sales Prohibited (Rep By Ord., 6-21-2003)

3.08.150 Inspection Of Premises
Premises Subject To Inspection: All licensed premises shall be subject to inspection by any officer, agent, or peace officer of the city or the alcoholic beverage control commission, or the state board of health, and every licensee shall, at the request of the state board of health, furnish to it samples of beer which he shall have for sale.
Revocation Of License For Violation: Any license granted pursuant to this chapter may be revoked on a finding by the city council that the licensee has had ten (10) days' or more notice from the state board of health that the licensee is violating one or more health ordinances, rules or regulations of the city or of the Utah division of health and has failed to comply with such health ordinance, rules or regulations.
Closing Of Business: The city council may direct the chief of police to close down any business licensed under this chapter where the state board of health has determined that continued operation of the business presents an imminent danger to the health of the community or persons who may eat or drink at the business. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
3.08.160 Beer In Kegs
Purpose: The purpose of this section is to promote the health, safety and welfare of the inhabitants of the city, decreasing neighborhood disturbances and the offensive and disorderly conduct generally caused by beer keg parties or gatherings. It is intended that beer be dispensed for consumption from kegs only by current holders of licenses from the city. This section shall be liberally construed to the end that the aforesaid purposes may be realized.
Manufactures, Wholesalers And Retailers; Valid License Required: It shall be unlawful for any manufacturer, distributor, wholesaler, or retailer of beer, or any of its agent or employees or for any person or persons, corporation, association, or entity of any nature, to sell, dispense, trade, give or otherwise dispose of beer in kegs or other bulk containers to anyone except persons, businesses, corporations or other entities holding a current valid beer license issued by the city.
Possession; Valid License Required: It shall be unlawful for any person or persons, corporation, business or entity of any kind to have in his or its possession or in his or its automobile or in his or its house, apartment, or other premises any beer keg where the same contains beer or any trace of beer, unless that person, corporation, association, business or entity possesses a valid city beer license or a valid state beer manufacturer's or wholesaler's license.
Penalties:
Any person, business, corporation, association, or agent or employee of the same who or which shall violate either paragraphs B or C shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
Any person, business, corporation, association or other entity who or which is found to have violated any of the provisions of paragraphs B or C and who or which possesses a city beer license of any kind or nature, or who or which possesses a city consent to a state liquor license of any kind shall have that license or consent suspended for a period of not less than thirty (30) days. A person, business, corporation, association or other entity who or which violates this section or whose agents or employees violate this section more than once shall have his or its beer license or consent to a state liquor license permanently revoked. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
3.08.170 Revocation Or Suspension
Violations Related To Operation Of Business: The city council may, after a hearing, revoke or suspend any beer license on a finding by it that the licensee or his officers, agents or employees have violated any provision of this chapter or any ordinance of the city whether now or hereafter enacted which in any way relates to the operation of the business or the safety of the public.
Hearing: A hearing may be requested by any person:
That is denied or refused a beer license by any officer, agent or employee of the city.
Whose beer license is revoked, restricted, qualified, or limited from that for which it was first issued.
Request For Hearing: The request for hearing must be made in writing to the mayor or city recorder and made within thirty (30) days following the date notice denying, refusing, revoking, qualifying, restricting or revoking the beer license is mailed by the city to the applicant or license holder at his address as it appears on the application or license.
Notification Of Hearing: Following receipt of a request for hearing, the city council shall inform the person requesting a hearing of the time and place the hearing is to be held. At the hearing, the aggrieved party shall have the right to hear and examine any witnesses the city may produce to support its decision and to present his own evidence in support of his contention. The city council shall, within ten (10) days following the conclusion of the hearing, in writing, inform the person who requested the hearing of the decision of the city council. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
No More Than One Hearing: This section shall not be construed so as to afford any aggrieved party more than one hearing before the city council nor shall the hearing provided in this chapter apply to any criminal complaint or proceeding. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
3.08.180 Penalty
Sales Without License: It shall be a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, for any person to engage in the business of selling beer at retail, in bottles or draft, without first having procured a license therefor from the city council and paid the license fee required by this chapter.
Sales After Revocation Of License: It shall be a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, for any person to sell beer after the revocation of the license issued pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
3.12 SALES AND USE TAX
3.12.010 Title
3.12.020 Purpose
3.12.030 Tax Imposed
3.12.040 Penalty

3.12.010 Title
This Chapter shall be known as the SALES AND USE TAX ORDINANCE OF THE CITY OF EPHRAIM. (Ord. 90-1, 1-3-1990, eff. retroactive to 1-1-1990)

3.12.020 Purpose
Authorization Of Tax: The Forty Eighth Session of the Utah Legislature authorized the counties and municipalities of the State of Utah to enact sales and use tax ordinances imposing a one percent (1%) tax.
Tax Established: It is the purpose of this Chapter to conform the sales and use tax of the City to the requirements of the Sales and Use Tax Act, Utah Code 59-12, as currently amended. (Ord. 90-1, 1-3-1990, eff. retroactive to 1-1-1990)
3.12.030 Tax Imposed
From and after the effective date hereof, there is levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of tangible personal property, services and meals made within the City at the rate of one percent (1%).
An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in the City of tangible personal property from any retailer on or after the operative date hereof at the rate of one percent (1%) of the sales price of the property. (Ord. 90-1, 1-3-1990, eff. retroactive to 1-1-1990)
3.12.040 Penalty
Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof, shall be subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. (Ord. 90-1, 1-3-1990, eff. retroactive to 1-1-1990; amd. 1998 Code)

3.16 HIGHWAYS TAX
3.16.010 Established
3.16.020 Compliance With State Provisions
3.16.030 Use Of Tax
3.16.040 Method Of Collection

3.16.010 Established
There is levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax upon all sales and uses of tangible personal property, services, meals and any and all other sales and services described is Utah Code § 59-12-103(1), within the City at the rate of one-fourth (1/4) of one percent (1%).
For the purpose of this Chapter, all retail sales shall be presumed to have been consummated at the place of business delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-State destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-State destination. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed by and adopted by the State Tax Commission. Public utilities as defined by Utah Code Title 54, shall not be obligated to determine the place or places within any county or municipality where public utilities services are rendered, but the place of sale or the sales tax revenue arising from such service allocable to the City shall be as determined by the State Tax Commission pursuant to an appropriate formula and other rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it. (Ord. 1998-6, 7-15-1998, eff. 8-1-1998)
3.16.020 Compliance With State Provisions
Except as hereinafter provided and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of the Sales and Use Tax Act, all provisions of Utah Code 59-12, as amended, and in force and affect on the effective date hereof, insofar as they relate to sales taxes, excepting Utah Code §§ 59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, are adopted and made a part of this Chapter as though fully set forth herein. (Ord. 1998-6, 7-15-1998, eff. 8-1-1998)

3.16.030 Use Of Tax
The tax imposed and collected under this Chapter shall be used for construction and maintenance of highways, roads, streets and public ways under the jurisdiction of the City. (Ord. 1998-6, 7-15-1998, eff. 8-1-1998)

3.16.040 Method Of Collection
As provided in Utah Code § 59-12-1002, the tax imposed by this Chapter shall be collected, disbursed and transmitted as provided in that section and administered under the conditions and provisions for collection, disbursement and distribution as provided therein. (Ord. 1998-6, 7-15-1998, eff. 8-1-1998)

3.20 SPECIAL IMPROVEMENT TAXES
3.20.010 Purpose
3.20.020 Delinquency; Notice Of Sale
3.20.030 Fees, Costs And Interest
3.20.040 Minimum Sale Price
3.20.050 Sale
3.20.060 Tax Sale Record
3.20.070 Certificate Of Sale
3.20.080 Sale To City
3.20.090 General Taxes On Delinquent Property
3.20.100 Redemption
3.20.110 Tax Deed
3.20.120 Sale After Deed
3.20.130 Special Improvement Guaranty Fund

3.20.010 Purpose
It is the purpose of this Chapter to supplement and provide details necessary to implement the powers and procedures whereby the City may levy, assess and collect special taxes for special improvements under the provisions of the Utah Municipal Improvement District Act, Utah Code § 17 A-3-301 et seq. (1983 Code § 6-211)

3.20.020 Delinquency; Notice Of Sale
After the date of delinquency, as fixed in the levy and notice of tax adopted by the City Council in connection with the creation of a special improvement district and the levy of taxes necessary to pay for the project, the City Treasurer shall proceed to make up a list of all property upon which the special tax remains due and unpaid and cause the same to be published at least once in some newspaper having general circulation in the City at least ten (10) days prior to the date of sale. The delinquency list shall contain a description of the property delinquent according to lots, blocks, or parcels, together with the owner's name or names, if known, and if not known, in lieu thereof, the words "unknown owner" with the amount of taxes due on each separate parcel exclusive of costs, and shall be accompanied by a notice of sale, which shall be on file in the City Treasurer's office. (1983 Code§ 6-212; amd. 1998 Code)

3.20.030 Fees, Costs And Interest
Costs Of Advertising: The City Treasurer shall tax against each parcel of land advertised as delinquent the actual amount for the cost of advertising the delinquency and shall, after the first publication, in all instances of payment, collect such amount in addition to the tax. (1983 Code § 6-213; amd. 1998 Code) 
Expense Of Sale: In case of a sale of any land for special taxes, the City Treasurer shall add to the amount of tax and costs of advertising, the further sum of twenty five dollars ($25.00) as the expense of sale and shall, in all instances of sale or redemption, collect such sum. (1983 Code § 6-214; amd. 1998 Code) 
Certificates Issued: The City Treasurer shall collect a fee of twenty five dollars ($25.00) for each certificate issued, which fee shall be paid into the Treasury. (1983 Code § 6-217; amd. 1998 Code) 
Interest: Interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per year shall be charged on the special tax due from the date of delinquency until date of sale and interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per year shall be charged on the full amount for which the property was sold from the date of sale. (1983 Code § 6-218)
3.20.040 Minimum Sale Price
In no case shall lands advertised for sale for delinquent special taxes be sold for less than the amount of such special taxes, interest, the cost of advertising, and expense of sale. (1983 Code § 6-215)

3.20.050 Sale
Conducted; Offer: On the day fixed for the sale, the City Treasurer, in person or by deputy, shall appear at the hour and place named in the notice of sale and at public auction, and there offer to the highest responsible bidder sufficient of the delinquent real estate for a sum sufficient to pay the taxes, interest and costs. The offer of sale shall be substantially in the following language:

There is delinquent upon ____ (here describe the piece of property as in the notice) special taxes amounting to _____ dollars with interest, costs, and expenses of ______ dollars. What is the smallest portion of this property which you will take and pay the taxes, interest, costs, and expenses?
Not Concluded; Continued: If the sale is not concluded by four o'clock (4:00) P.M. of the day advertised it may be, by the City Treasurer, continued until twelve o'clock (12:00) noon of the next succeeding business day and thereafter in the same manner proceeded with and continued until completed. (1983 Code § 6-216)
3.20.060 Tax Sale Record
Contents Required: The City Treasurer shall make a record of all sales of real property in a book to be kept by him for that purpose. The record shall be kept substantially in the same order as that for which the property was advertised for sale, but shall list, as applicable, in separate columns, a description of the property, the amount of the tax, interest, costs, expenses, how much of what part of each tract was sold, by whom purchased, the date of sale, and the date of redemption. 
Filing: At the end of each calendar year, the book shall be endorsed " __ __ __ City Treasurer, Special Tax Sale Record for the Year 19 __ ", and it shall then be filed in his office. Whenever thereafter any portion of property so sold shall be redeemed, the fact of redemption shall be entered by the City Treasurer opposite the description of the property in the tax sale record. At the expiration of three (3) years from the date of filing in his office, the City Treasurer shall file each yearly tax sale record in the office of the City Recorder. (1983 Code § 6-219)
3.20.070 Certificate Of Sale
When real estate is sold for special taxes, the City Treasurer shall make out, sign, acknowledge, and deliver a certificate of sale which shall recite the facts of sale as in the tax sale record, and what payment has been made therefor, and which certificate shall be in such form as is on file in the office of the City Treasurer. (1983 Code § 6-220; amd. 1998 Code)

3.20.080 Sale To City
Conditions: Where no bid at least equal to the amount of the tax, interest, cost of advertising and expenses of sale on each separate parcel is received as each separate parcel is offered for sale, the City shall be deemed to have bid for such property, and the property shall be sold by the City Treasurer to the City for the amount of the tax, interest, cost of advertising and expense of sale. The sale shall have the same effect as if made to an individual. The City Recorder shall draw a check or warrant on the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund for which the special tax was levied in the amount necessary. (1983 Code § 6-222) 
Certificate: When property is sold to the City for special taxes, the City Treasurer shall make out, sign, acknowledge and deliver the certificate of sale described in ECC 3.20.070 to the City Recorder, whose duty it shall be to see that such certificate is properly recorded in the office of the County Recorder, and it shall thereafter be kept as a part of the records of the City Recorder's office. (1983 Code § 6-221)
3.20.090 General Taxes On Delinquent Property
Request For Appropriation: Between November 15 and December 15 in each year, the City Recorder shall ascertain, by examination of the County records, which, if any, of the property sold to the City is delinquent and about to be sold for general taxes, and report the property and the amount of taxes in each instance to the City Council, with the request that the amount thereof be appropriated to the County. 
Warrant: It shall be the duty of the City Council to appropriate the amount recommended by the City Recorder. The City Treasurer shall thereon draw a warrant in favor of the County for the total sum of such delinquent taxes, and the City Recorder shall deliver the warrant to the County Treasurer, taking duplicate receipts therefor for each separate piece or parcel of property upon which the general taxes are thus paid. The City Recorder shall thereon deliver one of each such receipts to the City Treasurer and file and attach the other to the corresponding certificate of sale in his office. 
Records: On receiving such receipt, the City Treasurer shall make entry on his tax sale record, opposite the corresponding property, of the date and amount of taxes paid. Such taxes shall thereafter draw interest at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum, and shall be included in the amount required to be paid for redemption of such property. (1983 Code § 6-223)
3.20.100 Redemption
Conditions: Real estate sold for special taxes may be redeemed by any person interested therein, at any time within three (3) years after the date of the sale thereof, by such person paying to the City Treasurer, for the use of the purchaser or his legal representative, the amount paid by such purchaser and all costs and expenses, including the cost of the certificate of sale, together with the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for the redemption certificate, and all special taxes that have been accrued thereon and which have been paid by the purchaser after his purchase to the time of redemption, together with interest at the rate of one percent (1%) per month on the whole from the date of payment to the date of redemption; provided, that: (1983 Code § 6-224; amd. 1998 Code) 
In all cases where property has been sold to the City, and general taxes thereon have been thereafter paid by the City, it shall be necessary for a redemptioner to pay the amount of such general taxes, so paid as aforesaid, with interest thereon from the date of payment to the date of redemption, at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum; and (1983 Code § 6-224) 
When two (2) or more parties are interested in a piece of property which has been sold for taxes, either party may redeem the property in which he is interested, upon payment of that proportion of the taxes, interest and costs which his property bears to the whole property sold, together with the sum of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for a redemption certificate. (1983 Code § 6-224; amd. 1998 Code) 
Installment Redemption: 
Any property sold to the City, on which tax sale certificates have been issued but for which no tax deed has issued to the City, may be redeemed by any person having an interest in such property on the payment in installments of the unpaid principal, interest and all costs and charges; provided, that the installments shall be paid within such time and in such amounts as will discharge the indebtedness within the period in which the right to redeem from such tax sale shall expire.
Credit shall be given for each installment as paid, and the interest shall be reduced proportionately. 
Interest shall be paid at the rate of ten percent (10%) per annum on the unpaid balance due under this paragraph. 
There is hereby imposed the sum of one dollar ($1.00) per installment payment to cover the additional bookkeeping expenses incurred by any person taking advantage of this paragraph, and such charge shall not be credited against the delinquent assessment. (1983 Code § 6-225) 
Every person who takes advantage of this paragraph shall enter into an agreement with the City, which shall be in such form as is on file in the office of the City Treasurer. (1983 Code § 6-225; amd. 1998 Code) 
Certificate: The City Treasurer shall, when any property is fully redeemed, make the proper entry in the tax sale record file in his office, and issue a certificate of redemption, which certificate shall be by him acknowledged, and which entry or certificate shall be prima facie evidence of such redemption. (1983 Code § 6-226) 
Notice: In all cases where property sold to the City is fully redeemed, the City Treasurer shall issue a formal notice of such redemption in writing and file the same with the City Recorder, whose duty it shall be to attach such notice to the corresponding certificate of sale on file in his office, and endorse on the filing face of such certificate in red ink the word "REDEEMED" and the date of redemption. (1983 Code § 6-227)
3.20.110 Tax Deed
Issued: If any property sold as aforesaid is not fully redeemed within the time and in the manner in this Chapter provided, on the deposit of the tax sale record for the year in which the property was sold by the City Treasurer with the City Recorder, the City Recorder shall, on presentation of the City Treasurer's certificate of sale, make and acknowledge a deed conveying the property therein described to the purchaser, his heirs, or assigns, as the case may be. If any person shall be entitled to receive deeds for more than one parcel of property, he may have the whole included in one deed, but each parcel shall be separately described. In January of each year, or as soon thereafter as the business of the office will permit, the City Recorder shall make and acknowledge a deed, conveying to the City all property purchased in the name of the City at special tax sale not theretofore redeemed, as in this Chapter provided, shall see that such deeds are properly recorded in the office of the County Recorder, and shall keep such deeds on file in his office for the benefit of the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund. 
Contents: Deeds issued by the City Recorder in pursuance of the provisions of this Chapter shall recite in substance the amount of tax for which the property was sold, the particular purpose of the tax levied, the year in which the levy was made, the day and year of sale, the amount for which the real estate was sold, a description of the property sold, in accordance with the certificate of sale, the name of the purchaser or the purchaser's assignee, and shall be executed by the City Recorder on behalf of the City, and by him acknowledged so as to be entitled to record. (1983 Code § 6-228) 
Records Maintained: The City Recorder shall keep on file in his office a record of all tax deeds issued by him, which shall be a photocopy of the deeds so issued by him, and which shall be indexed in the name of the party whose property was sold for taxes, and also in the name of the individual to whom the tax deed was issued. (1983 Code § 6-229) 
Fee: The City Recorder shall collect four dollars ($4.00) for each deed issued, for the first description of property contained in such deed, and for each additional description of property in such deed, and shall pay such fees monthly into the Treasury. However, in cases where the City is the tax sale purchaser, no fee shall be collected. (1983 Code § 6-230)
3.20.120 Sale After Deed
Whenever property sold for special taxes and purchased by the City shall not have been redeemed within the time specified, but shall have been conveyed to the City by recorder's deed, and which shall not have been sold by the City, such property may thereafter be purchased by the prior owner, his heirs, personal representative or assigns, or any other person, upon petition therefor addressed to the City Council and upon such terms as the City Council may determine. The proceeds of such purchase shall be paid into the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund; provided however, that nothing contained in this Section shall prevent the City from selling any property conveyed to it by recorder's deed to any person at any time after such conveyance is made. (1983 Code § 6-231)

3.20.130 Special Improvement Guaranty Fund
Created: There is hereby created a special fund to be known as the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund, which Fund shall be used for the purpose of guaranteeing to the extent of the Fund the payment of special improvement bonds or special improvement warrants and interest thereon, theretofore or thereafter issued against the local improvement districts for the payment of local improvements therein and for the purchase of property sold to the City at tax sales or under foreclosure for delinquent special improvement taxes. (1983 Code § 6-301) 
Maintenance Of Fund: The City Council shall create and maintain the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund by appropriations from the General Fund, by the levy of a tax not to exceed one mill in any one year, by the issuance of general obligation bonds, or by appropriation from such other sources as may be determined by the City Council to provide the money necessary for that purpose. The Fund shall be held by the City Treasurer and shall be kept by him separate and apart from all other funds held by him. Payments out of the Fund shall be made only by checks drawn by the City Recorder. (1983 Code § 6-302) 
Interest And Penalties: All excess charges and penalties collected by the City Treasurer for the benefit or credit of any special improvement fund and remaining on hand after all the bonds or warrants, together with interest thereon, drawn against the special improvement fund shall have been fully paid and cancelled, shall be transferred by the City Recorder to the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund. (1983 Code § 6-303) 
Payment Of Bonds Or Warrants: When any bond, warrant, or coupon drawn against any special improvement fund is presented to the City Treasurer for payment and there is not a sufficient amount in the special improvement fund against which it is drawn, payment therefor shall be made by warrant drawn by the City Recorder against the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund (unless otherwise requested by the holder). (1983 Code § 6-304) 
Replenishment Of Fund: Whenever there is not a sufficient amount of cash in the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund at any time to make any and all purchases of property bid in by the City at sales of property for delinquent special improvement taxes, the City Council shall replenish the Special Improvement Guaranty Fund by transfer or appropriation from the General Fund or other available sources as may be determined by the City Council. (1983 Code § 6-305) 
City Recorder To Issue Warrants: Warrants drawing interest at rate not to exceed eight percent (8%) per annum may be issued by the City Recorder against the Fund to meet any financial liabilities accruing against it. At the time of making its annual tax levy, the City Council shall provide for the levy of a sum sufficient with the other resources of the Fund to pay warrants so issued and outstanding, the tax for this purpose not to exceed one mill in any one year. (1983 Code § 6-306) 
Subrogation Of City: Whenever the City shall have paid under its guaranty any sum on account of principal or interest on the bonds or warrants of any district, it shall be subrogated to the rights of the holders of such bonds or warrants or interest coupons so paid, and such bonds or warrants or coupons, and the proceeds thereof, shall become a part of the Guaranty Fund. (1983 Code § 6-307)
3.24 SOLICITORS, CANVASSERS, PEDDLERS AND ITINERANT MERCHANTS
3.24.010 Definitions - Solicitors, Canvassers, Peddlers And Itinerant Merchants
3.24.020 License Required
3.24.030 Application For License; Fee
3.24.040 Investigation And Issuance Of License
3.24.050 Licenses And Badges
3.24.060 Notice Of Revocation
3.24.070 Revocation After Hearing
3.24.080 Appeal
3.24.090 Additional Requirements
3.24.100 Exceptions

3.24.010 Definitions - Solicitors, Canvassers, Peddlers And Itinerant Merchants
CANVASSER OR SOLICITOR: Any individual traveling either by foot, wagon, motor vehicle or other type of conveyance from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, taking or attempting to take orders for the sale of goods, wares and merchandise, personal property of any nature whatsoever for future delivery, or for services to be furnished or performed in the future, whether or not such individual has, carries, or exposes for sale a sample of the subject of such sale, or whether he is collecting advance payments on such sales; provided, that such definition shall include any person who, for himself, or for another person, firm or corporation, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, tent, railroad boxcar, hotel or motel room, lodging house, apartment, shop or any other place within the City for the sole purpose of exhibiting samples and taking orders for future delivery.

PEDDLER: Shall include any person, traveling by foot, wagon, motor vehicle, or any other type of conveyance, from place to place, from house to house, or from street to street, carrying, conveying or transporting goods, wares, merchandise, meats, fish, vegetables, fruits, garden truck, farm products or provisions, offering and exposing the same for sale, or making sales and delivering articles to purchasers, or who, without traveling from place to place, shall see or offer the same for sale from a wagon, motor vehicle, railroad car, or other vehicle or conveyance; and further provided, that one who solicits orders and as a separate transaction makes deliveries to purchasers as part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed a peddler subject to the provisions of this Chapter. The word "peddler" shall include the words "hawker" and "huckster".

TRANSIENT MERCHANT, ITINERANT MERCHANT OR ITINERANT VENDOR: Any person, firm or corporation, whether as owner, agent, cosignee or employee, who engages in a temporary business of selling and delivering goods, wares and merchandise within the City, and who in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, motor vehicle, tent, railroad boxcar, public room in any hotel, motel, lodging house, apartment, shop or any street, alley, or other place within the City, for the exhibition and sale of such goods, wares and merchandise, either privately or a public auction. The person, firm or corporation so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this Chapter merely by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with, as a part of, or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)

3.24.020 License Required
 It shall be unlawful for: 

Transient Merchant, Itinerant Merchant Or Vendor: A transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor to engage in such business without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995) 
Peddler: Any person to engage in the business of peddler without first obtaining a license therefor as provided in this chapter. 
Solicitor Or Canvasser: Any solicitor or canvasser to engage in such business without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995; amd. 1998 Code)
3.24.030 Application For License; Fee
Required; Contents: No business shall be conducted without first making application and obtaining a license. Applicants for licenses to conduct business as a solicitor, canvasser, peddler or itinerant merchant shall provide the following information to the city recorder: 
The name of the applicant and if the applicant is an employee or agent of a corporation, the name of the corporation. 
The address of the applicant and if the applicant is an agent or employee of a corporation, the address of the corporation. 
A brief description of the nature of the business and the goods to be sold and from whom or where the applicant obtains the goods to be sold. 
If the applicant is employed by or an agent of another person, the name and permanent address of such other person or persons. 
The length of time for which the applicant desires to engage in business within the city. 
The place or places within the city where the applicant proposes to carry on his or her business. 
A list of the other municipalities in which the applicant has engaged in business within the six (6) month period preceding the date of the application. (Ord. 2002-3, 5-10-2002)
A statement as to whether or not the applicant, or any of his employers have been convicted of any crime, misdemeanor or violation of any municipal ordinance, the nature of the offense and the punishment or penalty assessed therefore. 
If the applicant is employed by another person, firm or corporation, documents showing that the person, firm or corporation for which the applicant proposes to do business is authorized to do business within the state. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995) 
The applicant must show a Utah state special events sales tax (number and a completed special events tax form for the day and/or days of the requested license period prior to receiving said license. (Ord. 2002-3, 5-10-2002) 
Fee: At the time of filing the application, a fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each day, which shall be deposited with the city recorder, is required. (Ord. 10-4-95, 10-4-1995)
3.24.040 Investigation And Issuance Of License
Referral To Chief Of Police: On receiving the application, the city recorder shall refer it to the chief of police, who shall cause such investigation of the applicant's business and moral character to be made as he deems reasonable and necessary for the protection of the public good. 
Unsatisfactory Result Of Investigation: If, as a result of the investigation, the applicant's character or business responsibility is found to be unsatisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse such upon the application, together with a statement of his reasons therefor, and return the application to the city recorder who shall notify the applicant that his application has been disapproved and that no permit and license will be issued. 
Satisfactory Result Of Investigation: If, as a result of such investigation, the character and business responsibility of the applicant is found to be satisfactory, the chief of police shall endorse such upon the application and return it to the city recorder who shall, upon payment of the prescribed license fee, deliver to the applicant his permit and issue a license. Such license shall contain the signature of the issuing officer and shall show the name, address and photograph of the licensee and the kind of goods to be sold pursuant to the application together with an expiration date. (1983 Code § 9-454)
3.24.050 Licenses And Badges
Issuance: The City Recorder shall issue to each licensee at the time of delivery of his license, a badge which shall contain the words "Licensed Solicitor", "Licensed Transient Merchant", or "Licensed Peddler", as the case may be, for which the application was made and the license issued, and the number of the license, in letters and figures easily discernible from a distance of five feet (5'). Such badge shall, during the time peddlers or solicitors are engaged in the business for which they are licensed, be worn constantly by them on the front of their outer garment in such a way as to be conspicuous. 
Exhibit License: Any person licensed pursuant to this Chapter shall exhibit such license at the request of any citizen of the City. 
Produce License Upon Request: It shall be the duty of any peace officer of the City to require any person seen soliciting, canvassing or peddling, and who is not known by such officer to be duly licensed, to produce his or her license and to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. 
Expiration Of License: All licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter shall expire on the date specified on the license. (1983 Code § 9-456)
3.24.060 Notice Of Revocation
Notice of the hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of complaint and the time and place of hearing. Such notice shall be mailed, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last known address or at the address shown on his application. The hearing and notice shall in all other aspects substantially comply with ECC 1.32. (1983 Code § 9-456)

3.24.070 Revocation After Hearing
Permits and licenses issued pursuant to this Chapter may be revoked by the Chief of Police or the City Recorder, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 

Fraud, misrepresentation or a false statement contained in the application for the license. (1983 Code § 9-456) 
Fraud, misrepresentation for false statement made in the course of carrying on his business as solicitor, canvasser, peddler or itinerant merchant. (1983 Code § 9-456; amd. 1998 Code) 
Any violation of this Chapter. 
Conviction of any crime or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude. (1983 Code § 9-456) 
Conducting the business of a solicitor, canvasser, peddler or itinerant merchant in an unlawful manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. (1983 Code § 9-456; amd. 1998 Code)
3.24.080 Appeal
Any person aggrieved by the action of the Chief of Police or the City Recorder in the denial of a permit or a license issued pursuant to this Chapter, or by the action of the City Council, may file an appeal. Such appeal shall be taken by filing with the City Council within fourteen (14) days after notice of the action complained of has been mailed to such person's last known address or address on the business application, a written statement setting forth fully the grounds for the appeal. A time and place for the hearing on such appeal and notice of such hearing shall be set and given to the applicant in the same manner as provided in ECC 3.24.060. (1983 Code § 9-456)

3.24.090 Additional Requirements
This Chapter shall not be construed so as to waive the provisions and requirements of any other ordinance of the City and the requirements and fees required herein shall be in addition to any other requirements and fees of any other ordinance of the City. (1983 Code § 9-457)

3.24.100 Exceptions
The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any individual who is, at the time he is engaged in any activity which would otherwise require licensing by this Chapter, engaged in an activity which is authorized by any church or charity which has a permanent structure located within the State, provided such church or charity has had such permanent structure for at least six (6) months prior to the date when the individual engaged in the activity would otherwise require licensing by this Chapter. (1983 Code § 9-458)

3.28 PAWNBROKERS
3.28.010 Definition Of Pawnbroker
3.28.020 License Required; Fee
3.28.030 Bond Required
3.28.040 Disclosure Provisions
3.28.050 Record Keeping And Access To Records
3.28.060 Rules And Regulations
3.28.070 Computer Reporting; Authority

3.28.010 Definition Of Pawnbroker
Pawnbroker is defined to be any person who loans money or deal in the purchase or exchange of personal property, on condition of selling the same back again to the pledger or depositor; or who loans or advances money on personal property or other indicia of title into his possession; or any person who sells unredeemed pledges with or without the contemporary sale of new merchandise to facilitate the sale of merchandise. (Ord. 4-7-93, 4-7-1993) 

3.28.020 License Required; Fee
It shall be unlawful for any person to be in the business of pawnbroker in the incorporated areas of the City, without having previously obtained a license to operate as a pawnbroker in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter. The license fee for pawnbroker shall be as established by resolution of the City Council. The license, after being issued, shall be displayed prominently in the place of business and a copy of all ordinances pertaining to the conduct of transaction of pawnbroker business, shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the place of business with the pawnbroker. The fee provided above shall be in addition to any other fee or charge required by this Code. (Ord. 4-7-93, 4-7-1993; amd. 1998 Code)

3.28.030 Bond Required
Before any license shall be issued to a pawnbroker under the provisions of this Chapter, the applicant for the license shall execute and deliver to the City a bond in the principal amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) executed by a corporate surety authorized to do business in the State, and conditioned upon the faithful performance of the licensee of all requirements under this Chapter. (Ord. 4-7-93, 4-7-1993)

3.28.040 Disclosure Provisions
Records; Contents: All pawnbrokers shall keep a complete ledger-type record containing an account of each and every transaction concerning the buying, selling, pawning and redemption of articles, which record shall be written in the English language in legible printing at the time of the receipt, loan, purchase, sale or redemption, and shall set forth the following information: 
The date and time; 
The name, date and birth, and full description of the pledgor or seller, with his street address, city and state of residence. The name, date of birth and description of the seller or pledger shall be taken from the type of identification card containing his or her photograph. The type of identification card used for this purpose, together with the identifying numbers thereon shall be noted on the form. If the property is jointly owned, information for both owners must be given as described above in this paragraph; 
An accurate description of the goods, articles or things pawned purchase, including the serial number, model number, name of the manufacturer, and dimensional description (e.g. Zenith color TV, 23-inch, Model No. __ __, Serial No. __ __; 
The amount of money loaned or advanced thereon or paid therefor; 
The date and hour of the transaction, and in the case of the items pawned, the period of time within which the pledge must be honored; 
The right thumbprint of the pledger or seller; 
 The number of the pawn ticket.
Pawn Ticket: The pawnbroker shall make out, in connection with each article pawned, purchased, or received pursuant to a transaction of any nature, a serially numbered pawn ticket. (Ord. 4-7-93, 4-7-1993) 
Multiple Copies; Distribution: Each ticket shall be issued in multiple copies so that one copy can be retained by the pawnbroker, one copy referred to the person delivering the article, one copy at the close of each week (Friday) or as often as the City requests, mailed by the pawnbroker to the Police Department of the City. It shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, for the pawnbroker to issue any pawn tickets which are not serially numbered in sequence as shown in the ledger book in paragraph A, or to intentionally falsify any information on either the ledger or a three (3) part ticket. The copies delivered to the City Police Department shall be clear, legible, and shall contain all signatures. It shall be unlawful and a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, for any pawnbroker, whether acting for himself or acting by or through any agent or employee, to transact any business with respect to a pawn, redemption, purchase, sale, consignment, or any other transaction of goods, other than in conformance with the requirements set forth. (Ord. 4-7-93, 4-7-1993; amd. 1998 Code)
3.28.050 Record Keeping And Access To Records
Inspection: All records of pawnbrokers shall be open to inspection by any category one peace officer at any time. The category one peace officer shall also be permitted to have access to the premises licensed under this Chapter for the purpose of the inspection of such premises during normal business hours. 
Retention Of Goods: If requested to do so by a category one peace officer, all goods, articles, or things pawned, pledged, sold, or delivered to such dealer must be retained and held until released by the category one peace officer's agency or delivered to the peace officer to be placed in evidence if requested. (Ord. 4-7-93, 4-7-1993)
3.28.060 Rules And Regulations
Hours: It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive any goods by way of pawn or pledge, or to keep his place of business open before the hour of seven o'clock (7:00) A.M. or after seven o'clock (7:00) P.M.; provided however, that on Saturday of each week and on days preceding legal Federal holidays, and the last fifteen (15) days of December of each year, it shall be lawful for said pawnbroker to keep his place of business open until ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. 
Protection Of Minors: It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to sell or trade any gun, knife with a blade in excess of four inches (4") long to any person under the age of eighteen (18) years of age, unless the said person is accompanied by their legal guardian or parent. 
Dealing With Proscribed Persons: It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive any goods, articles or things in pawn, in pledge or to loan or allow to be redeemed any article by any person who at the time of the transaction is intoxicated or who is known to be a habitual drunkard; or any person who is known to be a thief, insane or incompetent. (Ord. 4-7-93, 4-7-1993) 
Ownership Of Pawned Property:
It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to accept goods or articles in pawn from other than the lawful owner thereof, except with written permission of the owner. Any articles pawned by other than the owner, taken by a pawnbroker, shall be surrendered to the owner thereof upon presentation of proof of ownership of the pawned article by the owner, and failure of a pawnbroker to surrender such materials forthwith upon demand by the true owner, and after exhibition of proof of ownership, shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. (Ord. 4-7-93, 4-7-1993; amd. 1998 Code) 
This provision shall apply to outright purchases and all other applicable transactions of any nature. (Ord. 4-7-93, 4-7-1993) 
Stolen Goods Report: It shall be the duty of every pawnbroker to report to the Police Department any article pledged with or sold, or which it is sought to be pledged with him or sold, if he shall have reason to believe that the article was stolen or lost or found by the person attempting to pledge it, or sell it in the case of a lost article. (Ord. 4-7-93, 4-7-1993; amd. 1998 Code) 
Location Restriction Regarding Alcoholic Beverages: It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker to contain his pawnbroking business in the same room, or in the same building with interconnected rooms with any business dealing in alcoholic beverages.
Liability Of Principal: The holder of a pawnbrokers license is liable for any and all acts of his employees in violation of this Chapter. (Ord. 4-7-93, 4-7-1993)
3.28.070 Computer Reporting; Authority
The Police Department is authorized to transfer the information received pursuant to this Chapter into a computer information system and report the information in such form as the Police Department may determine is useful in law enforcement purposes. (Ord. 4-7-93, 4-7-1993; amd. 1998 Code)

3.32 UTILITY LICENSE FEE
3.32.010 Definitions - Utility License Fee
3.32.020 Fee Levied
3.32.030 Report And Payment Of Fee

3.32.010 Definitions - Utility License Fee
GROSS REVENUE: Shall be construed to mean the revenue derived from the sale and use of public utility services within the City; provided, that gross revenue as applied to the telephone utility shall be construed to mean basic local exchange services revenue received from subscribers located within the City and directly connected with the switchboards of said utility located within the City.

PUBLIC UTILITY SERVICES: The scale and use of electric power and energy, natural gas and all other heating fuels (coal, propane, oil), and local exchange telephone services. (Ord. 6-16-93, 6-16-1993)

3.32.020 Fee Levied
Utilities: There is hereby levied upon the business of every person or company engaged in business in the City of supplying telephone, gas, electric energy service, and all other heating fuels (coal, propane, oil) as public utilities or services, a license fee equal to six percent (6%) of gross revenue derived from the sale and use of the services of said utilities delivered beginning and including August 1, 1993, within the corporation limits of the City. 
Competitors: There is hereby levied upon the business of every person or company engaged in business in the City of supplying telephone, gas, electric energy service, and all other heating fuels (coal, propane, oil) in competition with public utilities, a license fee of six percent (6%) of the gross revenue derived from the sale and use of the services of said utilities delivered beginning and including August 1, 1993, within the corporate limits of the City. (Ord. 6-16-93, 6-16-1993)
3.32.030 Report And Payment Of Fee
Within forty five (45) days after the close of each month in a calendar year, any public utility charged hereunder shall file with the City Treasurer, a report of its gross revenue derived from the sale and use of public utility service during said month in the City as defined herein, together with a computation of the fee levied hereunder against the utility. Coincidental with the filing of such report, the utility shall pay to the City Treasurer the amount of the fee. (Ord. 6-16-93, 6-16-1993)

3.36 LANDLORD REGISTRY LICENSE
3.36.010 Definitions - Landlord Registry License
3.36.020 License Required
3.36.030 Application For License
3.36.040 Fee Schedule
3.36.050 Time Schedule

3.36.010 Definitions - Landlord Registry License
DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a structure, designed for occupation by one family, individual, or group of individuals for living or sleeping purposes and may have kitchen facilities.

FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit.

LANDLORD: The owner of a dwelling unit, units or part thereof that is leased, rented or sublet.

LONG TERM: A term of not less than one year.

SHORT TERM: A term of less than one year. (Ord. 7-20-94, 7-20-1994)

3.36.020 License Required
It shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, for any person to rent, lease, or sublet any dwelling unit or part thereof without first receiving the class of type of license required by the City. Registry licenses are to be renewed annually by January 1. (Ord. 7-20-94, 7-20-1994; amd. 1998 Code) 

3.36.030 Application For License
Information Required: No occupancy shall be allowed without first making application and obtaining a license. Applications for licenses to conduct business shall provide the following information to the City Treasurer: 
The name of the applicant and if the applicant is an employee or agent of a corporation, the name of the corporation. 
The address of the applicant and if the applicant is an agent or employee of a corporation, the address of the corporation. 
A brief description of the nature of the business. 
The place or places within the City where the applicant proposes to carry on his or her business. 
Inspection: Prior to the issuance of any initial license, each place or places where the applicant proposes to carry on their business must be inspected by a City-approved official to certify the structure meets all current building and fire codes for the health, safety and welfare of said structure and occupants. 
Any dwelling unit that a person utilizes to rent, lease, or sublet on a short term basis for the purpose of gain or economic profit shall be inspected initially and every third year thereafter. 
Any dwelling unit that a person utilizes to rent, lease, or sublet on a long term basis for the purpose of gain or economic profit shall be inspected initially and every five (5) years thereafter. (Ord. 7-20-94, 7-20-1994)
3.36.040 Fee Schedule
There is levied upon the business, location, trade or calling of every person engaged in business in the City a license fee based upon the type or class of said business as set by motion or resolution of the City Council. (Ord. 7-20-94, 7-20-1994)

3.36.050 Time Schedule
All landlords that rent, lease, or sublet a dwelling unit or units or part thereof to an individual or individuals on a short-term basis must obtain the licenses for said units by September 1, 1994. 
All landlords that rent, lease, or sublet a dwelling unit or units or part thereof to a family or families on a long-term basis must obtain the licenses for said units by January 1, 1995. (Ord. 7-20-94, 7-20-1994)
3.40 CONSTRUCTION CONTRACTORS
3.40.010 Purpose
3.40.020 Definitions - Construction Contractors
3.40.030 Requirements
3.40.040 Registration To Engage In Business
3.40.050 Job License For Each Contract
3.40.060 Regulations
3.40.070 Records To Be Maintained; Inspection

3.40.010 Purpose
The purpose of this Chapter is to establish a system of imposing license fees upon persons engaging in business within the limits of the City as contractors. The licenses are designed to be determined upon the basis of each contract or job being performed. It is the opinion of the City Council that this method of determining the amount of fee will result in fair taxation and will not discriminate against the contractor who performs only a few jobs with in the City limits as distinguished from the contractor who performs many. (1983 Code § 9-431)

3.40.020 Definitions - Construction Contractors
CONTRACTOR: Any person, firm, copartnership, corporation, association, or other organization, or any combination thereof, who for a fixed sum, price, fee, percentage, or other compensation other than wages, undertakes any building, highway, road, railroad, excavation or other structure, project, development, or improvement, other than to personalty, or any part thereof; provided, that the term "contractor", as used in this Chapter, shall include anyone who builds more than one structure on his own property during any one year for the purpose of sale and shall include subcontractors, but shall not include anyone who merely furnishes materials or supplies without fabricating the same into, or consuming the same in the performance of the work of the "contractors" as herein defined.

TYPES OF CONTRACTORS: As an illustrative list of contractors subject to the provisions of this Chapter, but not in limitation thereof, the following occupations are subject to this Chapter: general contractors, specialty contractors of all kinds, such as, but not limited to those engaged in the business of installing, repairing or otherwise performing services in connection with: acoustical tile and roof decking; awnings, storm doors and windows; air conditioning, dry heating, sheet metal; boilers, steam fitting; carpentry; cement and concrete; ceramic tile; cabinet and millwork; composition floor, countertops, tile; carpet; drywall; elevator installation; electrical; excavating and grading; fencing; floor coverings; fire prevention (structural); furnaces and burners; glazing; industrial piping; iron and bronze (ornamental); insulation; landscaping; lathing; lawn sprinklers; masonry; mosaic tile and terazzo; overhead doors; painting and paper hanging; pest control (structural); plastering; plumbing and wet heating; roofing and siding; swimming pool; signs, stone masonry; sewer installation; steel reinforcing and erection; tanks (structural); waterproofing; weatherstripping; welding; wrecking and demolition; wood floor laying and finishing. (1983 Code § 9-432)

3.40.030 Requirements
Any person desiring to engage in business as a contractor within the corporate limits of the City must comply with the two (2) following requirements: 

Registration: Prior to engaging in any subject business activity during any calendar year, he must register for the calendar year as a contractor by completing and filing a registration form in the office of the City Recorder. 
License: Prior to the performance of any services in connection with any specific contract or job, the person shall secure a license to engage in the performance of service connected with said specific job or contract from the office of the City Recorder. (1983 Code § 9-433)
3.40.040 Registration To Engage In Business
Form; Information Requested: Any person desiring to engage in business as a contractor shall complete and file in the office of the City Recorder a registration form provided to him by the City which shall show: 
The name of the contractor. 
The address and telephone number of the contractor. 
The type of organization, e.g., corporation, partnership, or sole proprietor. 
If a partnership or a corporation or other artificial person, the name, address, and telephone number of the person responsible for the functions of the organization: 
Whether or not licensed under the contractor's license law of the State; if so, the license number of the contractor. 
Type of business in which registrant seeks to engage, e.g., general contractor or one of the specialty contractors. 
Such other information as the City Council may by regulation require. 
Annual Fee: Any person seeking to register for the privilege of doing business as a contractor within the limits of the City for any calendar year, or any part thereof, shall pay an annual registration fee of thirty one dollars ($31.00). (1983 Code § 9-434)
3.40.050 Job License For Each Contract
Required: Any person desiring to perform services as a contractor shall, in addition to registering, as above required, secure a job license granting to him the privilege of performing the services required of him for each contract or job which he proposes to complete. 
Form; Information Requested: Any person seeking said job license for a contractor job shall complete an application therefor, on forms provided him by the City. The application shall set forth: 
The name and address of the contractor. 
His City registration number. 
The number of his State contractor's license. 
The person by whom he is engaged to perform services as a contractor. 
The address of said person. 
The location at which the said contractor's services are to be performed. 
The type of services that are to be performed, e.g., as a general contractor, as one of the specialty contractors. 
The contract amount. (1983 Code § 9-435)
3.40.060 Regulations
The City Council may adopt such regulations as in its opinion are necessary to implement this Chapter and the objectives thereof. (1983 Code § 9-438)

3.40.070 Records To Be Maintained; Inspection
All persons registered pursuant to this Chapter for the privilege of doing business as contractors, and all persons who engage in doing business as contractors, shall maintain records of all services performed by them as contractors within the corporate limits of the City. The records shall disclose the person for whom the services are performed and the contract price or charge made for the services and such other information as the City Council may, by regulation, require. The persons shall maintain such records at their office or principal place of business and shall permit officials or agents of the City to inspect said records for the purpose of determining whether or not said persons have complied with the requirements of this Chapter. (1983 Code § 9-437)

3.44 CIGARETTE AND TOBACCO SALES
3.44.010 Definitions - Cigarette And Tobacco Sales
3.44.020 License Required; Exception
3.44.030 Application
3.44.040 Fee For License
3.44.050 Bond Required
3.44.060 Rules And Regulations
3.44.070 Penalty

3.44.010 Definitions - Cigarette And Tobacco Sales
BUSINESS: Any sole proprietorship, joint venture, corporation or other business entity formed for profit making, or not profit making purposes, including retail establishments where goods or services are sold as well as professional corporations and other entities where legal, medical, dental, engineering, architectural or other professional services are delivered.

EMPLOYEE: Any person who is employed by any employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and any person who volunteers his or her services for a nonprofit entity.

EMPLOYER: Any person, partnership, corporation, including a municipal corporation or nonprofit entity, who employs the services of one or more individual persons.

MINOR: For the purpose of this Chapter only, shall mean any individual who is less than nineteen (19) years old.

PERSON: Any individual, partnership, cooperative association, private corporation, personal representative, receiver, trustee, assignee or any other legal entity.

PLACE OF BUSINESS: Any and all places such as shops, stores, factories, public garages, offices, theaters, recreation and dance halls, pool rooms, cafes, cafeterias, cabarets, restaurants, hotels, lodging houses, buses and waiting rooms.

RETAIL TOBACCO STORE: A retail store utilized primarily for the sale of tobacco products and accessories and in which the sale of other products is merely incidental. 

RETAILER: A person who owns or is responsible for supervising the day-to-day operation of a business where tobacco products are displayed or otherwise offered for sale.

SELF-SERVICE MERCHANDISING: Open display of tobacco products and point of sale tobacco promotional products to which the public has access without the intervention of an employee.

TOBACCO PRODUCT: Any tobacco cigarette, cigar, pipe tobacco, smokeless tobacco, snuff or any other form of tobacco that may be utilized for smoking, chewing, inhaling or other manner of ingestion.

VENDOR-ASSISTED MERCHANDISING: 

The retailer restricts or ensures the restriction of access to tobacco products by placing or displaying the products in a manner so that only an employee of the business has access to the tobacco products; and 
Customers do not have direct access to the tobacco products, so that business employees must assist customers by supplying the tobacco product to the customers; and 
Customers do not take possession of the product until it is purchased. (Ord. 02-98, 5-20-1998, eff. 7-1-1998)
3.44.020 License Required; Exception
It is unlawful to sell, give away or otherwise dispose of tobacco in any form in the City without first being licensed to do so by the City. No license shall be required for sales at wholesale. (Ord. 02-98, 5-20-1998, eff. 7-1-1998)

3.44.030 Application
Applications for a license to sell or otherwise deal in tobacco or tobacco products shall be made in writing to the City Recorder. The application shall contain the name of the applicant, the address at which such sales are to be made and a consent to the revocation of such license in event the holder thereof shall violate any ordinance of the City or statute of the State governing the sale, gift or other disposition or delivery of tobacco in any form to a person under the age of nineteen (19) years. The application shall be filed in the office of the City Recorder. The application shall be accompanied with the fee required in ECC 3.44.040. (Ord. 02-98, 5-20-1998, eff. 7-1-1998)

3.44.040 Fee For License
Besides all other license fees that may be required of a business location or person, there is levied an annual license fee as set by resolution of the City Council if such person or business enterprise makes sales of cigarettes or tobacco. (Ord. 02-98, 5-20-1998, eff. 7-1-1998)

3.44.050 Bond Required
No license shall be issued until the applicant files a bond with the City. The Mayor and City Council shall decide the form and the amount of the bond, the minimum amount of which shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00). The bond shall be duly executed by the applicant as principal, with a corporate surety, payable to the City and conditioned upon the faithful performance of all of the requirements of this Chapter, including the payment of all taxes, penalties and other obligations. (Ord. 02-98, 5-20-1998, eff. 7-1-1998)

3.44.060 Rules And Regulations
Specifically Packaged Products; Exemption, Conditions: 
Standard ten (10) pack cartons of cigarettes and multi-packages of smokeless tobacco are exempt from this Chapter so long as these tobacco products are under constant direct sight surveillance of a store employee.
These tobacco products shall be deemed to be under constant, direct sight surveillance of an employee only if the tobacco products themselves (and not just the displays, racks, shelves, kiosks, etc., where the products are displayed) are in plain and full view of a store employee. 
Manner Of Sales; Exemption: 
It shall be unlawful for any person, business or tobacco retailer to sell, permit to be sold or offer for sale any tobacco products by means of self-service merchandising, or by any means other than vendor-assisted sales. 
It is unlawful for a retailer to display tobacco products or otherwise make them available for sale through nonvendor-assisted merchandising methods, or by any self-service merchandising method. 
Refer to exemption in paragraph A. (Ord. 02-98, 5-20-1998, eff. 7-1-1998)
3.44.070 Penalty
Violation of this Chapter is considered an infraction and shall be penalized as follows: 

First occurrence; seven (7) day suspension of license and fifty dollar ($50.00) fine. 
Second occurrence; thirty (30) day suspension of license and one hundred dollar ($100.00) fine. 
Third occurrence; revocation of license and apply Utah Code § 76-10-104. (Ord. 02-98, 5-20-1998, eff. 7-1-1998)
3.48 SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES AND EMPLOYEES
3.48.010 Title
3.48.020 Purpose And Application
3.48.030 Definitions - Sexually-Oriented Businesses And Employees
3.48.040 Business Licenses
3.48.050 Legitimate Artistic Modeling
3.48.060 Categories; Number Of Licenses
3.48.070 Application For License
3.48.080 Fees
3.48.090 Bond Required
3.48.100 Issuance Of License
3.48.110 Location Restrictions
3.48.120 Design Of Premises
3.48.130 License; Specific Regulations
3.48.140 General Regulations
3.48.150 Prohibited Activities
3.48.160 Outcall Services; Operation Requirements
3.48.170 Nudity; Defenses To Prosecution
3.48.180 Violations
3.48.190 Appeal Procedure
3.48.200 Violation; Penalty
3.48.210 Existing Business; Compliance Time Limits

3.48.010 Title
The provisions codified in this Chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS AND EMPLOYEE LICENSING ORDINANCE. (Ord., 11-19-1997) 

3.48.020 Purpose And Application
Reasonable And Uniform Regulations: It is the purpose and object of this Chapter that the City establish reasonable and uniform regulations governing the time, place and manner of operation of sexually-oriented businesses and their employees in the City. This Chapter shall be construed to protect the governmental interests recognized by this Chapter in a manner consistent with constitutional protection provided by the United States and Utah Constitutions. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
Certain Business Activities: This Chapter imposes regulatory standards and license requirements on certain business activities, which are characterized as sexually-oriented businesses, and certain employees of those businesses characterized as sexually-oriented business employees. (Ord., 11-19-1997; amd. 1998 Code) 
3.48.030 Definitions - Sexually-Oriented Businesses And Employees
For the purpose of this Chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:

ADULT BOOKSTORE OR ADULT VIDEO STORE: A commercial establishment:

Which excludes minors from more than fifteen percent (15%) of the retail floor or shelf space of the premises; or
Which, as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions, slides or other visual representations, the central theme of which depicts or describes "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas"; or instruments, devices or paraphernalia which are designated for use in connection with "specified sexual activities", except for legitimate medically recognized contraceptives.
ADULT BUSINESS: An adult motion picture theater, adult bookstore or adult video store.

ADULT MOTION PICTURE THEATER: A commercial establishment which:

Excludes minors from the showing of two (2) consecutive exhibitions (repeated showings of any single presentation shall not be considered a consecutive exhibition); or
As its principal business, shows, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions which are primarily characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas".
ADULT THEATER: A theater, concert hall, auditorium or similar commercial establishment which:

Holds itself out as such a business; or
Excludes minors from the showing of two (2) consecutive exhibitions (repeated performance of the same presentation shall not be considered a consecutive exhibition); or
As its principal business, features persons who appear in live performances in a state of semi-nudity or which are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities".
EMPLOY: Hiring an individual to work for pecuniary or any other form of compensation, whether such person is hired on the payroll of the employer, as an independent contractor, as an agent or in any other form of employment relationship.

ESCORT: Any person who, for pecuniary compensation, dates, socializes, visits, consorts with or accompanies or offers to date, consort, socialize, visit or accompany another or others to or about social affairs, entertainment or places of amusement, or within any place of public or private resort or any business or commercial establishment or any private quarters. Escort shall not be construed to include persons who provide business or personal services such as licensed private nurses, aides for the elderly or handicapped, social secretaries or similar service personnel whose relationship with their patron is characterized by a bona fide contractual relationship having a duration of more than twelve (12) hours and who provide a service not principally characterized as dating or socializing. Escort shall also not be construed to include persons providing services such as singing telegrams, birthday greetings or similar activities characterized by appearances in a public place, contracted for by a party other than the person for whom the service is being performed and of a duration not longer than one hour.

ESCORT SERVICE: An individual or entity who, for pecuniary compensation, furnishes or offers to furnish escorts, or provides or offers to introduce patrons to escorts.

ESCORT SERVICE RUNNER: Any third person, not an escort, who, for pecuniary compensation, acts in the capacity of an agent or broker for an escort service, escort or patron by contacting or meeting with escort services, escorts or patrons at any location within the City, whether or not such third person is employed by such escort service, escort, patron, or by another business, or is an independent contractor or self-employed.

NUDITY: A state of dress in which the areola of the female breast or male or female genitals, pubic region or anus are covered by less than the covering required in the definition of semi-nude.

OPERATOR: The manager or other natural person principally in charge of a sexually-oriented business.

OUTCALL SERVICES: Services of a type performed by a sexually oriented business employee outside of the premises of the licensed sexually-oriented business, including, but not limited to, escorts, models, dancers and other similar employees.

PATRON: Any person who contracts with or employs any escort services or escort or the customer of any business licensed pursuant to this Chapter.

PECUNIARY COMPENSATION: Any commission, fee, salary, tip, gratuity, hire, profit, reward or any other form of consideration.

PERSON: Any person, unincorporated association, corporation, partnership or other legal entity.

SEMI-NUDE: A state of dress in which opaque clothing covers no more than the areola of the female breast and the male or female genitals, pubic region and anus shall be fully covered by an opaque covering no narrower than four inches (4") wide in the front and five inches (5") wide in the back, which shall not taper to less than one inch (1") wide at the narrowest point.

SEMI-NUDE DANCING AGENCY: Any person, agency, firm, corporation, partnership or any other entity or individual which furnishes, books or otherwise engages or offers to furnish, book or otherwise engage the service of a professional dancer licensed pursuant to this Chapter for performance or appearance at a business licensed for adult theaters.

SEMI-NUDE ENTERTAINMENT BUSINESS: A business, including adult theater, where employees perform or appear in the presence of patrons of the business in a state of semi-nudity. A business shall also be presumed to be a semi-nude entertainment business if the business holds itself out as such a business.

SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS: "Semi-nude entertainment businesses", sexually-oriented "outcall services", "adult businesses" and "semi-nude dancing agencies", as defined by this Chapter.

SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESS EMPLOYEES: Those employees who work on the premises of the sexually-oriented business in activities related to the sexually-oriented portion of the business. This includes all managing employees, dancers, escorts, models and other similar employees whether or not hired as employees, agents or as independent contractors. Employees shall not include individuals whose work is unrelated to the sexually-oriented portion of the business, such as janitors, bookkeepers and similar employees. Sexually-oriented business employees shall not include cooks, serving persons and similar employees, except where they may be managers or supervisors of the business. All persons making outcall meetings under this Chapter, including escorts, models, guards, escort runners, drivers, chauffeurs and other similar employees, shall be considered sexually-oriented business employees.

SPECIFIED ANATOMICAL AREAS: The human male or female pubic area or anus with less than a full opaque covering, or the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, with less than full opaque covering.

SPECIFIED SEXUAL ACTIVITIES:

Acts of:
Masturbation,
Human sexual intercourse,
Sexual copulation between a person and a beast,
Fellatio,
Cunnilingus,
Bestiality,
Pederasty,
Buggery, or
Any anal copulation between a human male and another human male, human female, or beast;
Manipulating or caressing or fondling by any person of:
The genitals of a human,
The pubic area of a human,
The breast or breasts of a human female;
Flagellation or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed. (Ord., 11-19-1997) 
3.48.040 Business Licenses
Sexually-Oriented Business: It is unlawful for any person to operate a sexually-oriented business, as specified herein, without first obtaining a general business license and a sexually-oriented business license. The sexually-oriented business license shall specify the type of business for which it is obtained. 
Sexually-Oriented Business Employee: It is unlawful for any sexually-oriented business to employ or for any individual to be employed by a sexually-oriented business in the capacity of a sexually-oriented business employee, unless that employee first obtains a sexually-oriented business employee license. 
Semi-Nude Dancing Agencies: 
It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or otherwise engage the services of a professional dancer, model or performer to appear in a state of semi-nudity for pecuniary compensation in or for any semi-nude entertainment business or adult theater licensed pursuant to this Chapter, unless such agency is licensed pursuant to this Chapter. 
It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book or otherwise engage or permit any person to perform as a professional dancer, model or performer in a state of semi-nudity or nudity, either gratuitously or for compensation, in or for any business licensed pursuant to this Chapter, unless such person is licensed pursuant to this Chapter. 
Exemptions: The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to any sex therapist or similar individual licensed by the State to provide bona fide sexual therapy or counseling, licensed medical practitioner, licensed nurse, psychiatrist or psychologist, nor shall it apply to any educator licensed by the State for activities in the classroom. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
3.48.050 Legitimate Artistic Modeling
Intent: The City does not intend to unreasonably or improperly prohibit legitimate modeling which may occur in a state of nudity for purposes protected by the First Amendment or similar State protections. The City does intend to prohibit prostitution and related offenses occurring under the guise of nude modeling. Notwithstanding the provisions of ECC 3.48.140 Paragraph D,11, a licensed outcall employee may appear in a state of nudity before a customer or patron; providing, that a written contract for such appearance was entered into between the customer or patron and the employee and signed at least twenty four (24) hours before the nude appearance. All of the other applicable provisions of this Chapter shall still apply to such nude appearance. 
Contract; Unlawful Activities: In the event of a contract for nude modeling or appearance signed more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of the modeling or appearance, the individual to appear nude shall not be required to obtain a license pursuant to this Chapter. During such unlicensed nude appearance, it is unlawful to: 
Appear nude or semi-nude in the presence of persons under the age of eighteen (18); 
Allow, offer or agree to any touching of the contracting party or other person by the individual appearing nude; 
Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, solicitation of a minor or committing activities harmful to a minor;
Allow, offer, commit or agree to any sex act as validly defined by City ordinances or State statute; 
Allow, offer or agree or permit the contracting party or other person to masturbate in the presence of the individual contracted to appear nude; 
Allow, offer or agree for the individual appearing nude to be within five feet (5') of any other person while performing or while nude or semi-nude. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
3.48.060 Categories; Number Of Licenses
Scope: It is unlawful for any business premises to operate or be licensed for more than one category of sexually-oriented business, except that a business may have a license for both outcall services and a semi-nude dancing agency on the same premises. 
Categories: The categories of sexually-oriented businesses are: 
Outcall services; 
Adult businesses; 
Semi-nude entertainment businesses; 
Semi-nude dancing agency. (Ord., 11-19-1997) 
3.48.070 Application For License
Content; Required Information: Before any applicant may be licensed to operate a sexually-oriented business or as a sexually-oriented business employee pursuant to this Chapter, the applicant shall submit, on a form to be supplied by the City license authority, the following: 
Correct Legal Name: The correct legal name of each applicant, corporation, partnership, limited partnership or entity doing business under an assumed name. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
Corporations; Partnerships: 
If the applicant is a corporation, partnership or limited partnership or individual or entity doing business under an assumed name, the information required below for individual applicants shall be submitted for each partner and each principal of an applicant and for each officer, director and any shareholder (corporate or personal) of more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of any applicant. Any holding company or any entity holding more than ten percent (10%) of an applicant's stock shall be considered an applicant for purposes of disclosure under this Chapter. (Ord., 11-19-1997; amd. 1998 Code) 
The shareholder disclosure requirements above shall only be applicable for outcall service licenses. 
Identify Authorized Signatories: All corporations, partnerships or noncorporate entities included on the application shall also identify each individual authorized by the corporation, partnership or noncorporate entity to sign the checks for such corporation, partnership or noncorporate entity. 
Personal Information: For all applicants or individuals, the application must also state: 
Any other names or aliases used by the individual; 
The age, date and place of birth; 
Height; 
Weight; 
Color of hair; 
Color of eyes; 
Present business address and telephone number; 
Present residence and telephone number; 
Utah drivers license or identification number; and 
Social security number.
Proof Of Age: Acceptable written proof that any individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
Photographs: Attached to the form as provided above, two (2) color photographs of the applicant clearly showing the individual's face and the individual's fingerprints on a form provided by the Police Department. For persons not residing in the City, the photographs and fingerprints may be on a form from the law enforcement jurisdiction where the person resides. Fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant directly to the issuing agency; 
Health Department Certificate: For any individual applicant required to obtain a sexually-oriented business employee license as an escort or as a semi-nude entertainer, a certificate from the County Health Department stating that the individual has, within thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date of the original or renewal application, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease; 
Employment History: A statement of the business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application; 
License And Permit History: A statement detailing the business license and permit history of the applicant for the five (5) year period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant previously operating or seeking to operate, in this or any other county, city, state or territory, has ever had a license, permit or authorization to do business denied, revoked or suspended, or has had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation or suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and state in full the reasons for the denial, revocation or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation or suspension shall be attached to the application; 
Criminal Convictions: All criminal convictions or pleas of nolo contendere, except those which have been expunged, and the disposition of all such arrests for the applicant, individual or other entity subject to disclosure under this Chapter, for five (5) years prior to the date of application. This disclosure shall include identification of all ordinance violations, excepting minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as a felony shall not be construed as a minor traffic offense), stating the date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of nolo contendere and sentence of each conviction or other disposition, identifying the convicting jurisdiction and sentencing court and providing the court identifying case numbers or docket numbers. Application for a sexually-oriented business or employee license shall constitute a waiver of disclosure of any criminal conviction or plea of nolo contendere for the purposes of any proceeding involving the business or employee license; 
Owner Of Property: In the event the applicant is not the owner of record of the real property upon which the business or proposed business is or is to be located, the application must be accompanied by a notarized statement from the legal or equitable owner of the possessory interest in the property specifically acknowledging the type of business for which the applicant seeks a license for the property. In addition to furnishing such notarized statement, the applicant shall furnish the name, address and phone number of the owner of record of the property, as well as the copy of the lease or rental agreement pertaining to the premises in which the service is or will be located; 
Description Of Services: A description of the services to be provided by the business, with sufficient detail to allow reviewing authorities to determine what business will be transacted on the premises, together with a schedule of usual fees for services to be charged by the licensee, and any rules, regulations or employment guidelines under or by which the business intends to operate. This description shall also include: 
The hours that the business or service will be open to the public, and the methods of promoting the health and safety of the employees and patrons and preventing them from engaging in illegal activity; 
The methods of supervision preventing the employees from engaging in acts of prostitution or other related criminal activities; 
The methods of supervising employees and patrons to prevent employees and patrons from charging or receiving fees for services or acts prohibited by this Chapter or other statutes or ordinances; 
The methods of screening employees and customers in order to promote the health and safety of employees and customers and prevent the transmission of disease and prevent the commission of acts of prostitution or other criminal activity. 
False Or Misleading Information Prohibited: It is unlawful to knowingly submit false or materially misleading information on or with a sexually-oriented business license application or to fail to disclose or omit information for the purpose of obtaining a sexually-oriented business or employee license. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
3.48.080 Fees
Each applicant for a sexually-oriented business or employee license shall be required to pay regulatory license fees as set forth in the consolidated fee schedule. An application is not complete until all appropriate fees have been paid. (Ord., 11-19-1997)

3.48.090 Bond Required
Each application for a sexually-oriented business license shall post with the Business and Economic Services Administrator, a cash or corporate surety bond payable to the City in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). Any fines assessed against the business, officers or managers for violations of City ordinances shall be taken form this bond if not paid in cash within ten (10) days after notice of the fine, unless an appeal is filed as provided by this Chapter. In the event that funds are drawn against the cash or surety bond to pay such fines, the bond shall be replenished to two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) within fifteen (15) days of the date of notice of any draw against it. (Ord., 11-19-1997)

3.48.100 Issuance Of License
Within Thirty Days; Exceptions: The Business and Economic Services Administrator shall approve the issuance of a license to the applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of a completed application, unless the official finds one or more of the following: 
An applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age. 
The applicant is overdue in payment to the City of taxes, fees, fines or penalties assessed against the applicant or imposed on the applicant in relation to a sexually-oriented business. 
The applicant has falsely answered a material question or request for information as authorized by this Chapter. 
The applicant has violated a provision of this Chapter or similar provisions found in statutes or ordinances from any jurisdiction within two (2) years immediately preceding the application; a criminal conviction for a violation of a provision of this Chapter or similar provisions from any jurisdiction, whether or not it is being appealed, is conclusive evidence of a violation, but a conviction is not necessary to prove a violation. 
The premises to be used for the business have been disapproved by the County Health Department, the Fire Department, the Police Department, the building officials or the zoning officials as not being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances of the City. If any of the foregoing reviewing agencies cannot complete their review within the thirty (30) day approval or denial period, the agency or department may obtain from the Business and Economic Services Administrator an extension of time of no more than fifteen (15) days for their review. The total time for the City to approve or deny a license shall not exceed forty five (45) days from the receipt of a completed application and payment of all fees. Businesses located outside of the corporate boundaries of the City, but requiring a license under this Chapter, may be denied a license pursuant to this Chapter if the business does not have a valid business license to conduct business at the business location from the appropriate jurisdiction for that location; 
Upon receipt of an application, all departments required to review the application shall determine within seven (7) days whether or not the application is incomplete in items needed for processing. Incomplete applications shall immediately be returned to the applicant with a specification of the items which are incomplete. 
The time for processing applications specified in this Section shall begin to run from the receipt of a complete application. 
In the event that a license for a semi-nude entertainment, semi-nude dancing agencies, adult businesses or semi-nude entertainment businesses has not been disapproved within thirty (30) days or the forty five (45) days allowed after an extension, the City shall issue the license pending completion of the City's review. 
Any license issued pursuant to paragraph A,5,c may be revoked by the City pursuant to the revocation procedures provided for herein, if the completed review determines that the license should have been denied. 
The required license fees have not been paid.
All applicable sales and use taxes have not been paid. 
An applicant for the proposed business is in violation of or not in compliance with this chapter or similar provisions found in statutes or ordinances from any jurisdiction. 
An applicant has been convicted of or pled nolo contendere to a crime: 
Involving prostitution; exploitation of prostitution; aggravated promotion of prostitution; aggravated exploitation of prostitution; solicitation of sex acts; sex acts for hire; compelling prostitution; aiding prostitution; sale, distribution or display of material harmful to minors; sexual performance by minors; possession of child pornography; lewdness; indecent exposure; any crime involving sexual abuse or exploitation of a child; sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault; rape; forcible sodomy; forcible sexual abuse; incest; harboring a runaway child; criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses or offenses involving similar elements from any jurisdiction regardless of the exact title of the offense for which: 
Less than two (2) years have elapsed from the date of conviction, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense, or less than five (5) years, if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanors within the five (5) years; or 
Less than five (5) years have elapsed from the date of conviction, if the offense was a felony. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification pursuant to this section. 
License Term: Sexually oriented business and employee licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid from the date of issuance through July 1 of each succeeding year. The license fees required under the consolidated fee schedule shall not be prorated for any portion of a year, but shall be paid in full for whatever portion of the year the license is applied for. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
3.48.110 Location Restrictions
Seminude Entertainment Businesses: It is unlawful for any business licensed for seminude entertainment to be located within three hundred thirty feet (330') of a business licensed for the sale or consumption of alcohol. 
Zoning: It is unlawful for any sexually oriented business to do business at any location within the city not zoned for such business. Sexually oriented businesses licensed as adult businesses or seminude entertainment businesses pursuant to this chapter shall only be allowed in areas zoned for their use pursuant to ECC 10.12.120. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
3.48.120 Design Of Premises
Adult Businesses: 
Diagram: In addition to the general requirements of disclosure for a sexually oriented business, any applicant for a license as an adult business or nude entertainment business shall also submit a diagram, drawn to scale, of the premises. The design and construction, prior to granting a license or opening for business, shall conform to the following: (Ord., 11-19-1997; amd. 1998 Code) 
The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms. 
Restrooms may not contain any video reproduction equipment or any of the business merchandise. Signs shall be posted requiring only one person being allowed in the restroom per stall, and only one person in any stall at a time, and requiring that patrons shall not be allowed access to the manager's station areas. 
For businesses which exclude minors from the entire premises, all windows, doors and other apertures to the premises shall be darkened or otherwise constructed to prevent anyone outside the premises from seeing the inside of the premises. Businesses which exclude minors from less than all of the premises shall be designed and constructed so that minors may not see into the area from which they are excluded. 
The diagram required shall not necessarily be a professional engineer's or architect's blueprint; however, the diagram must show marked internal dimensions, all overhead lighting fixtures and ratings for illumination capacity.
Manager's Station; Unobstructed View: It shall be the duty of the licensee and the licensee's employees to ensure that the views from the manager's station in paragraph A,1 remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks or any other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises, and to ensure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted. 
Lighting Fixtures: The premises shall at all times be equipped and operated with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one foot-candle, measured at floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensee and the licensee's employees present on the premises to ensure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present on the premises. 
Semi-Nude Entertainment Business: 
It is unlawful for business premises licensed for semi-nude entertainment to: 
Permit a bed, sofa, mattress or similar item in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public or in any office to which patrons are not admitted, and except that in an adult theater, such items may be on the stage as part of a performance. 
Allow any door on any room used for the business, except for the door to an office to which patrons shall not be admitted, outside doors and restroom doors, to be lockable from the inside. 
Provide any room in which the employee or employees and the patron or patrons are alone together without separation by a solid physical barrier at least three feet high and six inches wide (3' x 6"). The patron or patrons shall remain on one side of the barrier and the employee or employees shall remain on the other side of the barrier. 
Adult theaters shall also require that the performance area shall be separated from the patrons by a minimum of three feet (3'), which separation shall be delineated by a physical barrier at least three feet (3') high. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
3.48.130 License; Specific Regulations
Notice Of Change Of Information: Any change in the information required to be submitted under this Chapter for either a sexually-oriented business license or sexually-oriented business employee license shall be given, in writing, to the Business and Economic Services Administrator and the Police Department within fourteen (14) days after such change. 
Transfer Limitations: Sexually-oriented business licenses granted under this Chapter shall not be transferable. It is unlawful for a license held by an individual to be transferred. It is unlawful for a license held by a corporation, partnership or other noncorporate entity to transfer any part in excess of ten percent (10%) thereof, without filing a new application and obtaining prior City approval. If any transfer of the controlling interest in a business licensee occurs, the license is immediately null and void, and the business shall not operate until a separate new license has been properly issued by the City as provided in this Chapter. 
Display Of License: It is unlawful for any sexually-oriented business location within the boundaries of the City to fail to display the license granted pursuant to this Chapter in a prominent location within the business premises. It is unlawful for any individual licensed pursuant to this Chapter to fail to carry, at all times while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate boundaries of the City, their employee license on their person. If the individual is nude, such license shall be visibly displayed within the same room the employee is performing. When requested by police, City licensing or other enforcement personnel or health official, it is unlawful to fail to show the appropriate licenses while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate boundaries of the City. 
Advertisements; Statement: It is unlawful for any advertisement by the sexually-oriented business or employee to fail to state that the business or employee is licensed by the City and shall include the City license number. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
3.48.140 General Regulations
Obscenity; Lewdness: Notwithstanding anything contained in this Chapter, nothing in this Chapter shall be deemed to permit or allow the showing or display of any matter which is contrary to applicable Federal or State statutes prohibiting obscenity or lewdness. (Ord., 11-19-1997; amd. 1998 Code) 
Premises Location: It is unlawful to conduct business under a license issued pursuant to this Chapter at any location other than the licensed premises. Any location to which telephone calls are automatically forwarded by such business shall require a separate license. 
Business Name: It is unlawful for any sexually-oriented business to do business in the City under any name other than the business name specified in the application. 
Unlawful Activities: It is unlawful for any sexually-oriented business or sexually-oriented business employee to: 
Allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) years on the licensed premises, except that in adult businesses which exclude minors from less than all of the business premises, minors shall not be permitted in excluded areas; 
Allow, offer or agree to conduct any outcall business with persons under the age of eighteen (18) years; 
To allow, offer or agree to allow any alcohol to be stored, used or consumed on or in the licensed premises; 
Allow the outside door to the premises to be locked while any customer is in the premises; 
Allow, offer or agree to gambling on the licensed premises; 
Allow, offer or agree to any sexually-oriented business employee touching or being touched by any patron or customer; except that outcall employees and customers may touch, except that any touching of specified anatomical areas, whether clothed or unclothed, is prohibited; 
Allow, offer or agree to illegal possession, use, sale or distribution of controlled substances on the licensed premises; 
Allow sexually-oriented business employees to possess, use, sell or distribute controlled substances while engaged in the activities of the business;
Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, solicitation of a minor or committing activities harmful to a minor to occur on the licensed premises or, in the event of an outcall employee or business, the outcall employee committing, offering or agreeing to commit prostitution, attempting to commit prostitution, soliciting prostitution, soliciting a minor or committing activities harmful to a minor; 
Allow, offer, commit or agree to any specified sexual activity as validly defined by City ordinances or State statute in the presence of any customer or patron; 
Allow, offer or agree to any outcall employee appearing before any customer or patron in a state of nudity; 
Allow, offer or agree to allow a patron or customer to masturbate in the presence of the sexually-oriented business employee or on the premises of a sexually-oriented business; 
Allow, offer or agree to commit an act of lewdness, as defined in this Title. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
3.48.150 Prohibited Activities
Performers: It is unlawful for any professional dancer, model or performer, while performing in any business licensed pursuant to this Chapter, to: 
Touch in any manner any other person; 
Throw any object or clothing off the stage area; 
Accept any money, drink or any other object directly from any person; 
Allow another person to touch such performer or to place any money or object on the performer or within the costume or person of the performer; or 
Place anything within the costume or adjust or move the costume while performing so as to render the performer in a state of nudity. 
Patrons: It is unlawful for any person, or any patron of any business, to touch in any manner any performer; to place any money or object on or within the costume or person of any performer; or to give or offer to give to any such performer any drinks, money or object while such performer is performing, except that money may be placed on the stage, which shall not be picked up by the performer except by hand. 
Alcoholic Beverages: 
It is unlawful for any business licensed pursuant to this Chapter to allow the sale, storage, supply or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any sexually-oriented business. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
3.48.160 Outcall Services; Operation Requirements
It is unlawful for any business or employee providing outcall services contracted for in the City, to fail to comply with the following requirements: 

Written Contract: All businesses licensed to provide outcall services pursuant to this Chapter shall provide to each patron a written contract in receipt of pecuniary compensation for services. The contract shall clearly state the type of services to be performed, the length of time such services shall be performed, the total amount such services shall cost the patron, and any special terms or conditions relating to the services to be performed. The contract need not include the name of the patron. The business licensee shall keep and maintain a copy of each written contract entered into pursuant to this Section for a period of not less than one year from the date of provision of services thereunder. The contracts shall be numbered and entered into a register listing the contract number, date, names of all employees involved in the contract and pecuniary compensation paid. 
Maintain Office Or Telephone: All outcall businesses licensed pursuant to this Chapter shall maintain an open office or telephone at which the licensee or licensee's designated agent may be personally contacted during all hours outcall employees are working. The address and phone number of the licensed location shall appear and be included in all patron contracts and published advertisements. For outcall businesses which premises are licensed within the corporate limits of the City, private rooms or booths where the patrons may meet with the outcall employee shall not be provided at the open office or any other location by the service, nor shall patrons meet outcall employees at the business premises. 
Advertise; Manner: Outcall services shall not advertise in such a manner that would lead a reasonably prudent person to conclude that specified sexual activities would be performed by the outcall employee. 
Licensing Requirement: All employees of outcall services who provide outcall services within the City shall be licensed in accordance with this Chapter, regardless of the primary location of the business. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
3.48.170 Nudity; Defenses To Prosecution
It is a defense to prosecution or violation under this Chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated: 

Proprietary School: By a proprietary school licensed by the State, or a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; 
Private College Or University: By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
3.48.180 Violations
Injunction: An entity or individual who operates or causes a sexually-oriented business to be operated without a valid license, or who employs or is employed as an employee of a sexually-oriented business, or who operates such a business or functions as such an employee in violation of the provisions of this Chapter, is subject to a suit for injunction in addition to the civil and criminal violations provided herein, and any other remedy available at law or in equity. 
Suspension Or Revocation: 
The City may issue a notice suspending or revoking a sexually-oriented business or employee license granted under this Chapter if a licensee, or an employee of the licensee has:
Violated or is not in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter; 
Refused to allow any inspection of the premises of the sexually-oriented business specifically authorized by this Chapter, or by any other statute or ordinance; 
Failed to replenish the cost bond as provided in this Chapter (such a suspension shall extend until the bond has been replenished); 
Given materially false or misleading information in obtaining the license; 
Knowingly operated the sexually-oriented business or worked under the employee license during the period when the business licensee or employee licensee's license was suspended; 
A licensee has committed an offense which would be grounds for denial of a license for which the time period required has not elapsed; 
On two (2) or more occasions within a twelve (12) month period, a person committed in or on, or solicited in or on the licensed premises, or an outcall employee solicited or committed on or off the premises, an offense which would be grounds for denial of a license for which a conviction has been obtained, and the person or persons were employees, whether or not licensed, of the sexually-oriented business at the time the offenses were committed; 
A licensee is delinquent in payment to the City for ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the sexually-oriented business. 
Suspension or revocation shall take effect within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of notice, unless an appeal is filed as provided by this Chapter. 
The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. 
Term Of Revocation: When a license issued pursuant to this Chapter is revoked, the revocation shall continue for one year from its effective date, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually-oriented business or employee license for one year from the date of such revocation. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
3.48.190 Appeal Procedure
The denial, suspension or revocation of any license issued pursuant to this Chapter may be appealed as set forth in ECC 1.32. (Ord., 11-19-1997)

3.48.200 Violation; Penalty
In addition to revocation or suspension of a license, as provided in this Chapter, each violation of this Chapter shall, upon citation by the Business and Economic Services Administrator, require the licensee to pay a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00). Such fine shall be deducted from the cost bond posted pursuant to this Chapter, unless paid within ten (10) days of notice of the fine or the final determination after any appeal. In addition to the civil fines provided in this Chapter, the violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. Each day of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord., 11-19-1997; amd. 1998 Code). 
Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the sexually-oriented business licensee and/or operator, if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge or approval of the licensee and/or operator, or as a result of the licensee's and/or operator's negligent failure to supervise the conduct of the employee, and the sexually-oriented business licensee shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the licensee committed the act or caused the omission. 
A sexually-oriented business licensee and/or operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the licensed premises, and any act or omission of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the licensee and/or operator for the purposes of determining whether the license's license shall be revoked, suspended or renewed. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
3.48.210 Existing Business; Compliance Time Limits
Applicability: The provisions of this Chapter shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein, whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date hereof, and regardless of whether such persons and businesses are currently licensed to do business in the City. 
All such persons and businesses requiring outcall service licenses shall have forty five (45) days from the effective date hereof, or until their current license expires, whichever is first in time, to comply with the provisions of this Chapter. 
All semi-nude dancing agency licensees shall have seventy five (75) days from the effective date hereof, or until their license must be renewed, whichever is first, to comply with the provisions of this Chapter. 
All adult businesses and semi-nude entertainment businesses shall have one hundred thirty five (135) days from the effective date hereof, or until their current license must be renewed, whichever is first, to comply with the provisions of this Chapter. 
Fees; Credit: For the year 1997-1998, all businesses required by this Chapter to be licensed as sexually-oriented businesses shall be credited against the fees required in the consolidated fee schedule with the regulatory license fees paid for the current 1997-1998 license. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
3.52 TELECOMMUNICATIONS LICENSE TAX
3.52.010 Definitions - Telecommunications License Tax
3.52.020 Levy Of Tax
3.52.030 Tax Rate
3.52.040 Rate Limitation And Exemption
3.52.050 Effective Date Of Tax Levy
3.52.060 Interlocal Agreement
3.52.070 Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees

3.52.010 Definitions - Telecommunications License Tax
As used in this chapter: 

COMMISSION: The state tax commission. 

CUSTOMER: 

Subject to paragraphs B and C of this definition, "customer" means the person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract. 
For purposes of this chapter, "customer" means: 
The person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract; or 
If the end user is not the person described in paragraph B,1 of this definition, the end user of telecommunications service. 
"Customer" does not include a reseller: 
Of telecommunications service; or
For mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider's licensed service area. 
END USER: 

The person who uses a telecommunications service. 
For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is not an individual, "end user" means the individual who uses the telecommunications service on behalf of the person who is provided the telecommunications service.
GROSS RECEIPTS ATTRIBUTED TO THE MUNICIPALITY: Those gross receipts from a transaction for telecommunications services that is located within the municipality for the purposes of sales and use taxes under Utah Code 59-12, sales and use tax act and determined in accordance with Utah Code § 59-12-207. 

GROSS RECEIPTS FROM TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: The revenue that a telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered except for amounts collected or paid as:

A tax, fee, or charge: 
Imposed by a governmental entity; 
Separately identified as a tax, fee, or charge in the transaction with the customer for the telecommunications service; and 
Imposed only on a telecommunications provider; 
Sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a customer under Utah Code 59-12, sales and use tax act; or 
Interest, a fee, or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications provider on a customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when payment is due.
MOBILE TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: As defined in the mobile telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.

MUNICIPALITY: Ephraim City.

PLACE OF PRIMARY USE: 

For telecommunications service other than mobile telecommunications service, means the street address representative of where the customer's use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which shall be: 
The residential street address of the customer; or 
The primary business street address of the customer; or 
For mobile telecommunications service, is as defined in the mobile telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 124.
SERVICE ADDRESS: Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid, "service address" means: 

If the location described in this paragraph is known, the location of the telecommunications equipment: 
To which a call is charged; and 
From which the call originates or terminates; 
If the location described in paragraph A of this definition is not known but the location described in this paragraph is known, the location of the origination point of the signal of the telecommunications service first identified by: 
The telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or 
If the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the telecommunications provider, information received by the telecommunications provider from its service provider; or 
If the locations described in paragraphs A or B of this definition are not known, the location of a customer's place of primary use.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS PROVIDER: 

Subject to paragraphs B and C of this definition, "telecommunications provider" means a person that: 
Owns, controls, operates, or manages a telecommunications service; or 
Engages in an activity described in paragraph A,1 of this definition for the shared use with or resale to any person of the telecommunications service. 
A person described in paragraph A of this definition is a telecommunications provider whether or not the public service commission of Utah regulates: 
That person; or 
The telecommunications service that the person owns, controls, operates, or manages. 
"Telecommunications provider" does not include an aggregator as defined in Utah Code § 54-Sb-2.
TELECOMMUNICATIONS SERVICE: 

Telephone service, as defined in Utah Code § 59-12-102, other than mobile telecommunications service, that originates and terminates within the boundaries of this state; and
Mobile telecommunications service, as defined in Utah Code § 59-12-102: 
That originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state; and 
Only to the extent permitted by the mobile telecommunications sourcing act, 4 USC section 116 et seq. (Ord. 04-01, 6-16-2004)
3.52.020 Levy Of Tax
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross receipts from telecommunications service attributed to this municipality. (Ord. 04-01, 6-16-2004) 

3.52.030 Tax Rate
The rate of the tax levy shall be four percent (4%) of the telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service that are attributed to the municipality subject to the following: 

If the location of a transaction is determined to be other than this municipality then the rate imposed on the gross receipts for telecommunications services shall be the lower of: a) the rate imposed by the taxing jurisdiction in which the transaction is located or b) the rate for nonmobile telecommunication services shall be the rate imposed by the municipality in which the customer's service address is located; or for mobile telecommunications service, the rate imposed by the municipality of the customer's primary place of use. (Ord. 04-01, 6-16-2004)

3.52.040 Rate Limitation And Exemption
This rate of this levy shall not exceed four percent (4%) of the telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunication service attributed to the municipality unless a higher rate is approved by a majority vote of the voters in this municipality that vote in: 

A municipal general election; 
A regular general election; or 
A local special election. (Ord. 04-01, 6-16-2004)
3.52.050 Effective Date Of Tax Levy
This tax shall be levied beginning the earlier of July 1, 2004, or the first day of any calendar quarter after a seventy five (75) day period beginning on the date the commission received notice pursuant to Utah Code § 10-1-403 that this municipality has enacted this chapter. (Ord. 04-01, 6-16-2004)

3.52.060 Interlocal Agreement
On or before the effective date hereof, the municipality shall enter into the uniform interlocal agreement with the commission as described in Utah Code § 10-1-405 for the collection, enforcement, and administration of this municipal telecommunications license tax. (Ord. 04-01, 6-16-2004)

3.52.070 Repeal Of Inconsistent Taxes And Fees
Any tax or fee previously enacted by this municipality under authority of Utah Code § 10-1-203 or Utah Code 11-26, local taxation of utilities limitation is hereby repealed. 

Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted to repeal any municipal ordinance or fee which provides that the municipality may recover from a telecommunications provider the management costs of the municipality caused by the activities of the telecommunications provider in the rights of way of the municipality, if the fee is imposed in accordance with Utah Code § 72-7-102 and is not related to the municipality's loss of use of a highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right of way, or increased deterioration of a highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right of way nor does this chapter limit the municipality's right to charge fees or taxes on persons that are not subject to the municipal telecommunications license tax under this chapter and locate telecommunications facilities, as defined in Utah Code § 72-7-108, in this municipality. (Ord. 04-01, 6-16-2004)

4 PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY
4.04 FIRE DEPARTMENT
4.08 NUISANCES
4.12 WEEDS
4.16 GARBAGE AND REFUSE
4.20 GENERAL HEALTH REGULATIONS
4.24 LITTER; HANDBILLS
4.28 OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES
4.32 STREET NAMING AND NUMBERING

4.04 FIRE DEPARTMENT
4.04.010 Established
4.04.020 Fire Chief Position Created
4.04.030 Powers And Duties Of Fire Chief
4.04.040 Designation Of Emergency Vehicles
4.04.050 Responsibilities, Rights And Restrictions

4.04.010 Established
There is hereby created a Fire Department to be known as the Ephraim Volunteer Fire Department. (1983 Code § 10-111)

4.04.020 Fire Chief Position Created
There is hereby created the position of Chief of the Fire Department. (1983 Code § 10-121)

4.04.030 Powers And Duties Of Fire Chief
Supervision Of Department: The Chief shall have responsibility for the general supervision of the Department. 
Control And Extinguish Fire: During a fire, the Chief shall have full authority to take all measures as he shall deem necessary, subject to State law, to control and extinguish the fire and for that purpose he is hereby made a special peace officer. 
Report Information To City Council: The Chief shall, at least quarterly, report to the City Council the condition of the fire equipment, the number of fires and their causes and the estimated loss therefrom, together with such other information as the City Council may request or as he shall deem appropriate.
Enforce Fire Protection And Prevention: The Chief shall strictly enforce all of the provisions of the ordinances of the City relating to the protection against and prevention of fire. 
Maintain Equipment: The Chief shall maintain the equipment of the Department in good repair and order and ready for use. 
Establish Rules And Regulations: The Chief, subject to the approval of the Mayor and City Council, shall establish rules and regulations for the operation of the Department. 
Delegate Duties: The Chief may delegate his duties to any person employed by the Department, but such delegation shall not relieve the Chief of his responsibility for the performance thereof. 
Investigation Of Fires: The Chief shall cause all fires to be promptly investigated to determine the cause of the fire and report the cause of the fire, the time originated and such other information as may be relevant to prevent other fires. (1983 Code § 10-122) 
Employ Firefighters And Personnel: The Chief may make recommendations to the Mayor relating to the employment of firefighters and such other personnel as may be necessary to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. The Chief may employ such additional personnel as the Mayor and City Council may direct or authorize. (1983 Code § 10-123)
4.04.040 Designation Of Emergency Vehicles
Fire trucks and other motor vehicles used to transport fire equipment or fire personnel are hereby designated as authorized emergency vehicles. (1983 Code § 10-131; amd. 1998 Code)

4.04.050 Responsibilities, Rights And Restrictions
Removal Of Obstructions At Fire: The officer in charge at any fire may order the removal or destruction of any fence, building or structure, or that any utility be closed, cut or removed when deemed necessary to control, extinguish or prevent the spread of fire. (1983 Code § 10-132) 
Control Of Persons: All persons present at a fire shall obey the lawful orders of any firefighter. (1983 Code § 10-133)
Interference With Firefighters In Discharge Of Duties: Every person at the scene of any fire who wilfully disobeys the lawful orders of any public officer or firefighter, or offers any resistance to or interference with the efforts of any firefighter, or company of firefighters to extinguish the same, or engages in any disorderly conduct calculated to prevent the same from being extinguished, or who forbids, prevents or dissuades others from assisting to extinguish the same, is guilty of an infraction and subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. (1983 Code § 10-134; amd. 1998 Code) 
Unlawful Interference: Any person who shall wilfully hinder any officer or firefighter in the discharge of his duty at a fire, or in any manner injure, deface or destroy any engine, hose or other fire apparatus belonging to the City or who shall interfere with any fire company or person, or who shall wilfully break or injure any water pipe, or interfere with the water or its source of supply, shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. (1983 Code § 10-135; amd. 1998 Code) 
Investigation After Fire Report: The Chief, or such other persons as he shall designate, shall, after extinguishing a fire, make a prompt and thorough investigation of the cause of the fire, the time the fire began, the amount of loss and insurance, a description of the affected buildings and premises, and shall secure all other useful information available, and record the same in a record book kept for that purpose in the office of the Department and shall report the same to the City Council at such time as it may direct. (1983 Code § 10-136) 
Right To Enter And Inspect: The Fire Chief or his deputies, upon presentation of proper credentials, shall have the right to enter upon any premises at all reasonable hours for the purpose of making inspections. (1983 Code § 10-137) 
Persons Present Subject To Orders: Every capable person eighteen (18) years or older present at a fire shall be subject to the orders of the officer in command and shall render assistance in the manner directed by the officer in command. (1983 Code § 10-138; amd. 1998 Code) 
False Alarm: It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in or report to the Fire Department a false alarm or report of a fire or to tamper or remove any part of the fire alarm system. (1983 Code § 10-139)
4.08 NUISANCES
4.08.010 Nuisances Defined; Declaration
4.08.020 Nuisance On Property
4.08.030 Abatement Procedure

4.08.010 Nuisances Defined; Declaration
Definitions:

AUTHOR: Where a nuisance exists upon property and is the outgrowth of the usual, natural or necessary use of the property, the landlord or his agent, the tenant or his agent, and all other persons having control of the property on which such nuisance exists, shall be deemed to be the authors thereof and shall be equally liable and responsible. Where any such nuisance shall arise from the unusual or unnecessary use of such property or from the business thereon conducted, then the occupants and all other persons contributing to the continuance of such nuisance shall be deemed the authors.

NUISANCE: Whatever is dangerous to human life or health and whatever renders soil, air, water or food impure or unwholesome is declared to be a nuisance and unlawful. It shall be unlawful for any person either as an owner, agent or occupant to create or aid in creating or contributing to or maintaining a nuisance. 
Appearance: Any building or structure which has an unseemly appearance, is course in appearance or attractive to children, or those which may appear to be a curiosity or an invitation for inspection, or which may in the event of entering either as an attraction to children or to unsuspecting persons who may be at the risk of injury or damage (whether actually injured or damaged) and projects that appearance to three (3) or more persons, or to the public or to the City administration is declared a nuisance. 
Buildings And Structures: A nuisance includes an unoccupied building or structure which has deteriorated, become degraded, dilapidated, decayed, decomposed and become unsightly to the public or to three (3) or more persons who live or conduct business within the (same area as the building or have occasion frequently to pass by or observe the building which has any of the foregoing characteristics shall be deemed a nuisance. The foregoing are disjunctive and not conjunctive. Any of the foregoing descriptions constitutes a nuisance. 
Degenerated Structure: A building or a structure is a nuisance in appearance if it is degenerated to the point of attracting vermin, an accumulation of rodents, flies or putrefied or unsanitary debris. Any one of the conditions shall be and is declared a nuisance. 
Potential For Attracting Offensive Or Organic (Live) Creatures, Parasites, Rabble Or Dead Vermin: Any building or structure which has the potential to collect rats, mice, vermin or a combination of small animals or is dirty, unclean, unseemly, uncouth or course or vulgar or attracts offensive creatures, parasites, rabble or live or dead vermin shall be deemed a nuisance. (1983 Code § 10-311, 10-312; amd. 1998 Code)
Declaration Of Nuisance:
Every act or condition made, permitted, allowed or continued in violation of paragraph A, is hereby declared to be a nuisance and may be abated and punished as hereinafter provided. 
Nuisances include, but are not limited to: 
Befouling Culinary Water: Befouling in any spring, stream, well or water source supplying water for culinary purposes. (1983 Code § 10-313) 
Privies, Cesspools: Allowing any privy vault or cesspool or other individual wastewater disposal system to become a menace to health or a source of odors or contamination to air or water. (1983 Code § 10-313; amd. 1998 Code) 
Garbage Containers, Offensive: Permitting any garbage container to remain on premises when it has become unclean and offensive. 
Garbage Accumulation: Allowing vegetable waste, garbage, litter, filth or refuse of any nature to accumulate within or upon any private alley, yard or area except when it is temporarily deposited for immediate removal.
Manure Accumulation: Permitting the accumulation of manure in any stable, stall, corral, feed yard, yard, or in any other building or area in which any animals are kept. 
Slaughterhouses, Feed Yards: Permitting any slaughterhouse, market, meat shop, stable, feed yard, or other place or building wherein any animals are slaughtered, kept, fed or sold to remain unclean or in any state or condition detrimental to health or creating a nuisance because of odors, or in which flies or rodents breed. (1983 Code § 10-313) 
Discharging Offensive Water Or Liquid Waste: Discharging or placing any offensive water, chemical spray, liquid waste, or refuse of any kind into any street, alley, sidewalk, gutter, stream, wash, natural watercourse, ditch, canal, or any vacant lot or which, as the result of continued discharge, will render the place of discharge offensive or likely to become so. (1983 Code § 10-313; amd. 1998 Code) 
Collecting Grease, Offensive Matter: Keeping or collecting any stale or putrid grease or other offensive matter. 
Flies And Mosquitos: Having or permitting upon any premises any fly- or mosquito-producing condition. 
Public Drinking Vessels: Keeping any drinking vessel for public use without providing a method of decontamination between uses. 
Ablutions Near Drinking Fountain: Permitting or performing any ablutions in or near any public drinking fountain. 
Boarding House Or Factory, Sanitary Condition: Failing to furnish any dwelling house, boarding house, or factory or other place of employment with such privy vaults, water closets, sinks or other facilities as may be required to maintain the same in sanitary condition. 
Cleaning Privy Vaults: Neglecting or refusing to discontinue use of, clean out, disinfect, and fill up all privy vaults and cesspools or other individual wastewater disposal systems within twenty (20) days after notice from an enforcement officer or official of the City. 
Stagnant Water; Offensive Substances: Permitting any lot or excavation to become the repository of stagnant water or any decaying or offensive substances.
Obstructing Public Ways, Watercourses, Parks: Obstructing or tending to obstruct or interfere with or render dangerous for passage any street or sidewalks, lake, stream, drainage, canal or basin, or any public park without first obtaining the written permission of the City Council. (1983 Code § 10-313)
Enumeration Of Nuisances: The types of nuisances above stated shall be deemed in addition to and in no way a limitation of the nuisances subject to this Chapter. (1983 Code § 10-314)
Restroom Or Sewer Facilities: All toilet or sewer facilities shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with Utah law and City ordinances. All such facilities that do not comply with such provisions are hereby declared to be a nuisance and are subject to abatement as herein prescribed. (1983 Code § 10-315; amd. 1998 Code)
Restrictions On Blocking Water:
It shall be unlawful for any person to permit any drainage system, canal, ditch, conduit or other watercourse of any kind or nature, natural or artificial, to become so obstructed as to cause the water to back up and overflow therefrom, or to become unsanitary. 
Maintenance of any such watercourse in such condition shall constitute a nuisance and the same shall be subject to abatement. (1983 Code § 10-316)
4.08.020 Nuisance On Property
Definition: For the purpose of this Section the term "NUISANCE" is defined to mean any condition or use of premises or of building exteriors which are deleterious or injurious, noxious or unsightly which includes, but is not limited to, keeping or depositing on, or scattering over the premises any of the following: 
Lumber, junk, trash or debris. (1983 Code § 10-331) 
Abandoned, discarded or unused objects or equipment such as furniture, stoves, refrigerators, freezers, cans, containers, machinery, canisters or automobiles, or other discarded items not currently in use. (1983 Code § 10-331; amd. 1998 Code)
Duty Of Maintenance Of Private Property: No person owning, leasing, occupying or having charge of any premises shall maintain or keep any nuisance thereon, nor shall any such person keep or maintain such premises in any manner causing substantial diminution in the value of the other property in the neighborhood in which such premises are located. (1983 Code § 10-332)
Storage Of Personal Property: Unsheltered storage of old, unused, stripped and junked machinery, implements, equipment or personal property of any kind which is no longer safely usable for the purposes for which it was manufactured, for a period of thirty (30) days or more (except in licensed junk yards) within the City is hereby declared to be a nuisance and dangerous to the public safety. (1983 Code § 10-333)
Abatement By Owners: The owner, owners, tenants, lessees or occupants of any lot within the City on which such "storage", as defined in the foregoing paragraph C is made, and also the owner, owners or lessees of the above-described personal property involved in such storage, shall jointly and severally abate such nuisance by its prompt removal into completely enclosed and secured yards or buildings to be used for such purposes, or otherwise remove such property from the City. (1983 Code § 10-334)
4.08.030 Abatement Procedure
Appointment And Duties Of Inspector:
Appointment: There is hereby established the position of Nuisance Inspector whose duties it shall be to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. Until another person is designated, the Chief of Police shall enforce the provisions of this Chapter. More than one person may be appointed to act as Inspector under this Section. 
Duties: The Nuisance Inspector is authorized to: 
Perform all functions necessary to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. 
Inspect or cause to be inspected, as often as needed, all buildings, structures, lots or places for the purpose of determining whether such are in compliance with the provisions of this Chapter. 
Existence Of Objectional Condition: If he concludes there exists an objectionable condition in violation of this Chapter, the Inspector shall: 
Ascertain the names of the owners and occupants and descriptions of the premises where such objects and conditions constituting a nuisance exist. 
Serve notice in writing upon the owner and occupant of such premises, either personally or by mailing notice prepaid, addressed to the owner and occupant at their last known post office addresses as disclosed by the records of the County Assessor, or as otherwise ascertained, requiring such owner or occupant, or both, as the case may be, to eradicate or destroy and remove the nuisance within such time as the Inspector may designate; provided, that any person notified pursuant to this paragraph shall be given at least ten (10), but not more than twenty (20) days, as determined by the Inspector following the date of service of such notice, to correct the objectionable condition. The notice shall: 
Contain a specific statement of the nature of the violation and generally describe the premises on which the violation exists. 
Inform the owner, occupant or other person that in the event he disagrees with the determination of the Inspector and does not wish to comply with the provisions of the notice or that he objects to the factual or legal basis for the notice, he may request in writing a hearing before the City Council at a time and place to be set by the City Council. A written application for a hearing shall state the time within which the person must conform to the provisions of the notice. 
Inform the person that in the event he fails or neglects to correct the objectionable condition, the City will correct the objectionable condition and will collect the costs of so correcting the objectionable condition by either a court action, in which case he will be assessed such costs, together with reasonable attorney fees and court costs, or will charge the cost of correcting the violation against the property as a tax.
In the event the owner or occupant makes such request for a hearing, the City Council shall set the time and place for hearing objections, and the City Recorder shall notify the owner, occupant or other persons having an interest in said property on the condition thereof, in writing, of the time and place at which they may appear and be heard. The hearing shall be heard within less than five (5) days from the date of service or mailing of the notice of hearing. (1983 Code § 10-351)
Hearing:
Informal Hearing; Written Decision: At the written request of an owner, occupant or other person having an interest in property which is the subject of a notice to remove or abate weeds, objectionable conditions or objects from the property, the City Council shall conduct an informal hearing (which need not be reported), wherein such persons may present such evidence and argument as is pertinent to the question of whether or not the removal or abatement of the objects or conditions is properly within the purview of this Chapter. The City Council shall also permit the presentation of evidence and argument by the Inspector and other interested parties. Thereafter within not less than five (5) nor more than ten (10) days, the City Council shall, over the signature of the Mayor, or such other member of the City Council as it may designate, render its written decision, a copy of which shall be mailed to or served upon the owner or any other person to whom the original notice was given by the Inspector. 
Notice Of Decision; Abatement By Owner Or Occupant: In the event the decision of the City Council upholds the determination of the Inspector, the notice originally given by the Inspector as above provided shall be deemed to be sufficient to require the owner or occupant to remove or abate the objectionable objects or conditions, and he shall have up to ten (10) days from the date of notice of the decision within which to conform thereto, unless additional time, not to exceed thirty (30) days, is authorized by the Inspector. 
Time Period For Compliance: In the event that the decision of the City Council either overrules or modifies the determination of the Inspector, the written decision of the City Council shall apprise the owner or occupant of that fact and set forth the details and extent to which the owner or occupant must make removal or other abatement of the objectionable objects or conditions, if any. The owner or occupant shall be required to conform to the decision of the City Council within ten (10) days after service or mailing of a copy of the decision, and the decision shall be deemed to be the modified decision of the Inspector, unless additional time is authorized by the City Council. (1983 Code § 10-352) 
Filing Of Amended Notice: The Inspector shall file an amended notice and proof of service of notice and file the same in the office of the City Recorder. (1983 Code § 10-352; amd. 1998 Code)
Failure To Comply; Abatement By City: If any owner, occupant or other person having an interest in land described in such notice of decision to whom the notice was given shall fail or neglect to conform to the requirements thereof relating to the eradication, destruction or removal of such weeds, garbage, refuse, objects or structures, the Inspector shall employ all necessary assistance to cause such objectionable objects or conditions to be removed or destroyed at the expense of the City. (1983 Code § 10-353)
Itemized Statement: The Inspector shall prepare an itemized statement of all expenses incurred in the removal and destruction of nuisances, and shall mail a copy thereof to the owner or occupant or both or to persons having an interest in the property, demanding payment within twenty (20) days of the date of mailing. The notice shall be deemed delivered when mailed by registered mail, addressed to the last known address of the property owner, occupant or persons having an interest in the property. (1983 Code § 10-354)
Failure To Make Payment: In the event the owner, occupant or person having an interest in the property fails to make payment of the amount set forth in the statement to the City Treasurer within the twenty (20) days, the Inspector may either cause suit to be brought in an appropriate court of law or may refer the matter to the County Treasurer as provided in this Chapter. (1983 Code § 10-355)
Collection By Lawsuit:
Authority: In the event collection of expenses of destruction and removal are pursued through the courts, the City shall sue and receive judgment for all of said expenses of destruction and removal, together with reasonable attorney fees, interest and court costs, and shall execute upon such judgment in the manner provided by law. (1983 Code § 10-356) 
Lien; Public Sale: In the event of abatement, removal or correction, or any other act in the abatement, cleaning up or in any form of restoration of the premises where a nuisance existed and the same is not abated within a reasonably short time after notice, not more than two (2) weeks after written notice to the author, the same shall be abated by the City with the structures razed, destroyed and removed and all of the costs of abatement, removal or correction and all the court costs, including attorney fees, shall become a lien upon the offending premises, which lien may be foreclosed in a manner provided for the foreclosure of any lien upon property in the State and the property upon which the nuisance existed shall be sold at a public sale at which the owner will be allowed to bid, and the amount of the lien shall be the minimum amount acceptable to the City as a bid. Otherwise, the City shall acquire and become the owner of the property on which the abated nuisance existed, occurred or failed of correction irrespective of the identity of the author or the owner of any interest by ownership of the fee simple title, the holder of a lien or encumbrance thereon or any judgment, claim or any other asserted or unasserted interest shall be extinguished by the sale. (1998 Code)
Collection Through Taxes: In the event that the Inspector elects to refer the expenses of destruction or removal to the County Treasurer for inclusion in the tax notice of the property owner, he shall make in triplicate an itemized statement of all expenses incurred in the destruction and removal of the same, and shall deliver three (3) copies of the statement to the County Treasurer within ten (10) days after the completion of the work of destroying or removing such weeds, refuse, garbage, objects or structures. Thereupon, the costs of the work shall be pursued by the County Treasurer in accordance with the provisions of Utah Code § 10-11-4, as amended, and the recalcitrant owner shall have such rights and shall be subject to such ( powers as are thereby granted. (1983 Code § 10-357; amd. 1998 Code)
Criminal Proceeding: The commencement of criminal proceedings for the purpose of imposing penalties for violations of this Chapter shall not be conditioned upon prior issuance of a notice or the granting to the defendant an opportunity to abate or remove the nuisance. The provisions of this Chapter relating to notice and abatement shall be deemed merely alternative and additional methods of securing conformity to the provisions of this Chapter. (1983 Code § 10-358)
Penalty For Failure To Comply:
Class C Misdemeanor: Any owner, occupant or person having an interest in property subject to this Chapter who shall fail to comply with the notice or order given pursuant to this Chapter shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010 for each offense and further sum of fifty dollars ($50.00) for each and every day such failure to comply constitutes beyond the date fixed for compliance. (1983 Code § 10-359; amd. 1998 Code) 
Criminal Proceedings: Compliance by any owner, occupant or person to whom a notice has been given subsequent to the commencement of criminal proceedings as provided in this Chapter shall not be admissible in any criminal proceeding brought pursuant to this Section. (1983 Code § 10-359)
4.12 WEEDS
4.12.010 Definition - Weeds
4.12.020 Standard Of Weed Control
4.12.030 Penalty

4.12.010 Definition - Weeds
Weeds shall include any vegetation commonly referred to as a weed, or which shall have been designated a noxious weed by the Utah commissioner of agriculture. (1983 Code § 10-322)

4.12.020 Standard Of Weed Control
It is hereby declared that the above stated weeds constitute a nuisance when they create a fire hazard, a source of contamination, or pollution of the water, air or property, a danger to health, a breeding place or habitation for insects or rodents or other forms of life deleterious to humans or are unsightly or deleterious to their surroundings. (1983 Code § 10-323)

4.12.030 Penalty
It shall be an infraction and subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010 for any person owning or occupying real property on Main Street to allow weeds to grow higher than six inches (6") and for any person owning or occupying real property in Ephraim other than Main Street to allow weeds to grow higher than twelve inches (12") on such property or not to remove from such property any cuttings of such weeds or any refuse, unsightly or deleterious objects after having been given notice from the code enforcement officer. (Ord. 13-04, 11-6-2013)

4.16 GARBAGE AND REFUSE
4.16.010 Definitions - Garbage And Refuse
4.16.020 Collection And Pickup Of Garbage
4.16.030 Regulations

4.16.010 Definitions - Garbage And Refuse
COMMERCIAL GARBAGE: Refers to garbage produced in commercial establishments, public or quasi-public institutions or establishments, including restaurants, hotels, motels and similar establishments.

COMMUNITY WASTE: Lawn cuttings, clippings from bushes and shrubs, leaves and trees and tree branches.

CONTAINER OR REGULATION CONTAINER: A type of garbage or trash container of galvanized metal or other approved material and having a tight-fitting lid or properly and sufficiently treated weather resistant paper bag manufactured specifically for use in garbage and refuse collection. 

GARBAGE: Waste from the preparation, handling, storing, cooking or consumption of food and food products. 

REFUSE: All waste matter, except garbage, attending, or resulting from the occupancy of residences, apartments, hotels, or other places of dwelling and from the operation of a business. Refuse shall not be deemed to include industrial waste or waste matter resulting from the construction, demolition or repair of a building or other structure.

RESIDENTIAL GARBAGE: Garbage produced in places of private residence and dining halls not open to the public. (1983 Code § 10-411)

4.16.020 Collection And Pickup Of Garbage
Garbage To Be Placed At Pickup Point: All garbage and refuse subject to garbage collection by the City shall be placed at a pickup point at or near the premises designated from time to time by regulations adopted by the City Council and at such time or times as shall be designated by regulations of the City Council. 
Garbage Not Set Out Prior To Collection: Until otherwise provided by regulation, garbage and refuse must not be set out upon the street for collection prior to the evening of the day before collection and must be set out on the day of collection before the hour of collection designated by regulations of the City Council. 
Removal Of Receptacles: All empty receptacles must be removed from the street as soon as practicable after being emptied, and in every case, must be removed from the street the same day they are emptied. Receptacles shall not be permitted to remain on any street longer than may be necessary for the removal of the contents. (1983 Code § 10-418)
4.16.030 Regulations
No Accumulation Of Garbage: It shall be unlawful for any person to accumulate garbage or refuse or cause garbage or refuse to be deposited upon any street or alley or upon any premises in the City without express permission from the Public Works Director. The Public Works Director may permit the feeding or processing of garbage or refuse upon premises properly equipped and maintained so as to prevent the creation of a nuisance or a hazard to health, or permit the depositing of ashes and other dry material for filling purposes at such places as the Public Works Director may designate and under such restrictions as the City Council may by regulation impose. Additionally, the Public Works Director may grant to any person permission for sorting, bailing and marketing trade waste upon premises properly equipped and maintained. (1983 Code § 10-415; amd. 1998 Code) 
Containers: 
Suitable Receptacles: All garbage and refuse shall be placed in suitable and sufficient garbage receptacles, either receptacles with tight-fitting lids or properly and sufficiently treated water resistant paper bags manufactured specifically for use in garbage and refuse collection, or plastic bags manufactured specifically for use in garbage and refuse collection. (1983 Code § 10-416) 
Weight: Receptacles shall not be filled to exceed seventy five (75) pounds in weight, including the weight of the receptacle. Metal receptacles shall be provided with handles for convenient lifting. (1983 Code § 10-416; amd. 1998 Code) 
Closing Of Containers Required: All garbage and market waste must be placed in rainproof and flyproof receptacles of the type herein required, and the receptacle shall be tightly closed in such manner as to prevent offensive odors or flies. (1983 Code § 10-417) 
Community Waste: Community waste may be disposed of by residents and business establishments in vehicles provided by them subject to regulation by the City Council as to the places of disposal and as to the type of vehicle used to avoid spillage upon the public ways of the City, hazards to safety and the prevention of nuisances. (1983 Code § 10-419; amd. 1998 Code) 
Burning Of Refuse Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to burn garbage, market waste, manure or other refuse in the open air or in any furnace or stove within the City. (1983 Code § 10-420) 
Dumping Refuse Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or dump garbage, ashes, market waste, paper boxes, cartons, trade waste, manure or night soil, or any other refuse upon any lot within the City whether such lot is occupied or vacant and whether such person so placing, depositing or dumping such refuse is the owner, tenant, occupant or lessor thereof or has the same under his jurisdiction and control. (1983 Code § 10-421) 
Limitations Upon Dumping: Dumping waste and garbage shall be permitted only in such places as are designated by the City Council. Dumping shall be subject to such rules and regulations as may be formulated by the City Council. (1983 Code § 10-422) 
Regulation By City Council: The City Council may adopt such regulations as in its opinion are necessary to implement this Chapter and its objectives. (1983 Code § 10-423)
4.20 GENERAL HEALTH REGULATIONS
4.20.010 Board Of Health
4.20.020 Health Director
4.20.030 Permit Required
4.20.040 Application For Permit
4.20.050 Unwholesome Food
4.20.060 Removal Of Garbage
4.20.070 Discharge Of Sewage Pollution
4.20.080 Inadequate Plumbing

4.20.010 Board Of Health
Established: The Central Utah District Health Department is hereby designated as the Board of Health of the City. (1983 Code § 10-211) 
Powers And Duties: 
Contract With Central Utah Health Department: The City may contract with the Central Utah Health Department on such terms and conditions as the parties may agree to enforce the provisions of this Chapter and such other ordinances of the City which authorize or require action or impose any duty on the Board of Health. 
Adopt Rules And Regulations: The Board of Health shall adopt such rules and regulations as it shall deem necessary to govern its meetings and conduct. 
Review And Approve Applications And Permits: The Board of Health shall review and approve all applications for permits to operate any business or engage in any construction for which a permit is required from the Board of Health pursuant to any ordinances or regulations of the City.
Recommend Rules And Regulations: The Board of Health shall recommend to the Mayor for promulgation by the City Council such health rules, regulations and ordinances as it deems necessary for the health of the persons within the City. (1983 Code § 10-212)
4.20.020 Health Director
Position Created: The Health Director of the Central Utah District Health Department is hereby designated as the Health Director of the City. (1983 Code § 10-221) 
Powers And Duties: 
Appoint Or Designate Assistant: The Health Director may appoint or designate any qualified person to act as his assistant for the purpose of enforcing the ordinances of the City. 
Enforce Terms And Conditions Of Contract: Subject to the terms and conditions of the contract between the Central Utah District Health Department, the Health Director shall: 
Be the executive officer of the Board of Health. 
Enforce all ordinances of the City and the State which relate to the health and welfare of the residents of the City. 
Enforce all rules, regulations and ordinances relating to: 
Plumbing, sanitation, contagious or infectious diseases, quarantine and sewage disposal. 
Producing, storing, keeping and selling meat, dairy or other foods or food products. 
The quarantine and disposal of all animals affected with any contagious or infectious diseases. 
Enforce the nuisance ordinances of the City. 
Have the power to impose and maintain a strict quarantine of all infected persons and premises having contagious or infectious diseases, and to require such persons or premises to be disinfected.
Have the right and authority, when he shall deem necessary to secure or preserve the public health, to enter into or upon any premises, building, or other places during the daytime to examine, analyze, or test any building, structure, premises, product or good manufactured, stored, or kept within the city for the purposes of enforcing this chapter. (1983 Code § 10-222)
4.20.030 Permit Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in any of the following businesses or activities without first obtaining a permit from the board of health:

Food Or Food Products For Human Consumption: Handling, selling, offering for sale, preparing or serving any food or food products or beverages or water intended for human consumption. 
Public Swimming Pool: Operating or permitting public access to any public swimming pool. 
Public Dump: Commercially operating any public dump, garbage or refuse collection or disposal facility, or cleaning out or installing any privy, cesspool or septic tank. 
Fumigation Of Pests: Fumigating or eradicating pests, insects, vermin or any other infestation from any building occupied or to be occupied by humans. (1983 Code § 10-213)
4.20.040 Application For Permit
Applications for a permit from the board of health shall be made in writing to the city recorder. 
The application shall be referred by the city recorder to the board of health for review and recommendation. The board of health shall then forward the application with its recommendation to the mayor for approval or disapproval by the city council. (1983 Code § 10-214)
4.20.050 Unwholesome Food
It is a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, for any person to sell or offer for sale any unwholesome food or beverage which has been condemned by any government food inspector. (1983 Code § 10-223; amd. 1998 Code)

4.20.060 Removal Of Garbage
Upon Vacating Premises: It shall be unlawful for any person, upon vacating or moving from any dwelling, storeroom, or other building, to fail to remove all garbage, rubbish, or ashes from such building or premises and the grounds appurtenant thereto, or to fail to place the same in a thoroughly sanitary condition within twenty four (24) hours after the premises is vacated. 
Rental Property: In situations where rental property is so vacated, the owner of the property shall be concurrently responsible with the tenant thereof for compliance with this section. (1983 Code § 10-224) 
4.20.070 Discharge Of Sewage Pollution
Conform To Standards: It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge or permit the discharge of any sewage or filth from any premises into and upon any public highway, stream, watercourse or public place, or into any drain, cesspool, or private wastewater disposal system which does not conform to standards established by the state division of health or by the city. (1983 Code § 10-225) 
Connection To Public Sewer System: The health director may order a connection for sewage disposal to be made with the public sewer system provided by the city if such is available; provided, that the public sewer system is within three hundred feet (300') of the residence. (1983 Code § 10-225; amd. Ord. 12-05, 4-4-2012) 
Prevention: The health director shall use all due measures to prevent the fouling of any streams, watercourses, reservoirs, or any source furnishing water to any of the inhabitants of the city. (1983 Code § 10-225)
4.20.080 Inadequate Plumbing
The health director shall have power to require the prompt repair of all leaks or other defects in plumbing throughout the city. He shall have power to condemn and abate all plumbing which is deficient under the plumbing ordinances. When, in the opinion of the Health Director, a change in occupants, type of business or other cause requires changes in plumbing, he shall have the power to compel the installation of an increased number of plumbing fixtures and a change in their type or capacity, and to make such other alterations or increases as may be necessary for the health and safety of the occupants of the building and of the public generally. (1983 Code § 10-226)

4.24 LITTER; HANDBILLS
4.24.010 Definitions - Litter; Handbills
4.24.020 Litter Regulations
4.24.030 Handbills And Posters; Restricted Activity
4.24.040 Handbill Regulations

4.24.010 Definitions - Litter; Handbills
For the purpose of this Chapter:

AUTHORIZED RECEPTACLE: A public or private litter storage and collection receptacle.

COMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter or literature: 

Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, commodity or thing; 
Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment, or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest in sales thereof; 
Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit. However, the terms of this clause shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind, when either of the same is held, given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information which is not restricted under the ordinary rules of decency, good morals, public peace, safety and good order; provided, that nothing contained in this clause shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where such license is or may be required by any law of this State, or under any ordinance of the City; or 
Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter is predominantly and essentially an advertisement, and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes or for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as advertiser or distribution.
GARBAGE: Waste from the preparation, cooking or consumption of food, condemned food products and all refuse and waste from the handling, storage, preparation and sale of produce. Garbage originates primarily in kitchens, stores, markets, restaurants, hotels and other places where food is handled, stored, sold, cooked and consumed.

LITTER: Includes "garbage", "refuse" and "rubbish", as defined herein, and all other waste material which, if thrown or deposited as herein prohibited, tends to create a danger to public health, safety, welfare or appearance of the City.

NEWSPAPER: Any newspaper of general or local circulation or any periodical or current magazine regularly published with not less than four (4) issues per year, and sold to the public.

NONCOMMERCIAL HANDBILL: Any printed or written matter, any sample, or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper.

PARK: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the City owned or used by the City.

REFUSE: Putrescible and nonputrescible solid wastes (except body wastes), including garbage, rubbish, ashes, street cleanings, dead animals, and solid market and industrial wastes.

RUBBISH: Nonputrescible solid wastes consisting of both combustible and noncombustible waste, such as paper, wrapping, cigarettes, cardboard, tin cans, yard clippings, leaves, wood, glass, bedding, crockery and similar materials. 

VEHICLE: Every device in, on or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively on stationary rails or tracks. (1983 Code § 10-431)

4.24.020 Litter Regulations
Litter In Public Places: No person shall throw or deposit litter in or on any street, sidewalk or other public place except: 
 In authorized receptacles for collection or in official City garbage dumps; or 
For collection as authorized by the City Council. (1983 Code § 10-432) 
Placement Of Litter In Receptacles: Persons placing litter in authorized receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public place or on private property. (1983 Code § 10-433) 
Sweeping Litter Into Gutters Prohibited: No person shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway, except as authorized by the City Council. Persons owning or occupying property shall keep the sidewalk in front of their premises free of litter. (1983 Code § 10-434) 
Merchants' Duty To Keep Sidewalks Free Of Litter: No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business shall keep the sidewalk in front of their business premises free of litter. (1983 Code § 10-435) 
Litter Thrown By Person In Vehicle: No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter on any street or other public place, or on private property. (1983 Code § 10-436) 
Truck Loads Causing Litter: No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any load, contents or litter from being blown or deposited on any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck, the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place, mud, dirt, sticky substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. (1983 Code § 10-437) 
Litter In Parks: No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park except in authorized receptacles and in such a manner that the litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements on any part of the park or on any street or other public place. Where authorized receptacles are not provided, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. (1983 Code § 10-438) 
Litter In Lakes And Fountains: No person shall throw or deposit litter in any fountain, pond, lake, stream or any other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the City. (1983 Code § 10-439)
Litter On Occupied Private Property: No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied private property, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized private receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public place or on any private property. (1983 Code § 10-447) 
Litter On Vacant Lots: No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property whether or not owned by such person. (1983 Code § 10-448)
4.24.030 Handbills And Posters; Restricted Activity
No person or business shall post, stick, stamp, paint or otherwise fix, or cause the same to be done by any person, any notice, placard, bill, card, poster, advertisement or other paper or device calculated to attract the attention of the public, or upon any sidewalk, curb or any other portion or part of any public way or public place or any lamp post, electric light, telegraph, telephone or railway structure, hydrant, shade tree or tree box, or upon the columns, trusses, girders, railings, gates or other parts of any bridge or other public structure or building, or upon any pole, box or fixture of the fire alarm or police telegraph system, except such as may be authorized or required by the laws of the United States, or State of Utah and the ordinances of the City. (1983 Code § 10-449A)

4.24.040 Handbill Regulations
Throwing Or Distributing Commercial Handbills In Public Places; Penalty: No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the City. Unless otherwise authorized by the City Council, it is an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, for any person to hand out, distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street, or other public place for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. (1983 Code § 10-440; amd. 1998 Code) 
Placing Commercial And Noncommercial Handbills On Vehicles: Unless otherwise authorized by the City Council, no person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any vehicle; provided, however, that it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it. (1983 Code § 10-441) 
Depositing Commercial And Noncommercial Handbills On Uninhabited Or Vacant Premises: No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on any private premises which are temporarily or continuously uninhabited or vacant. (1983 Code § 10-442) 
Prohibiting Distribution Where Properly Posted: No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill on any private premises, if requested by anyone thereon not to do so or if there is placed on said premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign being the words "No Trespassing", "No Peddlers or Agents", "No Advertisements", or any similar notice, indicating in any manner that the occupants of the premises do not desire to be molested or to have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left on such premises. (1983 Code § 10-443) 
Distributing Commercial And Noncommercial Handbills At Inhabited Private Premises: No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or on private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or on such private premises. However, in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this Section, such person, unless requested by anyone on such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or on such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places, and except that mailboxes may not be so used when prohibited by Federal postal law or regulations. (1983 Code § 10-444) 
Exception For Mail And Newspapers: The provisions of this Chapter shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States, nor to newspapers except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner so as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements on any street, sidewalk or other public place or on private property. (1983 Code § 10-445) 
Posting Notice Prohibited: No person shall post or affix any notice, poster or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamp post, public utility pole or shade tree, or on any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. (1983 Code § 10-446)
4.28 OFFENSIVE BUSINESSES AND FACILITIES
4.28.010 Definition - Offensive Business And Facilities
4.28.020 Permit Required
4.28.030 Application For Permit
4.28.040 Issuance Of Permit
4.28.050 Control Of Animal And Fowl Facilities
4.28.060 Existing Businesses And Facilities

4.28.010 Definition - Offensive Business And Facilities
Offensive businesses, within the meaning of this Chapter, shall include but not be limited to, packing houses, dairies, tanneries, canneries, renderies, junk or salvage yards, bone factories, slaughter houses, butcher shops, soap factories, foundries, breweries, distilleries, livery stables, blacksmith shops, or any other enterprise or establishment which creates excessive odors, fumes, smoke, gases or noises. (1983 Code § 10-241 B)

4.28.020 Permit Required
No person shall commence or change the location of an offensive business or establishment in or within one mile of the limits of the City without first filing an application for a permit to do so with the City Recorder. (1983 Code § 10-241 A)

4.28.030 Application For Permit
The application for a permit shall specify the location at which the business or establishment is to be operated and maintained or the new location to which it is to be moved. The application shall describe the type of activity which will be conducted and describe the manner in which the business or establishment shall eliminate, control, or modify the emission by the business of the undesirable odors, fumes, noises, and other noisome features and the manner in which it shall be screened from public view, if its appearance is offensive. (1983 Code § 10-241C)

4.28.040 Issuance Of Permit
Report And Recommendation: The City Recorder shall cause a study to be made of the proposed business or relocation of any offensive business or establishment by the Central Utah District Health Department and by personnel engaged in the inspection of buildings and other facilities. A report and recommendation shall be made to the City Council. The City Council, after review, may grant to the applicant an opportunity to be heard and present additional facts. Thereafter, the City Council may: (1983 Code § 10-242; amd. 1998 Code) 
Deny the application. 
Recommend a modification thereof. 
Grant a limited permit to enter into the business or make the change of location subject to the requirement that the business or facility conform to standards established by the City Council with reference to controlling the offensive features of the business. 
Revocation Of Permit: In the event a permit is granted, it shall be subject to revocation either upon failure of the operator or owner to conduct his business in the manner specified by the City Council at the time of the granting of the permit, or because a change of circumstances makes the continued operation or maintenance of the business or facility a public nuisance. 
Modification Of Permit: The City Council shall have power to revoke or modify the permission to operate and maintain the business in such a manner as it deems necessary for the public good. (1983 Code § 10-242)
4.28.050 Control Of Animal And Fowl Facilities
Location And Management: The City Council shall have the power to prohibit or control the location and management of any offensive, unwholesome business or establishment in or within one mile of the City and may compel the owner of any pigsty, privy, barn, corral, fur-bearing animal farm, feed yard, poultry farm, or other unwholesome or nauseous house or place to cleanse, abate or remove the same.
Examination Of Operation: The City Council may, on its own initiative and shall, on complaint of a member of the public, examine the operation, control or location of any business or facility for the purpose of determining whether or not the operation of such business or facility should be improved so as to minimize the offensive and unwholesome characteristics or whether the business or activity should be moved or abated. 
Notification Of Abatement: In the event that the City Council decides that the business or facility should be abated, removed, or controlled, it shall notify the owner or operator of the business or facility of such fact. (1983 Code § 10-244) 
Hearing; Limited Permit: After a hearing, the City Council may issue a limited permit wherein it may prescribe the specifications and standard which must be followed by the business or facility in order to be permitted to continue in operation. (1983 Code § 10-244; amd. 1998 Code) 
Abatement Or Removal: Upon a determination by the City Council that the business or facility is a nuisance, it shall have power to order the abatement or removal of the facility or establishment. If the owner fails to conform to such order, the City Council shall have power to bring all necessary legal proceedings to force removal, abatement, or adherence to standards. (1983 Code § 10-244)
4.28.060 Existing Businesses And Facilities
Investigation By City Council: The City Council may require an investigation of any existing offensive business or facility to determine whether or not it should be permitted to remain in existence in or within one mile of the City limits. If the City Council determines that the continuation of the business or facility has become a nuisance to persons situated within the City limits or that ample control is not being exercised to minimize the creation of excessive odors, fumes, smoke, gases, and noise, it shall notify the owner or operator thereof that the City Council is considering revoking or modifying the operator's permit. 
Conform To Standards And Specifications: If the City Council decides to require a modification of the manner in which the business or facility is to be maintained, it shall specify the standards or specifications to which the enterprise must conform or otherwise lose its permit to engage thereafter in the business or activity. (1983 Code § 10-243; amd. 1998 Code)
4.32 STREET NAMING AND NUMBERING
4.32.010 Purpose
4.32.020 Street Naming
4.32.030 Street Numbering
4.32.040 Property Numbering
4.32.050 Building Identification
4.32.060 Record Keeping
4.32.070 Procedures
4.32.080 Penalty

4.32.010 Purpose
This chapter is established to provide a standard system for consecutive and logical numbering of streets and properties, to avoid the duplication of street names within Ephraim City and the surrounding areas and to avoid similar sounding or confusing names and designations. The primary goal is to create an orderly system of numbering streets and buildings so that they may more easily be located by address. In all decisions regarding street and building numbering, the first priority shall be to number such that emergency services personnel may quickly locate properties in the city by address when responding to emergency calls. (Ord., 6-6-2002)

4.32.020 Street Naming
The following standards shall apply when naming streets in Ephraim City: 

Duplication: Street names that duplicate existing street names in Ephraim City or elsewhere in the valley shall be avoided. 
Confusion: Proposed street names that sound very similar to existing street names or have unconventional spellings shall be avoided. (Ord., 6-6-2002)
4.32.030 Street Numbering
All streets and intersections shall have numbered coordinates that relate to the city's addressing grid. On streets that do not conform to the four (4) compass directions, numbered coordinates should be assigned from the axis that most nearly matches the principal direction of the street. For simplicity, street numbers shall end with the digit "0" or "5". (Ord., 6-6-2002)

4.32.040 Property Numbering
The following standards shall apply when numbering properties in Ephraim City: 

Juxtaposition: Building numbers should be comparable (but not duplicated) on parallel streets and should be in consecutive order. 
Even-Odd: In numbering houses upon the streets of the city, the following system shall be used: the initial points shall be the intersection of Main Street and Center Street, and the numbering shall extend east and west, and north and south, the even numbers always on the right hand, and the odd numbers always on the left hand, looking away from the initial point. 
Buildings Without Public Frontage: Buildings that are hidden behind other buildings or do not have frontage on a public or approved private street shall be numbered from the centerline of the principal access or driveway. When multiple buildings utilize the same access, the city may, at its discretion, assign a street coordinate to the principal access and number the buildings off of it as if it were a public street. (Ord., 6-6-2002)
4.32.050 Building Identification
All buildings shall have numbers and such numbers shall be identified using the following standards: 

Background: Numbers shall be set on a background of a contrasting color. 
Size: Numbers shall be large enough to be seen easily from the street. 
Visibility: When a dwelling is some distance from a street or when view of the dwelling is blocked by trees or shrubs, numbers should be displayed on a sign attached to a fence, gate, street mailbox, or lawn stake.
Corner Lots: On corner lots house numbers shall face the street named in the address. (Ord., 6-6-2002)
4.32.060 Record Keeping
Numbers Assigned: The city shall designate an employee to assign numbers. 
Inventory: A complete inventory of existing street names and building numbers shall be compiled and maintained by the city. (Ord., 6-6-2002)
4.32.070 Procedures
All proposed street names shall be coordinated with the county dispatch personnel to avoid duplication or confusing names. In addition, the following procedures shall be adhered to with new development and proposed street name changes: 

Subdivisions: Street names shall be approved by the planning commission at either preliminary or final plat approval. Street coordinates and house numbers shall be assigned by the city and shown on the final plat. 
Commercial, Industrial And Multi-Family: The city shall assign building numbers to site plans before issuing a zoning permit. 
Changing Existing Street Names: The city may change existing street names by petition, or at its discretion provided a public hearing on the proposed change is held before the change is made. (Ord., 6-6-2002)
4.32.080 Penalty
The violation of any provision of this chapter shall be deemed an infraction. (Ord., 6-6-2002)

5 POLICE REGULATIONS
5.04 POLICE DEPARTMENT
5.08 ANIMAL CONTROL
5.12 OFFENSES

5.04 POLICE DEPARTMENT
5.04.010 Established
5.04.020 Chief Of Police
5.04.030 Powers And Duties

5.04.010 Established
There is hereby established a regularly constituted police force to be known as the Police Department, which shall consist of a Chief of Police and such other police officers as shall be employed by the City. (1983 Code § 13-111)

5.04.020 Chief Of Police
Responsible For Department: He shall organize, supervise, and be responsible for all the activities of the Police Department and shall define and assign the duties of the different police officers. (1983 Code § 13-112B) 
Attend City Council Meetings: He shall, when required, attend meetings of the City Council to consult with and advise them on matters of public safety. He shall execute all lawful orders of the Mayor and City Council and see that all orders and judgments of the justice of the peace are carried into effect. (1983 Code § 13-112C)
5.04.030 Powers And Duties
The Chief of Police and all police officers of the City shall have the following powers and duties in addition to those that may be assigned to them as provided above: 

Suppress Riots: To suppress riots, disturbances, and breaches of the peace, and to apprehend all persons committing any offense against the laws of the State or ordinances of the City.
Execute And Serve Warrants: To execute and serve all warrants, processes, commitments, and writs whatsoever issued by the justice of the peace. 
Preserve Public Peace: To preserve the public peace, prevent crime, detect and arrest offenders, protect persons and property, remove nuisances existing in the public streets, roads, highways and other public places, enforce every law relating to the suppression of offenses, render such assistance in the collection of licenses as may be required by the license collector and perform all duties enjoined upon them by law and ordinance. (1983 Code § 13-113) 
Maintain Register Of Arrests: The Chief of Police shall provide and cause to be kept a register of arrest. Upon such register shall be entered a statement showing the date of such arrest, the name of the person arrested, the name of the arresting officer, the offense charged and a description of any property found upon the person arrested. (1983 Code § 13-114) 
Stolen Property Disposition: It shall be the duty of the Chief of Police to keep all lost or stolen property that comes into the possession of the Police Department or any of its members. He shall make all reasonable efforts to discover the owners thereof. (1983 Code § 13-117) 
Register Of Property: The Chief of Police must enter or cause to be entered in a suitable book a description for every article of property alleged to be stolen or embezzled and brought into his office or taken from the person or the prisoner and must attach a number to each article and make a corresponding entry thereof. (1983 Code § 13-116) 
Property Taken From Person Arrested: When money or other property is taken from a person arrested upon a charge of a public offense, the officer taking it must at the time issue triplicate receipts therefor, specifying particularly the amount of money or kind of property taken. One of the receipts he must deliver to the person arrested. Another he must forthwith file with the clerk of the court to which the complaint and other papers in the case are required by law to be sent. The third receipt must be sent at once to the office of the Police Department. (1983 Code § 13-115)
5.08 ANIMAL CONTROL
5.08.010 Definitions - Animal Control
5.08.020 Poundmaster
5.08.030 Animal Pound
5.08.040 Licensing Requirements
5.08.050 Cruelty To Animals Prohibited
5.08.060 Dangerous Or Vicious Dogs
5.08.070 Control Of Rabies And Rabid Animals
5.08.080 Animals At Large
5.08.090 Dogs At Large; Violation
5.08.100 Nuisance Dogs; Penalty For Violation
5.08.110 Prohibited Acts And Conditions
5.08.120 Impounding
5.08.130 Estrays

5.08.010 Definitions - Animal Control
As used in this chapter, unless the context otherwise indicates, the following words shall mean:

AT LARGE: Off the premises of the owner and not under the control of the owner or a member of his immediate family either by leash, cord, chain or otherwise.

DOG: Any male, neutered male, female, or spayed female dog of any age.

IMPOUNDED: Having been received into the custody of the city pound or into the custody of any authorized agent or representative of the city.

OWNER: When applied to the proprietorship of a dog, shall mean any person or persons, firm, association or corporation owning, keeping or harboring a dog.

POUND: An animal shelter, lot, premises, or buildings maintained by or authorized or employed by the city for the confinement or care of dogs seized either under the provision of this chapter or otherwise.

POUNDMASTER: The custodian selected by the city council to be responsible for the operation of the dog pound.

UNLICENSED DOG: A dog for which the license for the current year has not been paid, or to which the tag provided for in this chapter is not attached.

VICIOUS DOG: A dog that has bitten a person or other animal without provocation, or a dog that has a known propensity to attack or bite human beings, or other animals. (Ord. 13-03, 10-2-2013)

5.08.020 Poundmaster
Created: The position of city poundmaster is hereby created. Until such time as a poundmaster is appointed, the chief of police shall be poundmaster ex officio. 
Duties: The poundmaster shall perform the following duties: 
Carry out and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
Take into his possession and impound all strays running at large and dispose of the same as hereinafter provided. 
Enforce the licensing of and control all dogs within the city as hereinafter provided. 
File complaints in the courts against any person failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter and obtain licenses when required thereunder. 
Capture and secure all dogs found running at large contrary to the provisions of this chapter and impound such dogs in a humane manner.
Provide for a good and sufficient pound in which all animals duly committed to his charge or otherwise impounded by him shall be maintained. 
Enter a description thereof in records kept for that purpose stating the kind of animal, the circumstance under which received or impounded, and a description thereof sufficient to provide identification, the costs expended for the maintenance of the animal and amounts received arising out of maintenance or sale of animals. 
Shall Charge Fees For Services: The poundmaster shall charge, and the owners of animals taken into his possession for impound, disposal or other services shall pay, such fees and charges for services performed by the pound or poundmaster as the city council shall establish from time to time by resolution. All fees received by the poundmaster shall be paid over to the city treasurer. 
Interference With Poundmaster Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to interfere, molest, hinder or obstruct the poundmaster or any of his authorized representatives in the discharge of their duties as herein prescribed. (Ord. 13-03, 10-2-2013)
5.08.030 Animal Pound
The city council may contract with some humane person as poundmaster, with an adjoining municipality or with the county for the purpose of providing suitable premises and facilities to be used by the city as the dog pound. It shall be maintained in some convenient location and shall be sanitary and so operated as to properly feed, water and protect the dogs from injury. (Ord. 13-03, 10-2-2013)

5.08.040 Licensing Requirements
Dog Licensing: 
Time For Obtaining License; Effective Date: 
Unlawful: It is unlawful for any person to keep, harbor, or maintain any dog four (4) or more months old unless such dog has been registered and licensed in the manner herein provided. 
Fees Enumerated: No dog license shall be issued by the city unless the fee required is paid. The fee due and payable pursuant to this chapter shall be due January 31 and shall be delinquent as of March 1 of each year. All licenses purchased on March 1 or after will pay one and one-half (1 1/2) times the license fee as set by resolution. 
Newly Acquired Or Appropriate Age: The owner of any newly acquired dog of licensing age or of any dog which attains licensing age after March 31 of any year shall make an application for registration and license within thirty (30) days after such acquisition or dogs attain the above stated age. 
Application; Expiration: Application for registration and licensing shall be made to the poundmaster or such other person as the city council may authorize to receive such applications. The owner shall state at the time application is made for such license, his name and address and the sex, breed, and color of each dog owned or kept by him. 
License Fees: 
Fees Enumerated: No dog license shall be issued by the city unless the fees, set forth in the consolidated fee schedule, as adopted by the municipal council, are paid. (Ord. 13-03, 10-2-2013) 
Kennel Fees: Anyone owning, keeping, harboring or maintaining five (5) or more dogs over the age of four (4) months shall be considered operating a dog kennel. Dog kennels shall only be allowed as designated in ECC 10.20.030, "Table B, Land Use Matrix". Kennel operators shall be required to pay a yearly kennel license fee as established by resolution of the city council. Each such person having five (5) or more dogs shall be required to post a one thousand dollar ($1,000.00) bond or show proof of liability insurance covering any damage caused by said dogs. (Ord. 17-01, 2-1-2017) 
Expiration: The license fee shall cover the calendar year in which the license was issued, expiring on December 31 of the year of issuance, regardless of the date when issued. 
License Tag: 
Issuance: A dog license shall be issued by the poundmaster or such other person as the city council shall authorize. Upon payment of the license fee, the city recorder shall issue to the owner a license certificate and a metallic tag for each dog so licensed. The tag shall be changed every year and shall have stamped thereon the year for which it was issued and the number corresponding with the number on the certificate. Every dog owner, except those operating a kennel, shall provide each dog with a collar to which the license tag shall be affixed, and shall see that the collar and tag are constantly worn. It shall be unlawful to deprive a registered dog of its collar and/or tag. 
Duplicate Tag: In case a dog tag is lost or destroyed, a duplicate will be issued by the city recorder upon presentation of a receipt showing the payment of the license fee for the current year, and any such extra fees as established by resolution. 
Tag Not Transferable: Dog tags shall not be transferable from one dog to another, and no refunds shall be made on any dog license fee because of death of the dog or the owner leaving the city before expiration of the license period. 
Licensing Exemptions: 
Temporary Residents: The provisions of this section shall not be intended to apply to dogs whose owners are nonresidents temporarily within the city, nor to dogs brought to the city for the purpose of participating in any dog show. 
Guide Dogs: Dogs used as guides for blind persons and commonly known as seeing eye dogs shall be licensed and registered as other dogs hereinabove provided; except that the owner or keeper of such dog shall not be required to pay any fee therefor. (Ord. 13-03, 10-2-2013)
5.08.050 Cruelty To Animals Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to: 

Treat In Cruel And Inhumane Manner: Overdrive, overload, drive when overloaded, overwork, torture, cruelly beat, mutilate, or needlessly kill, or carry or transport in any vehicle or other conveyance in a cruel and inhumane manner, any animal or cause any of these acts to be done. 
Abandon: Abandon or turn out at large any sick, diseased, or disabled animal, but such animal shall, when rendered useless by reason of sickness or other disability, be killed by the owner thereof and its carcass disposed of in such manner as to create no nuisance or hazard to health.
Kill Or Poison: Wilfully to kill any domestic animal, or to administer poison to any such animal or to expose any poisonous substance with the intent that it shall be taken by any such animal. 
Fail To Provide Care: Fail to provide any animal in his charge or custody with necessary sustenance, drink and protection from the elements, or cause any of these acts to be done. 
Intentionally Exhibit: Intentionally exhibit any stud, horse or bull or other animal indecently, or let any male animal to any female animal for the purpose of providing entertainment or viewing to any person. 
Maintain Place Of Exhibition: Maintain any place where fowl or any animals are suffered to fight upon exhibition or for sport upon any wager. (Ord. 13-03, 10-2-2013)
5.08.060 Dangerous Or Vicious Dogs
Unlawful To Own And Possess: It shall be unlawful for any person to own and possess a vicious dog within the city. Whenever a prosecution for this offense is commenced under this section, the dog so involved may not be redeemed, pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, while awaiting final decision of the court as to the disposition to be made of such dog. 
Disposition After Conviction Of Offense: Upon the trial of any offense under this section, the court may, upon conviction and in addition to the usual judgment of conviction, order the poundmaster or other authorized personnel of the city to put the dog to death or may order such other disposition of the dog as will protect the inhabitants of the city. (Ord. 13-03, 10-2-2013)
5.08.070 Control Of Rabies And Rabid Animals
Rabies Vaccination Required: It shall be unlawful for the owner of any dog to suffer, allow, or permit such dog to be or go upon any sidewalk, street, alley, public place, or square within the city without first having had such dog vaccinated every two (2) years against rabies as provided in paragraph B within the past two (2) years, and without there being on such dog a collar or harness with a license tag thereon showing that such dog has been so vaccinated.
Vaccination By Licensed Veterinarian; Exception: Every owner of any dog over the age of six (6) months within the city shall have the dog vaccinated against rabies by a duly licensed veterinarian, shall secure from the veterinarian a certificate thereof, and shall attach to the collar or harness, which such person is hereby required to place upon the dog, a tag showing that such vaccination has been done; provided, that the city council may, by resolution, provide that the owners of any dog may themselves purchase serum and vaccinate their own dogs. The resolution shall also prescribe the conditions with which the owner must comply to obtain the tag herein required. 
Reporting Of Rabid Animals: Anyone having knowledge of the whereabouts of an animal known to have or suspected of having rabies shall report the fact immediately to the police department. The police department shall likewise be notified of any person or animal bitten by a rabid or suspected rabid animal. 
Biting Animal Quarantined: Any dog or other animal of a species subject to rabies which is known to have bitten or injured any person so as to cause an abrasion of the skin shall be placed in confinement under observation of a veterinary hospital or the city pound and shall not be killed or released until at least fourteen (14) days after the biting or injury has occurred in order to determine whether or not the animal has rabies. If the animal dies or has been killed, its head shall be removed and immediately taken to the state health laboratory to be examined for rabies. 
Bitten Animal Quarantined: Any animal of a species subject to rabies which has been bitten by a known rabid animal or has been in intimate contact with a rabid animal shall be isolated in a suitable place approved by the poundmaster for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days or destroyed. (Ord. 13-03, 10-2-2013)
5.08.080 Animals At Large
No cattle, horses, mules, sheep, goats, or swine shall be allowed to run at large or to be herded, picketed, or staked out upon any street, sidewalk, or other public place within the limits of the city, and all such animals so found may be impounded. Nothing herein contained shall be so construed as to prevent any person from driving cows, horses, mules or other animals from outside the city limits to any enclosure within the city limits or from any enclosure in the city to a place outside the city or from one enclosure to another within limits of the city. (Ord. 13-03, 10-2-2013)

5.08.090 Dogs At Large; Violation
Unlawful Acts: It shall be unlawful: 
For the owner or keeper of any dog to permit such dog to run at large. 
For an owner of a dog to permit such dog to go upon or be upon the private property of any person without the permission of the owner or person entitled to the possession of such private property. 
Violation Regardless Of Precautions: The owner of any dog running at large shall be deemed in violation of this section, regardless of the precautions taken to prevent the escape of the dog and to prohibit it from running at large. (Ord. 13-03, 10-2-2013)
5.08.100 Nuisance Dogs; Penalty For Violation
Nuisance Dogs: Any dog that has been found at large once and then subsequently found at large a second time within six (6) months of the first infraction, that dog shall be a nuisance dog. A violation of this paragraph is a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. 
Third Offense: The third time the same dog is picked up and impounded for being a nuisance and a menace to the public health and safety, the dog shall be disposed of in a humane manner or the poundmaster may order such other disposition of the dog as will protect the inhabitants of the city. (Ord. 13-03, 10-2-2013)
5.08.110 Prohibited Acts And Conditions
Disposition Of Dead Animals; Violation: The owner of any animal or fowl that has died or been killed shall remove or bury the carcass of such animal within ten (10) hours after its death; provided, that no horse, cow, ox, or other animal shall be buried within the closely inhabited portions of the city. A violation of this paragraph is a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. 
Diseased Animals: It is a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, for any person to bring into the city for sale or have in his possession with intent to sell or offer for sale, any animal which has a communicable disease or which has been exposed to or which is liable to carry infection from a communicable disease. 
Diseased Animals For Human Consumption: It is a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, for any person to bring into the city for sale or to sell, or offer for sale any cattle, sheep, swine, fish, game, fowl, or poultry which is diseased, unsound, and unwholesome or which for any other reason is unfit for human food. 
Female Dogs In Heat: The owner of a female dog in heat shall cause such dog to be penned or enclosed in such a manner as to preclude other dogs from attacking such female dog or being attracted to such female dog so as to create a public nuisance. 
Unlawful To Harbor Stray Dogs: It shall be unlawful for any person to harbor or keep within the city any lost or stray dog. Whenever any dog shall be found which appears to be lost or stray, it shall be the duty of the finder to notify the city recorder or poundmaster, who shall impound for running at large contrary to the terms of this chapter. If there shall be attached to such dog a license tag for the then current fiscal year, the poundmaster shall notify the person to whom such license was issued, at the address given on the license. 
Loud Or Offensive Animals; Penalty: No person shall own, keep, or harbor any dog which by loud, continued, or frequent barking, howling, yelping, or by noxious or offensive odors shall annoy, disturb, or endanger the health and welfare of any person or neighborhood. A violation of this paragraph shall be a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, and such is hereby declared to be a nuisance, and each day a violation is permitted to exist or continue shall constitute a separate offense. This paragraph shall not apply to the city dog pound, veterinary hospitals, or medical laboratories. 
Trespassing Animals: It shall be unlawful for any owner or caretaker of any domestic fowl or animal to permit such fowl or animal to trespass upon the premises of another person. (Ord. 13-03, 10-2-2013)
5.08.120 Impounding
Duty Of Official To Impound: It shall be the duty of every police officer or other designated official to apprehend any dog found running at large, not wearing his tag, or which is in violation of this chapter and to impound such dog in the pound or other suitable place. The poundmaster, or some other designated official, upon receiving any dog, shall make a complete registry, entering the breed, color and mix of such dog and whether licensed. If licensed, he shall enter the name and address of the owner and number of the license. 
Interference With Impounding Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, delay, interfere with, or obstruct the poundmaster or any of his assistants while engaging in capturing, securing, or taking to the dog pound any dog or dogs liable to be impounded, or to break open or in any manner directly or indirectly aid, counsel, or advise the breaking open of any dog pound or ambulance, wagon, or other vehicle used for the collecting or conveying of dogs to the dog pound. 
Records Maintained By Poundmaster: The poundmaster shall keep a record of each animal impounded by him, the date of receipt of such animal, the date and manner of its disposal and if redeemed, reclaimed, or sold, the name of the person by whom redeemed, reclaimed, or purchased, the address of such person, the amounts of all fees received or collected for or because of the impounding, reclaiming or purchasing thereof, together with the number of any tag and the date of any tag exhibited or issued upon the redemption or sale of such animal. 
Redemption Of Impounded Dogs: Any dog impounded as a licensed or unlicensed dog may be redeemed and taken from such pound by the owner or any authorized person, upon exhibiting to the poundmaster or person having charge of said pound, a certificate of registry as provided in paragraph A, showing that the license imposed by this chapter has been paid for such dog and upon paying the person in charge of the pound an impounding fee as set by resolution of the city council for each and every day such dog shall have been impounded. All impounded dogs not redeemed within three (3) days shall be sold for the best price obtainable at either private or public sale, and all monies received from such sales shall be paid daily to the city treasurer. All dogs that are not sold or redeemed in the required time shall be disposed of in a humane manner. 
Disposition Of Severely Injured Or Infected Dogs: In the case of dogs severely injured or having contagious disease other than rabies and which in the poundmaster's judgment are suffering and recovery is doubtful, the poundmaster may destroy the dog without awaiting the three (3) day period. (Ord. 13-03, 10-2-2013)
5.08.130 Estrays
Definition: Whenever the word "ESTRAY" appears in this section, it is defined to mean any valuable animal, except dogs or cats, not wild, found wandering from its owner. 
Duty Of Poundmaster: It is hereby made the duty of the poundmaster to take into his possession and impound all estrays running at large, and to dispose of the same as hereinafter provided. 
Notice Of Sale: Within three (3) days after an estray shall come into the possession of the poundmaster, he shall advertise the same in a newspaper published in and having general circulation in the county by publishing a notice in at least one issue of the newspaper, and by posting notices for a period of ten (10) days in three (3) public places in the city, one of which places shall be at or near the post office. He shall immediately deliver a copy of such notice to the city recorder or mail the same to him by registered letter. The notice so filed with the city recorder should be available during reasonable hours for inspection by the public free of charge. The notice herein provided for shall be on file in the office of the city recorder and shall contain a description of the animals, including all marks and brands, when taken, and the day, hour, and place of sale, which shall be not less than ten (10) days or more than twenty (20) days from the time of posting such notice. 
Return To Owner Upon Payment: If at any time before the sale of any estrays, such animals shall be claimed and proved to be the property of any person, the poundmaster shall release them to the owner upon receiving from him the cost of impounding, keeping and advertising the same. 
Unclaimed Animals: 
Sold To Highest Bidder: If the animals are not so claimed and taken away, the poundmaster shall, at the time and place mentioned in the notice, proceed to sell the same, one at a time, to the highest cash bidder, and shall execute and deliver a bill of sale transferring said animals to the purchaser or purchasers thereof, which bill of sale shall be in such form as is on file in the city recorder's office.
Bill Of Sale Filed With City Recorder: The poundmaster shall immediately file a copy of such bill of sale with the city recorder or forward the same to him by registered mail. Such bill of sale shall transfer and vest in such purchaser the full title to the animals thus sold. 
Records Maintained By Poundmaster: The poundmaster shall keep an accurate record of all estrays received by him, their age, color, sex, marks, and brands, the time and place of taking and the expense of keeping and selling the same, all animals claimed and taken away, all animals sold and to whom sold and the amount paid, all monies paid to owners after sale, all monies paid into the treasury, and all other matters necessary for compliance with the provisions of this section. The city council shall provide the poundmaster with a suitable book in which shall be entered the records required by law to be kept by the poundmaster. Such records shall be open to the inspection of the public at all reasonable hours, and shall be deposited by the poundmaster with his successor in office. 
Regulations For Trespassing Estrays Causing Damage: 
Recovery Of Damages: If any cattle, horses, asses, mules, sheep, goats or swine shall trespass or do damage upon the premises of any person, the party aggrieved, whether he be the owner or the occupant of such premises, may recover damages by an action at law against the owner of the trespassing animals or by distraining and impounding the animals in the manner provided. 
Appraisal Of Damages: The owner or occupant of any property may distrain any or all of said animals trespassing or doing damage thereon. He shall, within twenty four (24) hours thereafter, deliver said animals to the poundmaster together with a certificate of the appraisement of the damage done by such animals. Such appraisement must be made by some disinterested person. It must state the amount of the damage, the time when committed, the name of the person damaged, the name of the owner of the animals, if known, and if not known, it must state that fact together with a description of the animals, including all visible marks and brands. If the animals appear to be owned by different parties, a separate appraisement and a separate certificate thereof shall be made of the damage done by the lot or group of animals which appear to belong to each of the different owners. In such cases, the owners shall be notified separately, and each lot or group of animals shall be advertised and sold separately in the same manner as though the damage had been done by different animals at different times. 
Owner Notified: The person distraining the animals must, if the owner of the same be known to him and if he resides within ten (10) miles of the place of the trespass, immediately deliver to such owner, or leave at his place of residence if he cannot be found, a copy of such certificate of appraisement; but if the owner does not live within ten (10) miles of the place of trespass, the party distraining the animals may at his option deliver a copy of such certificate to the owner in person, or deposit the same in the nearest post office in a registered letter addressed to said owner. He shall be entitled to charge fifty cents ($0.50) a mile one way for the first ten (10) miles necessarily traveled in delivering such certificate, and fifty cents ($0.50) for each additional mile, to be taxed as costs against the animals. 
Failure To Notify Owner Waives Damages: If the party distraining any animals shall fail to deliver them or the certificate of appraisement to the poundmaster within forty eight (48) hours, or shall fail to deliver to the owners of the animals, if known, a copy of the certificate of appraisement within twenty four (24) hours after he receives the same or to deposit the same in a post office as herein provided, he shall not be entitled to recover damages under the provisions of this section. 
Duty Of Poundmaster If Owner Unknown: Whenever any animals are delivered to the poundmaster and the certificate of appraisement is filed with him as herein provided and such certificate states that the owner is unknown, the poundmaster shall immediately examine all brand books or brand sheets in his possession. If the owner be ascertained thereby or if the owner be already known to the poundmaster, he shall, if the owner lives within ten (10) miles, immediately deliver a copy of such certificate of appraisement to such owner, or leave the same at his residence if he cannot be found. If the owner lives more than ten (10) miles away, the poundmaster may at his option deliver such copy personally to the owner, or deposit the same in the nearest post office in a registered letter addressed to such owner. He shall, however, serve a copy in one of the ways provided herein; provided, that whenever personal service of a copy of any paper is required by this chapter, service by agent shall be deemed sufficient. 
Sale Of Delivered Animals: As soon as any such animals are delivered to the poundmaster, he shall immediately proceed to advertise the same for sale as hereinafter provided except when the owner is known and has been notified, in which case he shall hold said animals forty eight (48) hours before advertising the same. He shall advertise in a newspaper published in and having general circulation in the county, by publishing a notice in at least one issue of said paper, by posting notices in three (3) public places in the city, one of which shall be at or near the post office, and he shall deliver a copy of the same to the city recorder or send the same by deputy or by registered mail. The city recorder should preserve such notice and post a copy thereof. The notice herein provided for shall state the time when the damage was done and the amount thereof, the name of the party damaged, a description of the animals, including all visible marks and brands, and the day, hour, and place at which such animals will be sold, which shall be not less than ten (10) or more than twenty (20) days from the time of posting such notice. The notices shall be in such form as is on file in the office of the city recorder. 
Owner May Claim Animals Upon Payment Of Damages; Disputed Appraisal: The owner of any trespassing animals taken up under the provisions of this section may at any time before the sale thereof claim and take such animals away upon paying the amount of damages set forth in the certificate of appraisement and the accrued costs, and if such animals are included in a lot or group of animals belonging to other parties against which the damages and costs are assessed as a whole, he shall pay his proportion of the total amount of damages and costs assessed against such animals, according to the number of animals he owns when compared with the number of the entire lot or group. If he deems the appraisal too high, he may choose another appraiser having the qualifications herein provided who with the first appraiser shall make a new appraisal, and if they cannot agree, they shall choose a third appraiser, and the three (3) shall proceed to make another appraisal, and the decision of the majority shall be final. 
Sale To Highest Bidder; Bill Of Sale: If such animals are not claimed and taken away by the owner, the poundmaster shall, at the time and place set forth in the notice of sale, proceed to sell such animals, one at a time, to the highest cash bidder. If the owner of any lot of animals to be sold is known, the poundmaster shall sell only enough of said animals to pay the damages and costs, the remainder may be turned over to the owner at any time thereafter; but if the owner be unknown, the poundmaster shall proceed to sell all of said animals so advertised for sale. He shall execute and deliver a bill of sale therefor, and file a copy with the city recorder as hereinbefore provided.
Owner Entitled To Residue Of Proceeds: If any estrays or trespassing animals sold under the provisions of this section shall, within a period of six (6) months following the date of sale, be claimed and proved to be the property of any person, it shall be the duty of the treasurer at the expiration of such time to pay the money received for such animals to the owner thereof, less the amount of damages and the expense of taking, keeping, and selling the same. In the event such animals are not claimed as aforesaid, such money shall become the property of the city; provided, that in case there is a contest between two (2) or more persons claiming to be the owners of any such animals, the treasurer shall pay the residue to the party who shall establish by action his right to the same. 
Records Maintained By Poundmaster: The poundmaster shall keep an accurate record of all trespassing animals received by him, which record shall contain all the items required by this chapter together with the names of the injured party and the owner of the animals, the amount of the damages claimed, and all other matters necessary to maintain a complete account of the transaction. Such record shall be open for inspection at all reasonable hours without charge. 
Retaking Animal Unlawfully: It shall be unlawful for anyone to take any animal out of the possession of anyone lawfully holding the same under the provisions of this section, either by stealth, force, fraud, or to intercept or hinder any person lawfully taking up or attempting to take up such animals. (Ord. 13-03, 10-2-2013)
5.12 OFFENSES
5.12.010 Utah Criminal Code Adopted By Reference
5.12.020 Discharging Firearms
5.12.030 Prohibition Of Use, Possession Or Trafficking Of Spirituous Or Alcoholic Beverages On City Property
5.12.040 Curfew

5.12.010 Utah Criminal Code Adopted By Reference
Except insofar as the application thereof is clearly impractical or inappropriate, in view of the context of purposes or penalty as provided, all of the definitions, requirements, regulations, prohibitions, provisions and sections of the Utah Criminal Code Title 76, as amended, are hereby adopted by the city. Any and all violations thereof shall be considered violations of this chapter and each such violation shall subject the violator thereof to penalty provisions under this chapter if proceeded hereunder. (1998 Code)

5.12.020 Discharging Firearms
It shall be unlawful for any person to fire a gun, pistol or firearm of any description, or discharge any anvil, pellet gun, BB gun, or other device or instrument loaded with powder or other explosive within the city limits, except by written permission of the mayor. A person violating this section is guilty of a class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. (Ord. 1-4-89, 1-4-1989; amd. 1998 Code)

5.12.030 Prohibition Of Use, Possession Or Trafficking Of Spirituous Or Alcoholic Beverages On City Property
Definition: Intoxicating beverages, alcohol or spirituous liquors includes, but shall not be limited in interpreting this section to, liquor, wines, champagnes, beer (of any percentage of alcohol) or any other liquid intoxicant or any substance commonly or statutorily identified as alcohol. 
Prohibited: There is prohibited and it shall be a class B misdemeanor for any person or persons either solely or in association with others to have in their possession, to use, consume, or traffic (exchange or transfer) any alcoholic beverages within, upon, around, or within the immediate vicinity of any city owned or city operated property. 
Affected Facilities: The following facilities of the city are affected by this section but the enumeration is not to be determined, deemed or interpreted as a limitation or exclusive specification of city properties: 
All city buildings; 
City or public parks; 
City owned or city administered parking lots; 
City airport (either owned, operated or administered by the city together with its environs, its approaches and its structures or buildings therein, or vehicles or aircraft within, about or reasonably approaching the area which could be called the "environs" of the airport); 
Any vacant lots owned by the city; 
Any cultural buildings or art centers; 
Any multiple use facilities; and 
Any and all other properties in the ownership, possession, administration, use, which are within the dominion, supervision, use or employed in the administration of the city and its direct and indirect affairs. 
Penalty: The violation of this section shall be punished as a class B misdemeanor and the punishment shall include incarceration for the period of up to six (6) months in the county (or other) jail and fines up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); or either incarceration or fine in the discretion of the judiciary or the court administrating this section. (Ord. 1998-7, 9-16-1998)
5.12.040 Curfew
Designated; Violation; Penalty: It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) to be or remain in or upon any of the streets, alleys or public places or vacant lots within the limits of the city at night between the hours of eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., except Friday and Saturday nights between the hours of twelve o'clock (12:00) midnight and five o'clock (5:00) A.M., unless such person is accompanied by a parent, guardian or other person having the legal custody of the minor person, or employment makes it necessary to be upon the streets during the nighttime after such specified hour. Any person violating any of the provisions of this section shall be taken into custody by any peace officer and delivered to the parent or guardian, and a referral made to the appropriate court for prosecution. A violation of this paragraph shall constitute a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. 
Allowing Minors To Violate: It is unlawful for any parent, guardian, custodian or other person having the legal care and custody of any minor referred to herein to allow or permit any such minor to be in or upon any sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places in the city within the times provided in paragraph A. A violation of this paragraph shall constitute a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. (Ord. 08-03, 9-3-2008)
6 MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC
6.04 UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
6.08 OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES
6.12 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES

6.04 UNIFORM TRAFFIC CODE; GENERAL PROVISIONS
6.04.010 Uniform Traffic Code Adopted
6.04.020 Definitions - Uniform Traffic Code
6.04.030 Traffic Control
6.04.040 Parking Regulations

6.04.010 Uniform Traffic Code Adopted
The Utah Traffic Code, Rules of the Road, current edition, as compiled, prepared and published as a code in book form by the Utah Department of Public Safety and the Utah League of Cities and Towns, three (3) copies of which have been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Recorder, is hereby approved and adopted as the Traffic Code for the City, except as such Code may be altered or modified by the ordinances of the City. (1983 Code § 11-321; amd. 1998 Code)

6.04.020 Definitions - Uniform Traffic Code
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in the Traffic Code to: 

DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC SAFETY OF THE STATE OF UTAH: The Chief of Police of the City, or his agent.

LOCAL AUTHORITIES: The City Council.

MAGISTRATE: The justice of the peace or judge of the City. (1983 Code § 11-322)

STATE ROAD COMMISSION OR STATE OF TRANSPORTATION: The City and its officers, departments, agencies, and agents.

VEHICLE: Every device in, on, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon any road, street, highway or body of water.

HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 19-10 on 12/18/2019
6.04.030 Traffic Control
Prima Facie Speed: Unless otherwise provided in this Chapter or in any other ordinance of the City, the prima facie speed limits on the streets of the City shall be twenty five (25) miles per hour. (1983 Code § 11-323; amd. 1998 Code) 
Erection Of Stop Or Yield Signs: Whenever any ordinance of the City designates and describes a through street, it shall be the duty of the Chief of Police or the Public Works Director to place and maintain a stop sign or, where safety and efficiency require at any intersection, a yield sign on each and every street intersecting such through street unless traffic at such intersection is controlled at all times by traffic-control signals. However, at the intersection of two (2) through streets or at the intersection of a through street and a heavily traveled street, stop signs shall be erected at the approaches to either streets as determined by the Chief of Police and on the basis of an engineering and traffic study. (1983 Code § 11-326; amd. 1998 Code) 
Penalty: Any person violating, causing or permitting violation of any provision of this Section shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, notwithstanding other language or provisions in the Utah Traffic Code, Rules of the Road, current edition, hereby adopted. Any violator of this Section, upon conviction, shall be subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. (1983 Code § 11-327; amd. 1998 Code)
6.04.040 Parking Regulations
Signs; Erection: The City Council may authorize or direct any person employed by the City to erect or install any sign or traffic-control device required to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. (1983 Code § 11-342) 
Properly Posted Areas: It shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, to park or leave standing at any time a motor vehicle, as defined in the Utah Traffic Code, Rules of the Road, current edition, as adopted by the City, except when necessary to avoid interference with other traffic or in compliance with the directions of a policeman or traffic-control device. (1983 Code § 11-343; amd. 1998 Code)
Blocking Streets Or Highways: In addition to the parking provisions contained in the Utah Traffic Code, as adopted by the City, it shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, for any person to: (1983 Code § 11-341; amd. 1998 Code) 
Remain standing, lying or sitting on any street or highway in such a manner as to obstruct the free passage of vehicular or pedestrian traffic thereon. 
Wilfully remain standing, lying or sitting on any street or highway in such manner for more than one minute after being requested to move by any police officer. 
Wilfully remain on such street or highway in such manner as to obstruct the free passage of any person or vehicle into or out of any property abutting upon the street or highway or any property having access to such street or highway. (1983 Code § 11-341) 
Unlawful Parking: 
Parking At Curb: No motor vehicle shall be parked with the left side of the vehicle next to the curb, except on one-way streets. It shall be unlawful to stand or park any motor vehicle in a street other than parallel with the curb and with the two (2) right wheels of the vehicle within twelve inches (12") of the regularly established curb line, except on those streets which have been marked for angle parking; then vehicles shall be parked at the angle to the curb indicated by such marks. 
Vehicles For Sale: It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any street for the purpose of displaying it for sale, or to park any vehicle from which merchandise is peddled on any business street. 
Loading Zone: When so posted, it shall be unlawful for the driver of a passenger vehicle to stand or park such vehicle for a period of time longer than is permitted by the posted sign for the loading or unloading of passengers, or for the driver to stand or park any freight-carrying motor vehicle for a period of time longer than is necessary to load, unload and deliver materials in any place designated as a loading zone and marked as such. 
Parking Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, except physicians on emergency calls or designated emergency vehicles, when properly posted, to park any motor vehicle on any street in violation of the posted restrictions. 
Alleys: No person shall park a motor vehicle within an alley in such manner or under such conditions as to leave less than ten feet (10') of the width of the roadway available for the free movement of vehicular traffic. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle within an alley in such a position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. 
Cab Stands; Bus Stands: No motor vehicle other than a licensed taxicab shall be parked in any area designated by ordinance as a taxicab stand and no vehicle other than a bus shall be parked in a place so designated as a bus loading zone. (1983 Code § 11-344) 
Forty-Eight Hour Time Limit; Impoundment: It shall be an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, for any person to park or leave standing on any public road, street, alley or City property any motor vehicle for forty eight (48) or more consecutive hours, and any vehicle so parked or left standing may be impounded or removed by the Chief of Police. For purposes of impoundment and removal, the Chief of Police may impound and remove any motor vehicle which reasonably appears to have remained unmoved for forty eight (48) consecutive hours. The cost of impoundment and removal shall be charged to the owner or any person who claims the impounded motor vehicle. (1983 Code § 11-344; amd. 1998 Code) 
Snow Removal: It shall be an Infraction, subject to the penalties of this Code, for any person to park or leave standing a vehicle on any public road, street, or highway from November 15 through March 15 between the hours of one o’clock (1:00) A.M. to seven o’clock (7:00) A.M., and any vehicle in violation of this section may be issued a citation and/or impounded by the police. Any officer who impounds a vehicle under this paragraph shall cause the vehicle to be removed to the nearest accessible impound yard that meets the standards set by rule by the Utah State Division of Motor Vehicles. If no such impound yard is available, the impounding officer may cause the vehicle to be removed to a garage or some other reasonably safe place. The impounded vehicle shall be released after the registered owner or the owner’s agent (1) makes a claim, in person, for the release of the vehicle; (2) furnishes satisfactory evidence of his/her identity and his/her ownership in the impounded vehicle; and (3) pays the towing fees, storage fees, and any other costs reasonably incurred from the date of impoundment. No liability may be imposed upon any officer, the City, or any agent of the City for impoundment of any vehicle in enforcement this paragraph. (Ord. 9-16-87, 9-16-1987; amd. 1998 Code) 
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 19-10 on 12/18/2019
6.08 OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLES
6.08.010 Definitions - Highway Vehicles
6.08.020 Driver's License Required
6.08.030 Registration
6.08.040 Rules And Regulations
6.08.050 Penalty

6.08.010 Definitions - Highway Vehicles
ALL-TERRAIN TYPE I VEHICLE: Any motor vehicle fifty two inches (52") or less in width, having an unloaded dry weight of eight hundred (800) pounds or less, traveling on three (3) or more low pressure tires, having a seat designed to be straddled by the operator, and designed for or capable of traveling over unimproved terrain.

ALL-TERRAIN TYPE II VEHICLE: Any other motor vehicle not defined in Utah Code § 41-22-2(2), (11) or (22) designed for or capable of traveling over unimproved terrain. This term does not include golf carts, any vehicle designed to carry a disabled person, any vehicle not specifically designed for recreational use, or farm tractors.

OFF HIGHWAY VEHICLE (OHV): Any snowmobile or all-terrain type I vehicle, or type II vehicle or motorcycle, including all electric and motorized vehicles. (Ord. 08-02, 9-17-2008)

6.08.020 Driver's License Required
Off road vehicle operators sixteen (16) years and older shall be required to have a Utah driver's license to operate an OHV within city limits. Operators under sixteen (16) years of age, or an individual without a valid driver's license, excepting those specified in ECC 6.08.040 Paragraph F, must be under the direct visual supervision (within 100 feet) of an adult who is at least eighteen (18) years of age who has a valid driver's license, while riding within city limits. 

It will be unlawful for a parent or guardian to allow any unlicensed driver to operate an OHV within city limits unless accompanied by an adult licensed driver. (Ord. 08-02, 9-17-2008)
6.08.030 Registration
Sanpete County: All OHVs are required to be registered with the department of motor vehicles and have the proper stickers displayed. If the vehicle is used for animal husbandry and off highway use, this must be declared at time of registration. (Ord. 08-02, 9-17-2008 )
6.08.040 Rules And Regulations
Road Designation: The operator of an off highway vehicle, with the exclusion of snowmobiles, may, with a valid driver's license, drive on city streets, within city limits, except Main Street, Center Street, and 100 North, for the purpose of going from one place to another. Main Street, Center Street, and 100 North, as state roads, may be crossed. 
Laws: The rider of an off highway vehicle is subject to the provisions, traffic and parking laws of the state statute provisions of Traffic Code 41-6a, unless specifically excluded. An OHV shall not exceed fifteen (15) miles per hour and shall drive to the far right side of the appropriate lane of traffic. 
Noise: A noise decibel level of sixty-five (65) decibels shall not be exceeded by any such vehicle described above. 
Helmets: Any person under the age of eighteen (18) is required to wear a helmet at all times while driving or riding in or on any class OHV or motorized vehicle. 
Lights: Any OHV operated after dusk must be equipped with appropriate lighting equipment, including headlights, taillights, and brake lights.
Work Permit: Operators under sixteen (16) years of age, or an individual without a valid driver's license, wanting to use an OHV for alternate transportation for the purpose of leaving city limits for work purposes must obtain an Ephraim OHV work permit at the police department, designating intent, route, and days and times unlicensed driver is permitted to operate an OHV unsupervised. This permit must be in the possession of the operator when OHV is in use. (Ord. 08-02, 9-17-2008)
6.08.050 Penalty
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a class C misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. (Ord. 08-02, 9-17-2008)

6.12 COMMERCIAL VEHICLES
6.12.010 Commercial Vehicles In Restricted Zone
6.12.020 Violation

6.12.010 Commercial Vehicles In Restricted Zone
It shall be unlawful for any person to leave, park or station upon any residential street in Ephraim City for a period longer than six (6) hours, unless expressly allowed to do so by written permission of the chief of police, any vehicle which: 

Has more than four (4) wheels and more than a one ton rating; or 
Has a total length, including any trailer, mobile home, or any other object attached thereto, exceeding twenty one feet (21'); or 
Is what is commonly referred to as a semitractor trailer; or 
Is a vehicle, camper or other unit which carries or encloses housekeeping facilities. (Ord. 2001-6, 2001)
6.12.020 Violation
Any violation of ECC 6.12.010 shall be deemed a nuisance and may be summarily abated by the impounding of any such violating vehicle and/or by citing the registered owner of said vehicle. (Ord. 2001-6, 2001)

7 PUBLIC WAYS AND PROPERTY
7.04 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
7.08 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
7.12 EXCAVATIONS
7.16 PUBLIC PROPERTY CONTROL AND USE
7.20 CEMETERIES
7.24 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM FRANCHISE
7.28 TREES
7.32 EPHRAIM SPORTS COMPLEX

7.04 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC WAYS
7.04.010 Department Of Public Works
7.04.020 Removal Of Snow
7.04.030 Obstructions In Streets
7.04.040 Openings In Streets; Doors Obstructing
7.04.050 Discharge Of Water
7.04.060 Crossing At Intersections
7.04.070 Sidewalk Regulations
7.04.080 Driving Animals On Streets
7.04.090 Rollerskating And Skateboard Restrictions

7.04.010 Department Of Public Works
Creation: There is hereby created a Public Works Department, which shall have general supervision of streets, sidewalks, bridges and other public ways. 
Director: The Department shall be under the direction and control of the Public Works Director. (1983 Code § 11-311; amd. 1998 Code) 
Powers And Duties: The Department shall: 
Have charge of the construction, maintenance and repair of streets, sidewalks, bridges, curbs, gutters, culverts, drains, waterways and other public ways. It shall have control of all waters flowing on the streets, sidewalks and public ways whether originating from storm, flood, drainage or irrigation waters. 
Keep a record of and promptly investigate all complaints of defective streets, culverts, drains, ditches, sidewalks, and other public ways and, when proper, repair, replace or take such action as deemed best, and shall record the action taken on each complaint. 
Enforce the provisions of this Chapter and all other ordinances relating to the maintenance and use of streets, culverts, drains, ditches, waterways, curbs, gutters, sidewalks and other public ways. 
Repair, or cause to be repaired, all defects coming to the Department's attention and take reasonable precautions to protect the public from injuries due to such defects pending their repair. (1983 Code § 11-312)
7.04.020 Removal Of Snow
Failure To Remove Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for the owner, occupant, lessor, or agent of any property, abutting on a paved sidewalk, to fail to remove, or have removed from such paved sidewalk, all hail, snow, or sleet thereon within a reasonable time after such snow, hail, or sleet has fallen. In the case of a storm between the hours of five o'clock (5:00) P.M. and six o'clock (6:00) A.M., such sidewalks shall be cleaned before nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. of the same day. 
Depositing In Gutter Unlawful: It shall be unlawful for any person removing snow from the sidewalk, to deposit snow, dirt, leaves, or any other material, in the gutter so as to clog or prevent the free flow of water therein. (1983 Code § 11-361)
7.04.030 Obstructions In Streets
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any premises to place, or permit to be placed upon or in the sidewalk, parking area, gutter, or on the half of the street next to such premises: 

Refuse: Any broken ware, glass, filth, rubbish, sweepings, refuse matter, ice, snow, water, garbage, ashes, tin cans or other like substances. 
Building Materials: Any wagons, lumber, wood boxes, fencing, building material, dead trees, tree stumps, merchandise or other thing which shall obstruct such public street, gutter, parking area or sidewalk, or any part thereof, or the passage over and upon the same, or any part thereof, except as expressly authorized by ordinance, without the permission of the City Council first had and obtained. 
Permanent Or Temporary Structures: Any permanent or temporary structure, mechanism, device, vehicle, or other thing of any kind or character except trees planted pursuant to the provisions of applicable ordinances. (1983 Code § 11-362)
7.04.040 Openings In Streets; Doors Obstructing
Cellars: It shall be unlawful for the owner or occupant of any building having a cellar which opens upon any street or sidewalk to fail to keep the door or other covering in good repair and safe for the passage of the customary traffic on the street or sidewalk. If the owner or occupant of any such building shall neglect or refuse to repair properly any such door or covering within twenty four (24) hours after notice from the Public Works Director to do so, the Public Works Director shall forthwith cause such repairs to be made at the expense of the owner or occupant. 
Coal Holes: It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain coal holes or other openings in streets or sidewalks, except with the special permission of the City Council, and under the direction and supervision of the Public Works Director. (1983 Code § 11-363; amd. 1998 Code) 
Doors: It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having the control or management of any alley, road, or passageway to construct or hang gates or doors to such alley, road, or passageway so that the gates or doors thereto, when open, shall project outwardly more than two feet (2') over or upon the sidewalk beyond the property line. (1983 Code § 11-364)
7.04.050 Discharge Of Water
It shall be unlawful for any person owning, occupying, or having control of any premises to fail, refuse or neglect to prevent water from the roof or eaves of any house, building, or other structure, or from any other source under the control of such person, to be discharged upon the surface of any sidewalk. (1983 Code § 11-365)

7.04.060 Crossing At Intersections
It shall be unlawful for any person to drive or park a self-propelled vehicle or lead, drive, or ride any animal upon any sidewalk except across a sidewalk at established crossings. (1983 Code § 11-366)

7.04.070 Sidewalk Regulations
Businesses To Keep Clean: It shall be unlawful for any owners or occupants of any place of business to refuse, neglect or fail to cause the sidewalk abutting thereon to be swept or cleaned each morning before the hour of nine o'clock (9:00) A.M. (1983 Code § 11-367) 
Placing Goods For Sale Or Show: No goods, wares, or merchandise shall be placed, maintained or permitted for sale or show in or on any parking area, street, or sidewalk beyond two feet (2') from the front line of the lot, without first obtaining the written approval of the City Council. Such approval shall be granted only when such sale or show shall be a promotional activity not exceeding forty eight (48) hours and when participated in by a majority of firms seeking approval in their business areas. The City Council's written approval shall specifically provide that no goods, wares, or merchandise shall be placed in such a manner as to leave less than a six foot (6') passageway for pedestrians. (1983 Code § 11-368) 
Placing Goods For Receipt Or Delivery: It shall be unlawful for any person to place, or suffer to be placed or kept upon any sidewalk, any goods, wares or merchandise which he may be receiving or delivering, without leaving a four foot (4') passageway upon such sidewalk. It shall be unlawful for any person receiving or delivering such goods, wares or merchandise to suffer the same to be or remain on such sidewalk for a longer period than four (4) hours. (1983 Code § 11-369; amd. 1998 Code) 
Playing: Every person who obstructs the sidewalk or street by playing any game or engaging in any activity which obstructs the free travel thereon is guilty of an infraction and subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. (1983 Code § 11-370; amd. 1998 Code) 
Congregating: It is an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, for any person or persons to congregate about or upon any sidewalks, stairway, doorway, window or in front of any business or dwelling house, theater, lecture room, church or elsewhere and by so doing to obstruct or interfere with the free passage of persons entering, leaving or occupying such building or premises. (1983 Code § 11-371; amd. 1998 Code)
7.04.080 Driving Animals On Streets
Permit Required; Penalty: Every person who drives any herd of sheep or band of horses, cattle or other animals upon any public street or highway without first obtaining a permit from the chief of police so to do is guilty of an infraction and subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. (1983 Code § 11-331; amd. 1998 Code) 
Streets Not Designated: No person shall drive livestock through the city upon streets not designated for that purpose except upon permission and according to the direction of the chief of police. (1983 Code § 11-331)
7.04.090 Rollerskating And Skateboard Restrictions
Unlawful Use: It shall be unlawful for any person on roller skates, rollerblades, skateboards, or similar devices to utilize said devices on any sidewalk or parking lot in the following areas: 
Main Street from 200 North to 200 South. 
City airport (either owned, operated or administered by the city together with its environs, its approaches and its structures or buildings therein or vehicles or aircraft within, about or reasonably approaching the area which could be called the "environs" of the airport). 
Snow College campus (east and west). 
United States post office building, Ephraim, Utah. 
Penalty: The violation of this section shall be punished as a class C misdemeanor and subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, and also roller skates, rollerblades, skateboards, and/or similar devices will be confiscated. (Ord. 1998-11, 11-4-1998)
7.08 STREET AND SIDEWALK CONSTRUCTION
7.08.010 Permit Required; Inspection
7.08.020 Conform To Established Specifications
7.08.030 Changing Existing Construction
7.08.040 Mixing Concrete On Paved Streets Or Sidewalks; Permit
7.08.050 Overflowing Of Water
7.08.060 Irrigation Ditches
7.08.070 Removal Of Earth

7.08.010 Permit Required; Inspection
Required: No person, either as owner, agent, servant, contractor or employee, shall construct any permanent sidewalk for public use without first obtaining from the Building Inspector a permit to do so. The permit shall specify that the sidewalk be constructed of cement, the character and quality of the cement, the consistent parts of the mixture, and the thickness of the walk. (1983 Code § 11-352; amd. 1998 Code) 
Unlawful Violation Of Specifications: It shall be unlawful to construct a sidewalk in violation of the specifications given by a proper City official. 
Inspection: All sidewalks shall be inspected by the Public Works Director or his duly authorized representative. (1983 Code § 11-352; amd. 1998 Code)
7.08.020 Conform To Established Specifications
It shall be unlawful for any person either as owner, agent, servant, contractor or employee to construct a street or sidewalk which does not conform to specifications established by the City Engineer or other authorized representative of the City unless special permission to deviate from such specification is first obtained from the City Council. (1983 Code § 11-351)

7.08.030 Changing Existing Construction
It shall be unlawful for any person to construct a driveway across a sidewalk, or cut or change the construction of sidewalk, curb or gutter without first making written application and obtaining from the Building Inspector a permit to do so. The acceptance of such permit shall be deemed an agreement on the part of such person to construct said driveway in accordance with specifications furnished by the City. (1983 Code § 11-353; amd. 1998 Code)

7.08.040 Mixing Concrete On Paved Streets Or Sidewalks; Permit
Unless a permit from the Public Works Director has been obtained, it shall be unlawful to: (1983 Code § 11-355; amd. 1998 Code) 

Place, Pile Or Permit: Place or pile or permit to be placed or piled, any sand, gravel, lime, cement, mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance or mixture, or allow the same to remain on any portion of any paved street or sidewalk. 
Make, Mix Or Permit: Make or mix or permit to be made or mixed any mortar, plaster, concrete or any like substance or mixture on any portion of any paved street or sidewalk. (1983 Code § 11-355)
7.08.050 Overflowing Of Water
It shall be unlawful for any person to allow water to overflow from any ditch, canal, well or irrigation stream onto the streets, sidewalks or property of the City. (1983 Code § 11-356)

7.08.060 Irrigation Ditches
All owners or occupants of lots in the City who require water from a ditch for irrigation or other purposes shall dig ditches, erect flumes, lay pipes and install culverts, as needed, and maintain the same to convey water under sidewalks to or from their respective lots. All culverts, ditches, pipes and flumes conveying water under sidewalks shall meet such reasonable standards and specifications as may be established by the Public Works Director. (1983 Code § 11-357; amd. 1998 Code)

7.08.070 Removal Of Earth
No person shall dig, cut or remove any sod or earth from any street or other public place without a permit from the Public Works Director. (1983 Code § 11-358; amd. 1998 Code)

7.12 EXCAVATIONS
7.12.010 Permit Requirements
7.12.020 Bond Required
7.12.030 Subject And Excluded Excavations
7.12.040 Standards
7.12.050 Protection Of Public
7.12.060 Relocation And Protection Of Utilities
7.12.070 Revocation Or Refusal Of Permit
7.12.080 Exception In Emergency

7.12.010 Permit Requirements
Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to break, excavate, tunnel, undermine or in any manner affect the surface or base of any street or to place, deposit or leave upon any street any earth or any other excavated material obstructing or tending to interfere with the free use of the street, unless such person shall first have obtained an excavation permit therefor from the public works director. 
Streets And Sidewalks: 
No person shall make any excavation in any street, land or alley or remove any pavement or other material from any street or improvement thereon without first obtaining a permit from the public works director or other authorized representative of the city. 
No person shall excavate any sidewalk without first obtaining a permit from the public works director or other authorized personnel. (Ord. 5-15-96, 5-15-1996; amd. 1998 Code) 
Franchise; Public Utility: 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed to waive the franchise required for any person by city ordinances or laws of Utah.
Any public utility regulated by the state or holding a franchise from the city which, in the pursuit of its calling, has frequent occasion to open or make excavations in streets, may, upon application, receive a general permit from the city to cover all excavations such utilities may make within the streets of the city. (Ord. 5-15-96, 5-15-1996) 
Proof Of Insurance Required: Every application for an excavation permit shall be accompanied by proof that the excavator is covered by liability and property damage insurance in an amount not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
Time Limit: No excavation shall be left open for more than twenty four (24) hours. If the scope of work is such that it cannot be completed within twenty four (24) hours, the public works director may approve a permit for a longer period of time upon receiving sufficient proof that adequate measures will be taken to protect the public safety and the city's infrastructure. 
Penalty: Any violation of this chapter shall be punishable by a civil fine not less than two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) plus one hundred dollars ($100.00) per foot. Violator shall also pay all costs for repairing any property damage incurred by the violation. In addition to the penalties above, all violations shall be class B misdemeanors as per ECC 1.16.020 Paragraph C,2. (Ord. 2002-4, 7-25-2002)
7.12.020 Bond Required
Conditions: In order to ensure proper backfill and restoration of surface, the permittee shall deposit a surety bond or cash deposit with the city recorder, payable to the city, except that a public utility operating or using any of the streets under a franchise from the city will not be required to furnish such bond, providing such franchise obligates the holder thereof to restore the streets and to hold the city harmless in the event of any injury to any person or damage to any property due to negligence of such holder in conducting excavation and restoration operations under such franchise. The required surety bond must be: 
With good and sufficient surety. 
By a surety company authorized to transact business in the state. 
Satisfactory to the city attorney in form and substance.
Conditioned upon the permittee's compliance with this chapter in order to secure and hold the city and its officers harmless against any and all claims, judgments or other costs arising from the excavation and other work covered by the excavation permit for which the city, the city council or any city officer may be made liable by reason of any accident or injury to any person or property through the fault of the permittee arising out of failure to properly guard the excavation or for any other negligence of the permittee. 
Conditioned to fill up, restore and place in good and safe condition, as near as may be to its original condition, and to the satisfaction of the city, all openings and excavations made in streets, and to maintain any street where excavation is made in as good condition for the period of twenty four (24) months after the work shall be done, usual wear and tear excepted, as it was before the work shall have been done. 
Amount: The amount of the surety bond or cash deposit shall be established by resolution and may be changed from time to time, but until such resolution is passed the amount of the surety or cash deposit shall be five hundred dollars ($500.00) and twenty dollars ($20.00) for each foot of street the permittee shall excavate. (Ord. 5-15-96, 5-15-1996)
7.12.030 Subject And Excluded Excavations
Types Subject To Provisions: The types of excavations subject to the provisions of this Chapter are excavations for installation or repair of water lines, sewer lines, gas lines, electrical cable and conduits, telephone cable and conduits, and all other excavations for any other purpose within the street rights of way of the City or in other public places. 
Types Not Subject To Provisions: The types of excavations which do not come within the scope of this Chapter are excavations of any kind in City streets in projects designed, contracted for, and inspected by the City Engineer or other authorized personnel of the City. (Ord. 5-15-96, 5-15-1996)
7.12.040 Standards
Preparation: The pavement, sidewalk, driveway, or other surface shall be cut vertically along the lines forming the trench in such a manner as to not damage the adjoining pavement or hard surfacing. An undercut bevel at the rate of one inch (1") per foot of thickness will be provided at the proposed junction between the old and new surfaces. The portion to be removed shall be broken up in a manner that will not cause damage to the pavement outside the limits of the trench. However, any pavement damaged by operations outside the limits of the trench shall be replaced. All waste material resulting from the excavation shall be removed immediately from the site of the work.
Backfill: 
Materials: Materials for backfill will be in accordance with City specifications. All broken concrete, peat, decomposed vegetable matter and similar materials obtained from excavation will be removed from the site prior to beginning of back filling. All backfill other than flowable fill will be placed in layers not over eight inches (8") loose measure in thickness. Compaction will be obtained by mechanical rollers, mechanical tampers or similar means. Material for backfilling will have optimum moisture to ensure compaction to a degree equivalent to that of the undisturbed ground in which the trench was dug. Jetting or internal vibrating methods of compacting sand fill or similar methods of compacting sand or similar granular free draining materials will be permitted. 
Density: The density (dry) of the backfill under pavements, sidewalks, curbs, or other structures will be not less than that existing prior to excavation. The fill shall be restored and placed in a good condition which will prevent settling. 
Restoration Of Hard Surfaces: 
General: All street surfacing, curbs, gutters, sidewalks, driveways, or other hard surfaces falling in the line of the excavation which must be removed in performance of the work shall be restored in kind by the excavator, unless otherwise directed by the City Council, in accordance with the City specifications contained governing the various types of surfaces involved. 
Protection Of Paved Surfaces: In order to avoid unnecessary damage to paved surfaces, track equipment shall use pavement pads when operating on or crossing paved surfaces. 
Time: In traffic lanes of paved streets, the excavator shall provide a temporary surface immediately after backfill has been placed, and shall complete permanent repairs on the street, sidewalk, curb, gutter, driveway and other surfaces, within ten (10) days from the date of completion of the backfill except for periods: 
When permanent paving material is not available. 
When weather conditions prevent permanent replacement. (Ord. 5-15-96, 5-15-1996) 
When an extension of time is granted by the Public Works Director. 
Restoring Bituminous On Concrete Or Asphalt Surfaces: The exposed edges of existing pavement shall be primed with Type MC-1 bituminous material. The type, grade, and mixture of the asphalt to be used for street surface replacement shall be approved by the Public Works Director. The thickness shall be equal to the adjacent surface thickness but not less than three inches (3"). The complete surface shall not deviate more than one-half inch (1/2") between old and new work. 
Concrete Surfaces: The sub-base for concrete surfaces shall be sprinkled just before placing the concrete. Joints and surfaces shall be made to match the original surfaces. The thickness of concrete shall be equal to the adjacent concrete but in no case less than six inches (6") thick. The mixing, cement, water content, proportion, placement, and curing of the concrete will be approved by the Public Works Director. In no case shall the concrete have less compressive strength than three thousand (3,000) pounds per square inch at the end of twenty eight (28) days. (Ord. 5-15-96, 5-15-1996; amd. 1998 Code) 
Concrete Base, Bituminous Wearing Surfaces: This type of surfacing shall be constructed as above described. 
Gravel Surfaces: Trenches excavated through gravel-surfaced area, such as gravel roads and shoulders and unpaved driveways, shall have the gravel restored and maintained as described in paragraph E, except that the gravel shall be a minimum of one inch (1") more than the thickness of the existing gravel. 
Jetting Pipe: Jetting pipe by means of water under pressure, or compressed air, is permitted only when approved by the City. (Ord. 5-15-96, 5-15-1996)
7.12.050 Protection Of Public
Excavation operations shall be conducted in such a manner that a minimum amount of interference or interruption of street traffic will result. Inconvenience to residents and businesses fronting on public streets shall be minimized. Suitable, adequate and sufficient barricades shall be available and used where necessary to prevent accidents involving property or persons. Barricades must be in place until all of the excavator's equipment is removed from site and excavation has been backfilled and proper temporary gravel surface is in place. From sunset to sunrise all barricades and excisions must be clearly outlined by acceptable warning lights, lanterns, flares, and other devices. Police and Fire Departments shall be notified at least twenty four (24) hours in advance of any planned excavation requiring street closures or detour. (Ord. 5-15-96, 5-15-1996)

7.12.060 Relocation And Protection Of Utilities
An excavator shall not interfere with any existing utility without the written consent of the Public Works Director and without advance notice to the owner of the utility. If it becomes necessary to relocate an existing utility, it shall be done by its owner unless the owner otherwise directs. No utility, whether owned by the City or by a private enterprise, shall be moved to accommodate the permittee unless the cost of such work be borne by the permittee or an expressly written agreement is made whereby the utility owner and the excavator make other arrangements relating to such cost. The permittee shall support and protect by timbers or otherwise all pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or other apparatus which may be in any way affected by the excavation work, and shall do everything necessary to support, sustain and protect them under, over, along, or across the work. In case any of the pipes, conduits, poles, wires, or apparatus should be damaged (and for this purpose pipe coating or other encasement or devices are to be considered as part of a substructure), they shall be repaired by the agency or person owning them, but the utility owner shall be reimbursed for the expense of such repairs by the permittee. It is the intent of this Chapter that the permittee shall assume all liability for damage to substructures, and any resulting damage or injury to anyone because of such substructure damage and such assumption of liability shall be deemed a contractual obligation which the permittee accepts upon acceptance of an excavation permit. The City need not be made a party to any action because of this Chapter. The permittee shall inform itself as to the existence and location of all underground utilities and protect the same against damage. (Ord. 5-15-96, 5-15-1996)

7.12.070 Revocation Or Refusal Of Permit
All permits shall be subject to revocation and the City may refuse to issue a permit for failure of the permittee or applicant to abide by the terms and conditions of this Chapter. (Ord. 5-15-96, 5-15-1996)

7.12.080 Exception In Emergency
Excavation permits will not be requested prior to excavation in case of emergency endangering life or property, providing the City is notified as soon as practicable and a permit is applied for upon the next regular working day following the emergency. (Ord. 5-15-96, 5-15-1996)

7.16 PUBLIC PROPERTY CONTROL AND USE
7.16.010 Unlawful Use
7.16.020 Repair After Unlawful Use
7.16.030 Franchise; Easement
7.16.040 Acts Exempted

7.16.010 Unlawful Use
Unless authorized by permit or other written authorization issued by the City or unless authority is granted by provisions of this Code or other ordinance of the City now or hereafter enacted, it shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, for any person to: (1983 Code § 8-111; amd. 1998 Code) 

Property Controlled By City: Construct, lay, excavate, erect, operate or maintain over, under, across, in or through any property owned or controlled by the City, any utility, canal, ditch, construction or building. 
Restricted Areas: Enter upon any property of the City contrary to any posting or marking restricting or prohibiting use of the area. 
Damage To Property: Intentionally use or perform acts upon property of the City which materially impairs, alters, or damages the property. (1983 Code § 8-111)
7.16.020 Repair After Unlawful Use
The City Council, in addition to any other penalty which may be imposed, may order any person who has damaged, altered or changed any property of the City to repair or restore the property to its original condition prior to the damage, alteration or change and shall be entitled to seek civil damages to compensate for such damage, alteration or change, including costs of recovering such damages. (1983 Code § 8-112)

7.16.030 Franchise; Easement
Provisions: The City Council may grant to any person a franchise or easement on such terms and conditions as it deems reasonable, for the purpose of entering upon, constructing, building, operating and maintaining any business or for other use of the property of the City, and the provisions of ECC 7.16.010 and ECC 7.16.020 shall not apply to the extent such provisions are waived, qualified or made inapplicable to the rights or privileges granted in the franchise ordinance or easement. 
In Writing: Any franchise or easement granted by the City shall be in writing and any franchise or easement not in writing shall be void. (1983 Code § 8-113)
7.16.040 Acts Exempted
It shall not be a violation of this Chapter where any person uses the public property of the City in the manner or for the purpose for which such property has been made available for public use. (1983 Code § 8-114)

7.20 CEMETERIES
7.20.010 Definitions - Cemeteries
7.20.020 Administration And Management
7.20.030 Authorities And Fee Summary
7.20.040 Purchase Of Burial Rights
7.20.050 Care
7.20.060 Interment
7.20.070 Monuments And Markers
7.20.080 Plantings And Decorations
7.20.090 Prohibited Acts
7.20.100 Violation And Penalty

7.20.010 Definitions - Cemeteries
BODY REMAINS: Corpse or human body remains including ashes from cremation or any other way of describing the remains of a deceased person.

BURIAL PLOT/CREMATION: A designated parcel within the city cemetery four feet (4') wide by four feet (4') long.

BURIAL PLOT/TRADITIONAL: A designated parcel four feet (4') wide by ten feet (10') long within the city cemetery for purposes of containing the remains of the dead.

BURIAL VAULT: A vault made of concrete, fiberglass, steel, or brick lined or of such other material approved by the cemetery sexton substantially constructed and covered with a similar durable material for the purpose of containing a casket.

CEMETERY BLOCK: A division of the cemetery consisting of sixty four (64) cemetery lots used in describing the location of individual burial plots.

CEMETERY LOT: A designated parcel within the cemetery consisting of eight (8) burial plots used in describing the location of individual burial plots.

CEMETERY SEXTON: The public works director or any other person as designated by the city council.

CERTIFICATE OF BURIAL RIGHTS: A deed, certification, or other means of conveyance of burial rights from the city to a purchaser.

CITY: The municipal government of Ephraim, Utah.

CITY RECORDER: For purposes of this chapter, shall mean city recorder or other such person as assigned.

DISINTER/DISINTERMENT: To exhume the body remains of the dead.

HEAD END: The end of the burial plot designated for the placement of markers or monuments; generally the west end.

INDIGENT: Person suffering from extreme poverty.

INTER/INTERMENT: To bury the body remains of the dead.

MARKER(S): A flat stone or other suitable material set at grade level and inscribed with the name of the deceased and any other pertinent information.

MONUMENT(S): A vertical stone or other suitable material inscribed with the name of the deceased and any other pertinent information, placed on a cement base at least four inches (4") above ground level.

PARK CEMETERY: The entire land area own ed by the city of Ephraim for burial purposes and generally located between 550 North and 700 North on the west side of Main Street.

PERMITTED PLANT STAND(S): Vertical stake(s) used to hold a pot or other decoration. The stake(s) must be attached to the monument/marker base and cannot exceed four feet (4') in height nor exceed a maximum decoration/pot diameter of twelve inches (12"). This does not include temporary wreath stands.

PIONEER CEMETERY: The historic burial area located approximately one mile north of Ephraim. Future burials cannot occur within this cemetery.

PLOT OWNER: The owner or purchaser of burial privileges or the collateral right of use of any burial plot evidenced by a burial certificate for a described plot or by proved and recognized descent or devise from the original owner. All plots are exempt from taxation and cannot be seized for debt (except those owed to the city) nor can they be mortgaged.

RESIDENT:

One who has primary residence within Ephraim City. 
Those with homes connected to Ephraim water, Ephraim sewer, and/or Ephraim power. 
Health impaired individuals who resided in Ephraim for at least ten (10) years, but due to varying factors must live in a rest home or other care facility, including family homes, outside of Ephraim City. (Ord. 17-02, 2-1-2017) 
7.20.020 Administration And Management
City Council Authority To Adopt Rules And Regulations: The city council shall formulate and establish such fees, rules and regulations for the protection of the cemetery and the governance of matters pertaining to the cemetery as shall from time to time be found necessary to properly protect the property therein and maintain the cemetery in suitable and proper condition. 
Cemetery Management: All work in the city cemetery is subject to the direction and control of the cemetery sexton. 
Cemetery Burial Required: It is unlawful to bury the body remains of any person within the limits of the city, except in the Park Cemetery.
Cemetery Hours: The city cemeteries shall be open from sunrise to sunset. 
Registration Of Burials: 
The city recorder shall be the registrar of burials for the city, and before burying any dead in the city cemetery, the relatives or other persons having charge of the body shall be required to furnish to the city recorder a written statement of the death, which shall be recorded in a record kept for that purpose by the city recorder. Such statements, as well as the record, shall include the name of the person deceased, when and where born, if known, any military service, the date of death and the cause thereof, together with the name of the attending funeral service director. 
If body remains are being transported from out of the state of Utah, a copy of the burial transit permit must be provided to the city recorder. 
Not later than the tenth day of each month, the city recorder shall send the local county registrar a list of all interments made in the Ephraim City Cemetery during the preceding month. 
Cleanup Dates: The cemetery grass is mowed each Wednesday and Thursday from March to October. In the case of inclement weather, mowing could be delayed. Flowers, etc., must be removed prior to mowing with the exception of those for new burials, which will be allowed to remain for a period of seven (7) days. Exceptions to above will be posted. Items which may have an estimated value of twenty five dollars ($25.00) or more will be retained for thirty (30) days. Following a thirty (30) day holding period, these items will be disposed of. The city is not responsible for the return of any removed object, decoration, plant, or container. (Ord. 17-02, 2-1-2017)
7.20.030 Authorities And Fee Summary
Fee Changes: The city council shall, from time to time by resolution, fix the price at which burial rights shall be sold and the fees which shall be charged for the various cemetery services to be provided. 
Fee Collection: The city recorder is hereby authorized and required to collect in advance, all fees, including burial rights. 
Burial Rights Fee: A fee to secure burial rights for a particular plot within the Ephraim cemetery. The purchaser may either pay the full purchase price for burial rights or enter into a contract wherein payment shall be agreed. 
Care And Maintenance Fee: A fee to provide for the care and maintenance of the city cemetery. 
Interment Fee: Includes the grave or urn opening and closing fee. 
Monument Locating Fee: A fee to ensure the proper placement of a monument/marker. 
Transfer Fee: A fee for the transfer of burial rights (plot sales) from one owner to another. 
Grave Opening Authority: No grave shall be opened in the city cemetery until full payment of all fees has been made. (Ord. 17-02, 2-1-2017)
7.20.040 Purchase Of Burial Rights
Burial Rights: The city recorder is hereby authorized to sell burial rights in the city cemetery tor burial purposes only and to collect all tees arising from the sale. The city recorder shall keep a complete record of all sales, which record shall describe the location of the plot purchased and the price paid therefor. The city recorder shall deliver to each purchaser a certificate of burial rights for each plot purchased, which certificate shall, among other things, describe the location of the plot, the purchase price, and the type of maintenance services which are to be provided. 
Nature Of Title To Graves: The legal title to all property in the cemetery shall reside in the city. The purchasers of any gravesite or lot within the cemetery shall acquire only the right to be buried or bury the remains of other persons and to have said gravesite or lot cared tor in accordance with city policies and rules with respect to the care and maintenance of the cemetery. 
Plot Improvements: No improvements, changes, or modifications, shall be made on any plot by a person including the certificate holder or his heirs without first submitting to and receiving from the cemetery sexton or designee, written approval tor such improvements, changes or modifications, which improvements, changes or modifications shall be subject to the rules and regulations contained herein. 
Resale Transfer Restrictions: 
The certificate of burial rights of a cemetery plot vests the purchaser the right to use such plot for burial purposes only, for themselves, their heirs, or any such person(s) as they may choose to permit, provided that such admission is free of charge and without compensation, and that the purchaser has the names of those persons, for whom permissions for burial rights have been given entered into the city records. 
Certificates of burial rights may not be transferred from the original purchaser to a new owner without approval by the city and issuance of a new certificate. A transfer fee in such amount as established by resolution of the city council shall be paid for the processing and issuing of a new certificate. Transferees of burial rights are also bound to all existing and current fees and regulations, to include the price of burial rights and care and maintenance fees, and nonresident fees where applicable, to be paid for at the time of transfer. 
Whenever a certificate of burial rights reverts to the city, as provided for in this paragraph, or becomes vested in the city for any reason, before a new certificate is issued, the original certificate shall be canceled or an assignment given and the record shall be so changed. 
The certificates of burial rights shall be issued and signed by the mayor and shall be attested by the city recorder. 
Inheritance Of Burial Rights: Heirs may acquire rights to cemetery plots. Heirs must prove legal power of attorney or legal inheritance before rights to cemetery plots can be reassigned. Heirs acquiring burial rights are also bound to all existing and current fees and regulations to include the price of burial rights and care and maintenance fees, and nonresident fees, where applicable, to be paid for at the time of transfer. The city shall have no liability for a failure to properly determine the legal succession of the rights for any cemetery space. 
Abandonment Through Nonuse: Any plot which has remained empty without burial use for a period in excess of sixty (60) years will be presumed to have been abandoned by the plot purchaser, and in the interest of best utilization of cemetery space, such plots may be reclaimed and sold by the city in the manner provided in this section; provided, the previous owner or someone holding the right of the previous owner, upon presentation of satisfactory evidence of an intent to use the space for a burial, shall be allowed to retain burial rights in said plot. 
Reclaim Of Abandoned Plot By City: The cemetery sexton shall advise the city recorder of an apparent abandonment through nonuse of a plot or burial space, and the city recorder shall determine from the cemetery records when the original deed was issued and whether a sixty (60) year abandonment exists. If so, the city council may pass a resolution voiding the original deed and declaring the property abandoned. The resolution shall be served upon anyone claiming ownership by publication for three (3) successive weeks in a newspaper of general circulation within Sanpete County and a copy of the resolution shall be mailed within fourteen (14) days after such publication to the last known address of the owner of record or any heirs known to the city. Upon the expiration of thirty (30) days after the last publication of the resolution, unless an owner has come forward, all rights in the plot or space shall be terminated and thereafter be vested in the city. (Ord. 17-02, 2-1-2017)
7.20.050 Care
Scope Of Care: The city agrees to provide care of the cemetery generally, which shall include, but is not limited to, mowing of all plots at reasonable intervals, resodding, seeding, and filling in sunken graves, sodding the surface of the graves to level, removing wilted flowers and containers, and trimming trees and shrubbery when necessary, raking and cleaning the plots, but shall not include repairing or replacing markers or monuments of any nature, except when the need for repair or replacement is directly caused by the city. 
Funds: Funding for applicable improvements and development of the cemetery shall be derived from the city's capital improvements fund and shall be set apart for that purpose as part of the city's budgeting process in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances. (Ord. 17-02, 2-1-2017)
7.20.060 Interment
Notice: No interment shall be permitted in the city cemetery except upon notice to the city recorder and a work order issued to the cemetery sexton. The city strongly recommends that notice be given as soon as possible. 
Fees Paid: No burial plot shall be opened nor interment made until all fees have been fully paid. 
Burials: All burials shall be under the direction of the cemetery sexton or designee. 
Opening And Closing Of The Grave: The opening and closing of a grave must be done by the cemetery sexton or designee unless specific permission to do otherwise is obtained from the city council. 
Burial Vault: Other than that of an infant or cremation, no casket shall be interred unless enclosed in a concrete burial vault or approved concrete grave liner (box). 
Multiple Burials: Vertical stacking of caskets is prohibited. If more than one burial is made in a single traditional grave plot, the first burial shall be at the head end of said plot. The following combinations are permitted in any given traditional grave plot: 
One adult vault, or 
Two (2) urns, or 
Two (2) child vaults, 
Two (2) infants, or 
One vault and one urn, or 
One child vault and one infant. 
Burial Of Indigent: The sexton, with the advice and consent of the city council, may designate a portion of the cemetery for the burial of indigents. Whenever it is made to appear to the mayor that any person who has died does not have an estate sufficient to pay the purchase price of a gravesite in the cemetery, and where no immediate family exists, and where the deceased was previously an active resident of Ephraim, the sexton may grant burial space for such deceased person upon written request of the next of kin, without the payment of fees required by this title. 
Burial Hours: Unless prior arrangements are made, all burials shall take place as to allow the complete burial process during regular city business hours. The city reserves the right to limit the number of burials which can be performed on a single day. 
Graveside Services: Graveside services may be held at the gravesite. Serving of food or beverage in the cemetery is prohibited. 
Storage: The city does not provide temporary storage of caskets or urns. (Ord. 17-02, 2-1-2017)
7.20.070 Monuments And Markers
Monuments/Markers: Monuments/markers are permitted in the city cemetery subject to the regulations of this chapter. No more than one monument or marker shall be permitted for each grave, unless permission is received by the cemetery sexton to do otherwise. In this instance it must be a flat marker located close to the head end of the grave. 
Maintenance: The city is not responsible for the purchase, installation, maintenance, or damage to any monument/marker unless the damage results from a city activity. 
Construction: No monument/marker, or any part thereof, may be constructed of wood, or any other material which is not approved by the cemetery sexton. 
Placement: Monuments/markers must be placed at the head end of the burial plot. 
Installation: Installation of the monument/marker shall be performed by a monument/marker company. All monuments/markers shall be placed in accordance with the instructions and conditions of the cemetery sexton, and only after payment of the monument/marker locating fee. Attaching ropes or cables to trees or other objects in the cemetery, and placing material on adjoining plots is prohibited. Planks or plywood must be placed over grass or paths any time a vehicle is driven on it. Where feasible, a lightweight portable trailer/dolly should be used to move headstones rather than driving a vehicle on the lawn.

Heavy trucks will not be permitted within the cemetery when, in the opinion of the cemetery sexton, such work might cause damage to the grounds or driveways. Once begun, all monument and stone work is to be completed and any accumulated debris is to be removed from the site within a one day period. All work must be done during regular cemetery hours of operation, Monday through Friday, unless by special permission from the cemetery sexton.
Monument/Marker Requirements:


Concrete Border: A four inch (4") wide concrete border is required around all monuments/markers, including those that are flat.
Vertical Monument Foundations: Each monument shall be placed on a concrete foundation which will be a minimum thickness of four inches (4").
Flat Markers: Flat markers must be placed flush with the contour of the ground to accommodate for care and maintenance issues.
Monument/Marker Dimensions: The maximum monument/marker size the city shall allow is eighty percent (80%) (up to 36 inches) of a single plot width excluding concrete border. A single monument/marker may be placed on two (2) adjacent plots under the same ownership; however, the monument/marker may not exceed sixty percent (60%) (up to 72 inches) of the combined width. No monument/marker may exceed four feet (4') (48") in height. A waiver for height may be granted based on receiving written approval from the city council.
Grass Care Facilitation: As is practicable, placement of all monuments/markers shall be made so as to facilitate the use of mechanical cleaning and mowing equipment.
Monument/Marker Time Line:
Arrangements should be made by the family to place a temporary plaque on the gravesite within three (3) days of the interment for identification purposes.
Occupied grave plots must be marked with a permanent monument or marker within one year after burial. Monuments/markers may be placed prior to the burial of the deceased; however, if the monuments/markers must be moved to open the grave, a moving fee will be assessed based on the actual cost of doing so. (Ord. 17-02, 2-1-2017)
7.20.080 Plantings And Decorations
Potted Plants: 
One plant stand is permitted per grave plot. 
The city is not responsible for maintenance and care of plants and plant stands. The city is not responsible for stolen plants or permitted plant stands. Plant stands that are vacant or unused for more than one year are subject to removal. 
The city reserves the right to remove all plants or plant stands which interfere with routine maintenance of the city cemetery or which become unsightly, dangerous, or diseased on the burial plot in which they are situated or to any other burial plot, path, or roadway. 
Other Objects: 
Vases or containers integrated into a monument or marker are allowed. 
 Enclosures such as fences and coping are prohibited and subject to immediate removal. 
The city reserves the right to remove any object which interferes with routine maintenance of the cemetery or which is unsightly, overgrown, or dangerous on the burial plot in which it is situated or to any other burial plot, path, or roadway. All unauthorized plantings and objects are subject to immediate removal by the city. 
Permanent Plantings Of Trees And Shrubbery: 
Permanent plantings of trees, shrubbery, and flowers are not permitted within the city cemetery except those by the city or those authorized in writing by the cemetery sexton.
The cemetery sexton shall select appropriate locations for and quantities of authorized plantings. 
The city may refuse to sell any burial plot adjacent to a burial plot or pathway containing a tree if the city determines excavating a grave on the burial plot is detrimental to the tree. 
The city reserves the right to remove any planted tree, shrub, or flower which interferes with routine maintenance of the cemetery or which is unsightly, overgrown, dangerous, or diseased. All unauthorized plantings are subject to immediate removal. (Ord. 17-02, 2-1-2017)
7.20.090 Prohibited Acts
Animals: All animals, domesticated or otherwise, are prohibited in the cemetery except as provided in paragraph B. It is unlawful for the owner, agent, caretaker or other person in charge of livestock to allow or negligently permit animals to run at large or trespass on cemetery grounds. 
Dogs: It is unlawful for any person to allow any dog under his control or ownership, other than a guide or service dog specially trained for that purpose, accompanying a blind, visually handicapped, hearing impaired or otherwise physically disabled person, to be within the cemetery, even if under leash. 
Vandalism/Theft: It is unlawful for any person to injure, deface, carry away from the grave any monument, marker, tree, shrub, flower, or any other property or ornament in the city cemetery, except by written permission of the rightful owner or the cemetery sexton. 
Vehicles: It is unlawful for any person, except for those installing monuments/markers, or official city maintenance personnel in the performance of their duties, to drive any vehicle over any grave or upon any nonpaved area of the cemetery. (Ord. 17-02, 2-1-2017)
7.20.100 Violation And Penalty
Any person, firm, corporation, contractor, or otherwise, whether acting as a burial permit holder or on behalf of the burial permit holder, who violates or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter, shall be guilty of a class C misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as defined in Utah state law. A separate offense shall be deemed to be committed on each day an offense occurs or continues. (Ord. 17-02, 2-1-2017)

7.24 CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM FRANCHISE
7.24.010 Intent
7.24.020 Definitions - Cable Communications System Franchise
7.24.030 Franchise Required
7.24.040 Application Procedure
7.24.050 Fee For Application
7.24.060 Grant Of Franchise
7.24.070 Fee For Franchise
7.24.080 Required Extensions Of Service
7.24.090 Violations; Procedure For Remedying
7.24.100 Alternative Remedies
7.24.110 Penalty

7.24.010 Intent
The City finds that the continuation and development of cable television and communications system has great benefit and impact upon the residents of the City. Because of the complex and rapidly changing technology associated with cable television, the City further finds that the public convenience, safety and general welfare can best be served by establishing regulatory powers which should be vested in the City or such persons as the City shall designate. It is the City's intent to ensure that City residents receive a high quality cable television and communications service; that any inconvenience to residents in the development, operation and maintenance of a cable system or systems be minimized; and that the City is properly compensated for the administration of cable television and communication franchises and the use of the public facilities permitted by this Chapter. It is the intent of this Chapter to provide for the means to attain the best possible public interest in these matters, and any franchise issued pursuant to this Chapter shall be deemed to include the finding as an integral part thereof. (Ord. 11-15-95, 11-15-1995)

7.24.020 Definitions - Cable Communications System Franchise
CABLE ACT: Collectively, the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984 and the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, as amended.

CABLE COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM, SYSTEM OR SYSTEMS (Also Referred To As Cable Television System, Cable System, CATV System or Community Antenna TV System): Shall have the meaning specified for "Cable Communication System" in the Cable Act. Unless otherwise specified, it shall in this Chapter refer to the cable communications system constructed and operated in the City under this Chapter.

CITY: The City of Ephraim.

FRANCHISE: The initial authorization or renewal thereof, issued by the franchising authority, whether such authorization is designated as a franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate or otherwise, which authorizes construction and operation of the system.

FRANCHISE FEES: Any tax, fee or assessment of any kind imposed by the City on the grantee solely because of its status as a franchisee.

GRANTEE: The party to whom the franchise is granted, its agents, employees, lawful successors, transferees or assignees.

GRANTOR: The City of Ephraim.

GROSS REVENUES: Any revenue received by the grantee from the operation of the system in the service area; provided however, that such phrase shall not include any fees or taxes which are imposed directly or indirectly on any subscriber thereof by any government unit or agency, and which are collected by the grantee on behalf of such government unit or agency.

PERSON: Any individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, corporation or government entity.

STREET: The surface of the space above and below any public street, road, highway, easement, lane, path, alley, court, sidewalk, parkway, rights of way or driveway now or hereafter existing as such within the City and over which the City has jurisdiction.

SUBSCRIBER: A person or user of the system who lawfully receives communications and other services therefrom with the grantee's express permission. (Ord. 11-15-95, 11-15-1995)

7.24.030 Franchise Required
Operate System: It is unlawful to operate a cable communications system within the City without first obtaining from the City a franchise to do so. 
Occupy Or Use Streets: No cable communications system shall be allowed to occupy or use the streets without a franchise. (Ord. 11-15-95, 11-15-1995)
7.24.040 Application Procedure
Application, Information Required: 
No initial license franchise shall be issued except upon written application to the City. Such forms shall contain such information as the City Council may prescribe as to the: 
Citizenship and character of the applicant. 
Financial, technical and other qualifications of the applicant to operate the system. 
Complete information as to its principals and ultimate beneficial owners, including, in the case of corporations, all stockholders, both nominal and beneficial, owning one percent (1%) or more of the issued and outstanding stock, and in the case of incorporated associations, all members and ultimate beneficial owners, however designated. 
Description in detail of the equipment or facilities proposed to be constructed, installed and maintained. 
A statement or schedule setting forth the number of channels and all of the television or radio stations proposed to be received, transmitted, conducted, relayed or otherwise conveyed over its system. 
Such other information as the City may deem appropriate or necessary. 
Such application shall be signed by the applicant or a duly authorized representative. 
Notice Of Hearing: The City Council, after the last date fixed for the receipt of the application, shall cause to be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the City, a notice of a public hearing, giving the time, date, place of such hearing, and listing the names of the applicants and inviting public examination of the applicants and qualification of said applicants. 
Public Hearing: A public hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the standards of due process in fairness to applicants and the public and in accordance with the FCC rules and regulations and orders and policies pertinent to such hearing. Each applicant shall be notified of the time and location when his application is to be considered. 
Renewal Of Franchise: At the option of the City and upon application of the grantee, any franchise granted under this Chapter may be renewable in the same manner as required herein for obtaining an original franchise, except those provisions which are by their terms expressly inapplicable. The City Council may, at its option, waive compliance with any or all of the requirements of this Section. Any proceedings undertaken by the franchising authority that relate to the renewal of the grantee's franchise shall be governed by and comply with the provisions of section 626 of the Cable Act, as amended, unless the procedures and substantive protections set forth therein shall be deemed to be preempted and superseded by the provisions of any subsequent provision of Federal or State law. (Ord. 11-15-95, 11-15-1995)
7.24.050 Fee For Application
Each original initial application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable filing fee in the amount of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), which shall be payable to the City Recorder. (Ord. 11-15-95, 11-15-1995)

7.24.060 Grant Of Franchise
Authority Of City: Subject to the requirements of this Chapter, the City may grant to any grantee a nonexclusive, revocable franchise to construct, operate, maintain and reconstruct a cable communications system within part or all of the City. The franchise shall constitute both a right and an obligation to provide the services of a cable communications system as required by the provisions of this Chapter. 
Term: The term of any new or renewal franchise and all rights, privileges, obligations and restrictions pertaining thereto shall remain in effect for a period of fifteen (15) years, unless terminated sooner as hereinafter provided. 
Comparable Provisions: The material provisions of any franchise granted pursuant to this Chapter shall be comparable, in order that one operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another, and to provide all parties equal protection under the law. The franchising authority shall not authorize or permit a system to operate within the franchise area on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome to any one operator. (Ord. 11-15-95, 11-15-1995)
7.24.070 Fee For Franchise
Required: For the use of the streets and for the purposes of providing revenue with which to defray the costs or regulation arising out of the granting of a franchise under this Chapter, grantee shall pay a franchise fee.
Amount: During the term of the franchise, grantee shall pay to the City an amount equal to five percent (5%) per year of the grantee's annual gross revenue received. 
Payment Due; Report: The franchise fee shall be paid annually ninety (90) days after the end of the preceding calendar year. Each payment shall be accompanied by a brief report from a representative of the grantee showing the basis for the computation. 
Acceptance Of Payment: No acceptance of any payment shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is, in fact, the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of payment be construed as a release of any claim which the City may have for further or additional sums payable under the provisions of this Section. 
Failure To Pay; Interest: Any franchise fee which remains unpaid after the dates specified shall be delinquent and shall thereafter accrue interest at the maximum legal rate until paid. (Ord. 11-15-95, 11-15-1995)
7.24.080 Required Extensions Of Service
Authority: Grantee is hereby authorized to extend the cable system as necessary, as desirable, or as required pursuant to the franchise agreement. 
Arbitrary Refusal Prohibited: No subscriber shall be refused service arbitrarily. (Ord. 11-15-95, 11-15-1995)
7.24.090 Violations; Procedure For Remedying
Demand By City; Response Of Grantee: In the event that City believes that grantee has violated any provision of the franchise, City may make a written demand on grantee that it remedy such violation. From receipt of such notice, the grantee shall: 1) within fourteen (14) days, respond to the franchising authority, contesting the assertion of noncompliance; or 2) have thirty (30) days to cure such default; or 3) in the event that, by the nature of default, such default cannot be cured within the thirty (30) day period, initiate reasonable steps to remedy such default and notify the franchising authority of the steps being taken and the projected date that they will be completed.
Failure To Comply; Administrative Hearing: If the grantee fails to comply or the City believes the grantee to still be not in compliance and the alleged violation is of a significant material provision of the franchise, an administrative hearing shall be held to review the alleged violation. If this does not result in a satisfactory resolution, and/or grantee requests a public hearing, then a public hearing shall be held, and the grantee shall be provided with an opportunity to be heard upon thirty (30) days' written notice to grantee of the time and the place of the hearing and the allegations of franchise violations. 
Conduct Of Hearing: Any hearing held will be conducted by the City Council. 
Cost: The cost incurred by the parties for attorney fees, expert witness fees and other expenses shall be borne solely by the party incurring the costs. 
Witnesses: All witnesses testifying at any hearing held pursuant to this Section shall be sworn witnesses and shall be subject to direct and cross-examination. However, formal rules of evidence applicable to the trial of civil and criminal proceedings in the trial courts of the State shall not be applicable to the hearing. The provisions of the Administrative Procedures Act, commencing at Utah Code § 63-46b-1 et seq., as amended, or any successor legislative enactment, shall not be applicable to any such hearing. The hearing may be continued from time to time. 
Findings Of Fact, Conclusions: The City Council shall, upon conclusion of the hearing, prepare findings of fact and conclusions. The decision made shall be filed and mailed to the grantee not later than thirty (30) calendar days after the conclusion of the hearing. 
Remedy For Noncompliance After Hearing: If after the hearing, the City Council determines that a noncompliance occurred or still exists, then the grantor may impose a remedy, including, without limitation: 
Making the correction itself and charging the cost to the grantee; 
Commencing an action at law for monetary damages or seeking other equitable relief; 
Requiring the filing of a financial performance instrument by the grantee to ensure future performance; or 
In the case of a substantial default of a material provision of the franchise, declaring the franchise terminated. 
Termination Of Franchise: If the decision by the City Council is that there are grounds for termination of the franchise and that the franchise shall be terminated, the City Council shall adopt a resolution which terminates the franchise and includes its findings and conclusions. A copy of the resolution shall be mailed to the grantee. 
Events Beyond Control Of Grantee: The grantee shall not be held in default or noncompliance with the provisions of the franchise, nor suffer any enforcement of penalty relating thereto, for such noncompliance or alleged defaults which are caused by strikes, acts of God, power outages or other events reasonably beyond its ability to control. (Ord. 11-15-95, 11-15-1995)
7.24.100 Alternative Remedies
City: No provision of this Chapter shall be deemed to bar the right of the City to seek or obtain judicial relief from a violation of any provision of the franchise or any rule, regulation, requirement or directive promulgated thereunder. Neither the existence of other remedies identified in this Chapter nor the exercise thereof shall be deemed to bar or otherwise limit the right of the City to recover monetary damages for such violation by the grantee, or judicial enforcement of the grantee's obligations by means of specific performance, injunction relief or mandate, or any other judicial remedy at law or in equity. 
Grantee: No provision of this Chapter shall be deemed to bar any rights the grantee may have under law and the right to review of any decision by the City Council by a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 11-15-95, 11-15-1995)
7.24.110 Penalty
In addition to the criminal and civil remedies provided by Federal and State law, it is a Class B misdemeanor for any person to create or make use of any unauthorized connection, whether physically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of the system without the express consent of the grantee. It is a Class B misdemeanor for any person to tamper with, remove or injure any property, equipment or part of the system or any means of receiving services provided thereto, without the express consent of the grantee. (Ord. 11-15-95, 11-15-1995; amd. 1998 Code)

7.28 TREES
7.28.010 Definitions - Trees
7.28.020 Tree Commission
7.28.030 Planting Requirements
7.28.040 Care Of Public Trees
7.28.050 Dead Or Diseased Tree Removal On Private Property
7.28.060 Interference With Commission Prohibited
7.28.070 Arborists; License And Bond Required
7.28.080 Review By City Council; Appeal
7.28.090 Penalty

7.28.010 Definitions - Trees
PARK TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation in parks and public areas owned by the City of Ephraim, Utah.

STREET TREES: Trees, shrubs, bushes and all other woody vegetation on property or rights of way owned by the City of Ephraim, Utah, lying between property lines on either side of all streets, avenues or alleyways within the City. (Ord. 7-5-95, 7-5-1995)

7.28.020 Tree Commission
Created; Appointment: There is hereby created and established a Tree Commission for the City, which shall consist of five (5) voting members, citizens and residents of the City, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the approval of the City Council. A sixth member of the Commission shall be a member of the City Council and shall vote only in the case of a tie. The City Councilmember serves as a liaison member. 
Term Of Office; Vacancy: The term of office to be appointed by the Mayor shall be three (3) years. The term of two (2) of the members appointed to the first Tree Commission shall be for three (3) years and the term of two (2) of the members of the first Tree Commission shall be for two (2) years. The term of the fifth member of the first Tree Commission shall be for one year. The term of the City Councilmember shall coincide with his/her term of office. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, his/her successor shall be appointed for the unexpired portion of the term being vacated. 
Compensation: Members of the Tree Commission shall serve without compensation. 
Duties And Responsibilities: 
It shall be the responsibility of the Tree Commission to study, investigate, counsel and develop, and/or update annually, and administer a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of street trees and park trees. Such plan will be presented annually to the City Council and, upon their acceptance and approval, shall constitute the Official Comprehensive City Tree Plan for the City. 
The Tree Commission, when requested by the City Council, shall consider, investigate, make findings, report and recommend upon any special matter or question coming within the scope of its work. 
Operation Of Commission: The Tree Commission shall choose its own officers, make its own rules and regulations in accordance and in compliance with applicable law, and keep a journal of its proceedings. A majority of the members shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. (Ord. 7-5-95, 7-5-1995)
7.28.030 Planting Requirements
Species To Be Planted: The Tree Commission shall develop and maintain a list of desirable trees (see appendix 1 attached to the Ordinance codified herein) for planting along streets in three (3) size classes based on mature height: small (under 20 feet), medium (20 to 40 feet) and large (over 40 feet). Lists of trees not suitable for planting (see appendix 2 attached to the Ordinance codified herein) will also be created by the Tree Commission. 
Spacing: The spacing of street trees and park trees will be in accordance with the tree species size classes listed in paragraph A, and no trees may be planted closer together than the following: small trees, thirty feet (30'); medium trees, forty feet (40'); and large trees, fifty feet (50'), except in special plantings designed or approved by a landscape architect. 
Distance From Curb And Sidewalk: The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curb lines and sidewalks will be in accordance with the tree species size classes listed in paragraph A and no trees may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: small trees, two feet (2'); medium trees, three feet (3'); and large trees, four feet (4'). 
Distance From Street Corners And Fireplugs: No street tree or park tree shall be planted within thirty five feet (35') of any street corner, measured from the point of nearest intersecting curbs and curb lines. No street tree or park tree shall be planted within ten feet (10') of any fireplug. 
Utilities: No street trees, other than those species listed as small trees in paragraph A may be planted under or within ten (10) lateral feet of any overhead utility wire, or over or within five (5) lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line or other utility. (Ord. 7-5-95, 7-5-1995)
7.28.040 Care Of Public Trees
Authority Of City: The City shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
Removal Of Unsafe Trees: The Tree Commission may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature is injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines or other public improvements, or is affected with any injurious fungus, insect or other pest. This paragraph does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners; providing, that the selection and location of said trees is in accordance with ECC 7.28.030. It is the responsibility of the adjacent property owner to obtain approval of the Tree Commission before planting any tree to assure compliance with requirements of ECC 7.28.030. 
Tree Topping: It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person or City department to top any street tree, park tree or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches (3") in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical, may be exempted from this Chapter at the determination of the Tree Commission. 
Pruning, Corner Clearance: Every owner of any tree overhanging any street or right of way with in the City shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of thirteen feet (13') above street surfaces or eight feet (8') above the sidewalk surface. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs, which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The City shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub on private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a street light, or interferes with visibility of any traffic-control device or sign or sight triangle at intersections. The Tree Commission shall first notify in writing the owners of such trees. Pruning shall be done by said owners at their own expense within thirty (30) days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the City shall have the authority to prune such trees and charge the cost of pruning on the owner's property tax notice. Tree limbs that grow near high voltage electrical conductors shall be maintained clear of such conductors by the City power maintenance crew in compliance with any applicable franchise agreements. 
Removal Of Stumps: All stumps of street trees and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground (Ord. 7-5-95, 7-5-1995)
7.28.050 Dead Or Diseased Tree Removal On Private Property
The Tree Commission shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the City when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or diseases which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the City. The Tree Commission will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within thirty (30) days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the City shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal to the owner's property tax notice. (Ord. 7-5-95, 7-5-1995)

7.28.060 Interference With Commission Prohibited
It shall be unlawful for any person to prevent, delay or interfere with the Tree Commission, or any of its agents, while engaging in and about the planting, cultivating, mulching, pruning, spraying or removing of any street trees, park trees or trees on private grounds, as authorized in this Chapter. (Ord. 7-5-95, 7-5-1995)

7.28.070 Arborists; License And Bond Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business or occupation of pruning, treating or removing trees within the City without first applying for and procuring a license. The license fee shall be in accordance with current license fee schedules of the City, paid in accordance to the licensing ordinance of the City; provided however, that no license shall be required of any public service company or City employee doing such work in the pursuit of their public service endeavors. Before any license shall be issued, each applicant shall first file evidence of possession of liability insurance in the minimum amounts of three hundred thousand dollars ($300,000.00) for bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) property damage indemnifying the City or any person or property injured or damaged resulting from the pursuit of such endeavors as herein described. (Ord. 7-5-95, 7-5-1995)

7.28.080 Review By City Council; Appeal
The City Council shall have the right to review the conduct, acts and decisions of the Tree Commission. Any person may appeal from any ruling or order of the Tree Commission to the City Council, who may hear the matter and make final decisions. (Ord. 7-5-95, 7-5-1995)

7.28.090 Penalty
Any person violating any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and upon conviction or a plea of guilty, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. (Ord. 7-5-95, 7-5-1995; amd. 1998 Code)

7.32 EPHRAIM SPORTS COMPLEX
7.32.010 Title For Citation
7.32.020 General Usage
7.32.030 All Night Tournament
7.32.040 Tournaments

7.32.010 Title For Citation
The provisions codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the EPHRAIM SPORTS COMPLEX USAGE ORDINANCE. (Ord. 12-02, 2-15-2012)

7.32.020 General Usage
Ephraim City does hereby establish designated latest start times for games at the Ephraim City Sports Complex as set forth below: 

Lights shall be turned off fifteen (15) minutes following the final scheduled game regardless of the day of the week. No game shall be scheduled to start after the following: 
Ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Monday through Friday; 
Eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Saturdays. 
There will be a preference for games starting after dark to be located on field 1 (northwest) or field 4 (northeast). 
No city sponsored Sunday events. However, tournament play may continue from Saturday night into early Sunday morning if necessary. 
No public address (PA) system shall be used after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. 
Lights shall be turned on at sundown unless requested by officials or the city recreation director to be turned on sooner for safety reasons. (Ord. 12-02, 2-15-2012)
7.32.030 All Night Tournament
Two (2) all night special events may be allowed each year beginning on Fridays and ending on Saturdays at the discretion of the city council and awarded on a case by case basis by the city council. During such an event, the provisions in ECC 7.32.020 may be waived except no public address system use after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. (Ord. 12-02, 2-15-2012)
7.32.040 Tournaments
All tournaments other than those identified in ECC 7.32.030 shall abide by the following: 

For the purposes of this section a tournament shall be one sanctioned by any of the following: UGSA, UBBA, UASA, the Lions Club, or Ephraim City. 
Lights shall be turned on at sundown unless requested by officials or the city recreation director to be turned on sooner for safety reasons. 
Lights shall be turned off fifteen (15) minutes following the final scheduled game regardless of the day of the week. No game shall be scheduled to start after the following: 
Ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. Monday through Thursday; 
Eleven o'clock (11:00) P.M. on Fridays; 
With no restriction on Saturdays. 
No public address (PA) system shall be used after ten o'clock (10:00) P.M. on any day. 
There will be a preference for games starting after dark to be located on field 1 (northwest) or field 4 (northeast). (Ord. 12-02, 2-15-2012)
8 UTILITIES
8.04 GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
8.08 UTILITIES BOARD
8.12 OPERATIONS AND REGULATIONS
8.16 DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION
8.20 NET METERING
8.24 CONTROL OF BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS

8.04 GENERAL AND ADMINISTRATIVE PROVISIONS
8.04.010 Definitions - General Utilties
8.04.020 Fees, Rates And Charges
8.04.030 Limitation (Special Consideration) For Outside Connection Or Use

8.04.010 Definitions - General Utilties
When used in this title, the following terms shall have the meaning set opposite each term, phrase or identified activity:

ACCOUNT HOLDER: A person, corporation, partnership, or other entity which has created a utility account with the city to pay for utility service provided by the city.

ACTIVITY: Any construction and development, or any action accessing or requiring the access of a structure or a point of consumption or use of power, water or sewer systems or anyone or a combination of those to any part of the system (as "system" is hereinafter defined).

AID IN CONSTRUCTION: An agreement between applicant and city where applicant may be reimbursed for costs associated with installation of infrastructure for utility service benefiting multiple users. Reimbursable costs will be collected by the city as additional connections are made to aforementioned install ed utilities according to the terms and conditions of the agreement.

APPLICANT: A person, corporation, partnership, or other entity which applies to the city for utility service.

APPLICATION: The utility service agreement application to be made and entered into for electrical power, culinary water, sewer, garbage disposal service, or any other service to: a) residential; b) commercial; c) industrial; d) recreational; or e) any other uses of the system or any one of the systems. (See also definition of Utility Service Agreement.)

BED AND BREAKFAST: Overnight accommodations and a morning meal in a dwelling unit provided to individuals on a temporary basis for compensation.

BILLING: The periodic or monthly, quarterly, annual, or other periods ordinarily written statements, charges to users for electrical power, culinary water, sewer service, garbage disposal service or any use, and means the delivery of a statement of the amount due from any consumer from the system. Billings may be made by mail, personal delivery, or if necessary by telephone or any practical notice in emergencies. The billing shall state the amount due and the date after which the bill becomes delinquent. A billing shall have effect immediately upon mailing, delivery, or any other communication of such billing to a consumer or user and each billing shall be presumed to be accurate unless for good and adequate reasons challenged by any user or consumer within thirty (30) days after its issuance.

BOARD: See definition of Utility Board.

BOARDING HOUSE: A dwelling or part thereof with shared facilities in which, for compensation, lodging is provided, which may or may not include meals. For the purposes of this title, a boarding house shall not be considered as a temporary lodging facility.

CITY: Ephraim City, Sanpete County, State of Utah.

COMMERCIAL: Any activity carried on for a profit or intended to produce a profit.

COMMERCIAL BUILDING/BUSINESS: A building primarily built for the purpose of engaging in commercial activities.

CONNECTION: Any accessing of any structure or activity to any system.

CONNECTION FEE: The cost fixed by ordinance, resolution or order of the governing body for connection to the system or any of the individual systems.

CONSTRUCTION: Any improvement, line extension, or the addition to the system or any part thereof, or any accessory, any equipment, any facilities or any ingredients adding to any part of the system.

COSTS: The expense to the city of any nature including, but not limited to, expenditures of any kind, litigation expenses or liabilities, or legal fees, expenses of any nature or in any way imposing a liability upon the city and any other reasonable and necessary expenditures of the city respecting any part of the system whether in the administration of the system or enforcing or defending the city and any system or either the city and any system.

DEFERRED PAYMENT AGREEMENT: An agreement to receive or to continue to receive utility service and to pay an outstanding debt or delinquent account owed to the city for such continuation.

DELINQUENCY: The failure to pay any billing after the due date of the current billing month as designated by city resolution or ordinance.

DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.

DISTRIBUTION: The delivery of power, water, or sewer service to any unit of the system to any place, any unit, or any structure, or any other place where electric power or water is consumed or sewer service provided, or where or to which any delivery of power or water is made or transmitted to, or any sewer service of any structure, place, unit or other facility is furnished. Distribution to a "unit", as defined herein, will not allow unauthorized extension of service or power to any other unit or place or method of use. Nothing in the judicial interpretation or construction of the term distribution shall be deemed to allow multiple connections to receive service from any part of the system.

DWELLING: Any building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy, but not including hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, or other temporary use lodging facilities. A dwelling can consist of one or more "dwelling units".

DWELLING, DUPLEX: A building containing two (2) single-family dwelling units totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof.

DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities comprising of an independent, self-contained space for occupancy by one family, individual and/or individuals for living and sleeping purposes.

DWELLING UNIT; ACCESSORY: A dwelling unit within a dwelling that is incidental and secondary to the primary residence (not a duplex).

DWELLING UNIT; APARTMENT: A dwelling which contains three (3) or more dwelling units.

EASEMENT: That portion of a lot or lots reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal owner of said property. The easement may be for use under, on or above said lot(s). An easement is a vested or acquired right to use land, other than as a tenant, for a specific purpose; such right being held by someone other than the owner who holds title to the land.

EQUAL PAY: A monthly payment plan under which the customer's estimated annual billing is divided into twelve (12) equal monthly payments.

GENERAL ORDINANCES: The ordinances of the city of Ephraim, Utah, whenever adopted including the ordinance codified herein which shall be known as the "utilities ordinance".

GENERATING SYSTEM: The turbine, waterworks, penstocks, all forms of electrical generation, and all accessories for generating electric power of the city.

GOVERNING BODY: The city council of Ephraim City, Utah.

HOTEL, MOTEL: A building with or without kitchen facilities offering temporary use accommodations to general public.

INDEMNITY: An agreement or the automatic enforceable requirement to indemnify the city and repay or redress the city for or on account of any loss and shall include, but not be limited to, the "indemnity agreement" which is a part of the customer statement of rights and responsibilities.

INSIDE: Shall, when geography is the subject, refer to use within the corporate boundaries of the city; and inside a dwelling when type of use is involved.

INVESTMENT: All the costs, expenses, engineering, and payments for construction of all or any part of the systems, and includes indebtedness both incurred and paid, and that incurred and not yet paid.

KILOWATT: The measure of electrical power delivered to a consumer however (and whether or not specifically in any manner) measured in kilowatt hours and shall be the measure of energy.

KILOWATT HOUR (kWh): The measure of electrical energy used in the industry by which the amount of electric energy is delivered for use by a consumer.

KITCHEN: Any room used for or intended to be used for cooking and preparing food.

LANDLORD UTILITY AGREEMENT: A form provided by the city required to be entered into annually by a landlord indicating the status of utilities for an apartment/rental unit, prior to utility service being provided to that apartment/rental unit.

LIABILITY: Any expense or cost or loss to the city or any obligation or claim against the city for or in favor of any person, and liability shall be as further defined in the indemnity agreement, which is part of the customer statement of rights and responsibilities. (See also definition of Indemnity.)

LINE EXTENSION: The addition and/or extension of any utility system, transmission or other energized power lines, or water lines, or sewer lines, or any addition to the utility distribution system of the city.

OUTSIDE USE: The use of culinary water outside a dwelling, home, commercial or industrial building or any use other than essential culinary use of potable water.

PERSON: Any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, or similarly defined interest.

PROCLAMATION: A statement by the governing body, the board or any authorized official of the city to suspend or prohibit activities, regulate or limit uses or otherwise place into effect an enforceable order reasonably or necessarily appropriate.

RATE: The current electrical service and water charges, sewer charges and any other charges set out by ordinance, resolution or order.

RATE CHANGES: Any change to rates or change in connection or other fees which may be made by resolution of the governing body and entered in the minutes of the governing body.

RECONNECTION FEE: A fee charged to a customer's utility account where a utility has been shut off.

SECURITY DEPOSIT: A deposit in the amount as established by resolution of the city council to prevent against the delinquency of a utility account.

SEWER LATERAL: The line, pipe or conduit which transports sanitary sewer effluent from the user/generator to the sewer main.

SEWER MAIN: The line, pipe or conduit which is generally located in the public right of way which transports sanitary sewer effluent to the publicly owned treatment facility.

STATEMENT OF RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES: A form provided by the city to an account holder, explaining customer rights and responsibilities when utility service is provided, to be signed by the customer; the original of which shall be retained by the city, and a copy provided to the customer at their request. 

STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building or manufactured home that is principally above ground.

SYSTEM: 

The entire electric power generating transmission, distributing and power producing facilities and power acquisition from any system for contributions to or of the electric power system of the city or any lines, facilities, poles, underground or aboveground transmission facilities for power generated by the city or acquired or purchased by the city from other sources; 
The culinary water system; 
The sewer or wastewater system; or 

shall be given a similar meaning by referring to paragraphs A, B, or C of this definition, or any combination of the above.
TEMPORARY USE: A use established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use within the expiration of a thirty (30) day time period.

TRAILER: A structure standing on wheels, towed or hauled by another vehicle, and used for short term human occupancy, carrying of materials, goods, or objects, or as a temporary (30 day time period) office.

UNIT: Each dwelling unit, place of business, manufactured home, mobile home, condominium unit, and apartment regardless of whether or not the unit is part of a complex or groups of units, except that an owner occupied dwelling containing an attached accessory dwelling will be considered one unit, and a commercial building containing more than one business with shared bathroom facilities, will be considered one unit.

USER FEE: The cost of electric power, culinary water, sewer service, or garbage disposal service and not in combination but a fee for each service provided to any unit or any consumer.

UTILITY BOARD: A board created and appointed by the city council to serve as an advisory committee to the city council.

UTILITY PROCESSING FEE: A fee assessed to cover the costs of creating a new utility account.

UTILITY SERVICE: Water, sewer, electric, and/or garbage disposal service provided by the city.

UTILITY SERVICE AGREEMENT: The utility service agreement and application to be made and entered into for electrical power, culinary water, sewer, garbage disposal service, or any other service to: a) residential; b) commercial; c) industrial; d) recreational; or e) any other uses of the system or any one of the systems. (See also definition of Application.) (Ord. 14-02, 8-8-2014)

8.04.020 Fees, Rates And Charges
Notwithstanding any other provision in this title where rates or charges are treated, all amounts paid for utility charges shall be credited first to electric power charges; and thereafter, in order, sewer services; and thereafter, in order, water use; and thereafter, garbage disposal service; and thereafter, all other charges associated with city utilities. Failure to pay all utility charges shall authorize the city without more, to terminate services of all utilities; in the event of a delinquency, as provided in this title adopted under the authority hereof there is presumed and shall be reserved by and granted to the governing body authority to terminate at any reasonable time. Such service shall be reinstated only after the payment of such charges, penalties, interest and assessments as may be fixed by resolution or order of the city council. Unless utility account is terminated and services are discontinued by the city, or an exception is granted, all minimum charges for water, sewer, electric power, and garbage disposal service shall be payable and actually paid every month whether or not the premises (unit(s)) shall be occupied or the services at that unit or premises used or any use exercised. Discontinuance of one utility shall constitute discontinuance of all utilities, unless an exception is granted as defined under ECC 8.12.010 Paragraph K,2. (Ord. 14-02, 8-8-2014)

8.04.030 Limitation (Special Consideration) For Outside Connection Or Use
Nothing in this section, subsection, or this title or elsewhere shall it be deemed or inferred or intended that the city by any legislation or law shall have a duty to extend water, power, or sewer service outside the legal boundaries of the city of Ephraim or to make charges or fees for water or sewer services equal to or in any other way different from such charges within the city. There shall be a distinct classification respecting rates for service outside the city and service within the city because of the history of taxation, satisfaction of debt, work labor and force account or donated efforts which have constituted or made it possible to create the infrastructure of the city of Ephraim. (Ord. 14-02, 8-8-2014)

8.08 UTILITIES BOARD
8.08.010 Created; Appointment
8.08.020 Authority Of Board
8.08.030 Term; Vacancies
8.08.040 Qualifications
8.08.050 Compensation
8.08.060 Operational Budget Recommendation
8.08.070 Meetings; Conduct
8.08.080 Powers And Duties Of The Board

8.08.010 Created; Appointment
There is created a utilities board to consist of five (5) members to be appointed by the mayor with the advice and consent of the city council. The board shall have authority over the individual or combined divisions of electric power, culinary water, sewage and wastewater collection and treatment and shall have authority to enter private property under any appropriate circumstances and at any reasonable times for the essential enforcement of this title. (Ord. 1998-1, 12-17-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)

8.08.020 Authority Of Board
Within the constraints of city policies and the current budget, the board may consider any matter related to the Ephraim utilities and take action or make recommendations in regard thereto to the administration and to the city council. The board may use professional engineering, technological and specialized studies, staff recommendations, public comment, past experience and any other reasonable or appropriate information when making decisions or making recommendations. (Ord. 14-01, 5-21-2014)

8.08.030 Term; Vacancies
Such appointed members shall serve for a term of five (5) years and may be removed by the mayor and the city council only for cause, after a public hearing, subject however, that the first appointment of five (5) members shall be for the term of one, two (2), three (3), four (4) and five (5) years respectively, from the first Monday of the month following the taking effect of the ordinance codified herein, and vacancies occurring through expiration of terms of appointment, death, disability, resignation or removal from the city, and upon recommendation from the board of replacement candidates shall be filled by appointment of the mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council. (Ord. 1998-1, 12-17-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)

8.08.040 Qualifications
No person shall be a board member unless they shall have been for at least one year next preceding appointment, a resident elector of the city. No person who holds any other city office or who is an employee of the city government or who has any business relationship with the department, other than as a consumer, shall be a board member. A board member ceasing to possess any of these qualifications shall be removed from his office forthwith by the mayor and city council. (Ord. 1998-1, 12-17-1997, eff. 1-1-1998)

8.08.050 Compensation
Members of the board shall receive no compensation for their services, but shall be reimbursed for all reasonable expenses incurred in the execution of their duties. (Ord. 14-01, 5-21-2014)

8.08.060 Operational Budget Recommendation
On an annual basis, the board will submit a recommended operational budget to the city council and the board shall monitor said budget as approved. The board is authorized and directed and without further act of the city council empowered to administer the collection of all connection fees, rates and utility charges for the electric power, utility, sewer utility and water utility. (Ord. 1998-1, 12-17-199 7, eff. 1-1-1998)

8.08.070 Meetings; Conduct
The board by majority vote shall elect from among its members a chairman or chairwoman who shall preside over the meetings of the board and a vice chairman or chairwoman who shall act during their absence. The board may utilize a secretary who shall be responsible for keeping minutes and notes of all board meetings, and who may be paid for such services as provided by the city. The board shall elect its officers at the first regular meeting at which all members are present following the appointment of a new board member for a full term, but not later than the fourth meeting following the appointment. The board shall adopt rules for the conduct of its meetings. No action shall be taken by the board, except by the affirmative vote of at least three (3) board members. At least three (3) members shall be present to comprise a quorum. The board shall meet at least once per month and at such time or times as it shall see fit by a majority. All meetings of the board shall be held in accordance with the Utah open and public meetings act. (Ord. 14-01, 5-21-2014)

8.08.080 Powers And Duties Of The Board
 The board shall: 

With the consent of the council, employ the necessary agents or consultant and to commission studies to determine and address current and future electrical needs and the physical facilities to meet those needs and to report their findings to administration and the city council. 
With the consent of the council, employ the necessary agents or consultant and to commission studies to conduct short and long range planning for culinary water, its water rights, source and distribution, addressing future culinary water needs and the physical facilities to meet those needs and to report their findings to administration and the city council. 
With the consent of the council, employ the necessary agents or consultant and to commission studies to conduct short and long range planning for sewer and wastewater needs, its collection, and disposal, addressing future needs and the physical facilities to meet those needs and to report their findings to administration and the city council. 
Be informed on the operations of the departments. Department managers shall advise and update the board on activities and projects monthly. In addition, the board shall review the monthly financial and operating reports of the department and where appropriate provide advice and recommendation to the department manager, administration and city council with respect to the same. 
Be represented on hiring boards for employees within the respective utilities of water, sewer and power. 
Recommend to administration and the city council rates to be paid by consumers of electric power, culinary water and the service of sewer and wastewater. Such rates, charges and fees may be changed, increased or decreased by resolution of the city council without notice other than that prescribed by law and with such notification as appears on billing statements for each of the services. 
Have plenary power in cases where necessity requires, and to avoid an emergency, to suspend or limit use of any of the resources of any of the systems until further action of the city council. 
The board shall advise the mayor and city council on matters they deem appropriate which will include, but not be limited to, power purchases, contracts, utility rates, and utility projects. In addition, the board may recommend for mayor and city council approval, a representative from the community to attend the meetings of the agencies and to represent the city in matters associated with those agencies. 
The city council shall appoint a representative from the community that serves as the contact authority for the agencies of UAMPs and IPA. This person may be granted authority to buy and sell power and therein obligate the city up to the budgeted amount in each given year for power purchases. Council approval is required for any obligation above what is allocated in the budget. This person will regularly report to the utility board and city council on UAMPs and IPA's business dealings and the current and projected power market as it may affect Ephraim City. This person may also be reimbursed for travel expenses. 
Review the annual budget and budget proposals of the department and provide recommendation to the administration and city council with respect to the same. 
Hear requests for relief from the terms of this title and to hear and decide appeals from the decision of administrative and departments' staff. (Ord. 14-01, 5-21-2014)
8.12 OPERATIONS AND REGULATIONS
8.12.010 Utility Service Standards
8.12.020 Water Use And Service
8.12.030 Sewer Service Regulations
8.12.040 Power Use And Service
8.12.050 Class B Misdemeanor

8.12.010 Utility Service Standards
Applications, Fees, And Agreements: 
Rules For Levying, Billing, Guaranteeing And Collection Charges: The city council may from time to time promulgate rules for levying, billing, guaranteeing and collecting charges for utility services and all other rules necessary for the management and control of the city utility system. 
New Connection Application: Any person, entity, or business, who desires or is required to install/construct a new physical connection to the city water, sewer, or power system shall file with the planning director or his/her designee for each connection a written and signed connection application on a form as provided by the city, and pay the connection fees prior to service beginning. 
Utility Service Agreement And Customer Statement Of Rights And Responsibilities: Any person who desires or is required to secure water, sewer, power, and/or garbage disposal service when such service is available from the city shall apply therefor to the city and file an agreement and sign a customer statement of rights and responsibilities with the city offices on a form as provided by the city. 
Landlord Agreement For Tenant Utility Connection And Billing: Prior to tenant transferring utilities into their name, the city must receive written permission from the landlord; on a form provided by the city, instructing the city how utility billing is to occur. Should the form not be returned, utilities will be kept in the landlord's name making him/her responsible for any utility charges incurred until a landlord agreement, directing otherwise, has been filed with the city. 
Service Rates, Connection Fees, Reconnection Fees, And Utility Processing Fees: The penalty fee for delinquency in payment, connection fee, reconnection fee, inspection fee, utility processing fee, and other charges incidental to connection and services from the city for city utilities shall be established from time to time by resolution enacted by the city council. Rates for services furnished shall be uniform with respect to each meter size or meter classification as shown on the consolidated fee schedule adopted by the municipal council as established or that may hereafter be established. Until such time as the meter size, and/or meter classification have been determined, each unit, whether serviced by its own meter or a common meter, will pay at least the minimum monthly charge as if serviced by its own meter; excluded from this are temporary use facilities such as hotels, motels, and bed and breakfasts, owner occupied homes with no more than one accessory dwelling unit, and commercial units with a limited number of employees and shared bathroom facilities. 
Special Rates And Service Charges: The city council may from time to time fix by agreement or resolution special rates and conditions for users using exceptionally large amounts of water/electric service or making use of the water/electric system under exceptional circumstances, upon such terms and conditions as they may deem proper. 
Security Deposits And Guarantees: 
Security Deposit Required: Every individual who applies for new utility services, a transfer of utility services, or a reconnection of utility services wherein a deposit has been returned, shall be required to pay a security deposit in an amount as established by resolution of the city council. Applicants may be exempted from the security deposit requirements of this section provided they are the "legal owner" of the residence, and meet one of the following conditions: 
The applicant provides written proof of a good payment record, showing no delinquencies, from previous utility companies regarding applicant's payment history for the most recent fifteen (15) months. Documentation may come from one utility company or when all utility accounts are combined. 
The applicant currently has a utility account with the city and that account shows a payment history for a minimum of fifteen (15) months with not more than one month of "delinquent" status within that period. 
A landlord utility agreement has been signed specifying during a vacancy utilities are to be "kept on" and transferred from a tenant's name back into the landlord's name. 
Security Deposit Amount: The amount of this security deposit shall be reviewed periodically and may be increased or decreased as is deemed appropriate by the utility board, and as approved by the city council. 
Security Deposit Waived For Good Payment History: If a security deposit is required, and the applicant is the "legal owner" of the property, and their payment history is shown to be satisfactory for a consecutive twenty four (24) month time period, the security deposit shall be applied to their bill at the end of that time period. 
Delinquency: No security deposit shall be used in lieu of a monthly payment to discharge a delinquency on the account unless service had been discontinued. 
Additional Security Deposit: Any account holder who has his/her utility service disconnected or executes a deferred payment agreement will be required to pay an additional security deposit under the terms of this section if the previous deposit has been used to cover previous delinquent accounts. 
Refusal Of Service: Any refusal of service pursuant to any portion of this chapter is subject to review by the utility board. 
Eligibility For Service: 
Conditions Of Service: Utility service is to be conditioned upon payment of security deposits, processing fees, connection fees, proof of ownership or right to use, and of all outstanding debts for past utility service which are owed by the applicant to the city, provided, however, that such service may be denied where unsafe conditions exist or when the applicant has furnished false information for the purpose of obtaining utility service or where the customer has tampered with utility meters, lines, etc. An applicant is ineligible for service if at the time of application, the applicant is cohabiting with a delinquent account holder, previously terminated for nonpayment, and the applicant and delinquent account holder also cohabited during the time the delinquent account holder received the utilities service, whether such service was received at the applicant's present address or another address until all delinquent accounts have been paid in full. 
Outstanding Debt: Where an applicant is unable to pay an outstanding debt in full, utility service shall be continued only upon execution of a written deferred payment agreement. (See paragraph F, "Deferred Payment Agreement") 
Account Billing: 
Billing Cycle: All city utilities shall use a billing cycle which has an interval between regular periodic billing statements of twenty eight (28) to thirty two (32) days. This section applies to permanent continuous service customers, not to seasonal customers. 
Estimated Billing: Monthly billings may be estimated from previous billings if meters are inaccessible due to inclement weather or otherwise. The minimum balance due will be charged during nonreadable months. Any difference between the estimated and the actual usage will be reflected on the next readable month's billing. 
Periodic Billing Statement: The city shall mail or deliver a bill to the account holder, for each billing cycle at the end of which there is an outstanding credit or debit balance for current service. 
Late Payment Charge: After the billing due date, a late payment charge of ten percent (10%) shall be assessed against the previous month's unpaid balance. 
Shutoff Notice: If full payment and any applicable fees are not paid within fifteen (15) days from the due date, the city shall give the customer notice in writing of intent to discontinue the service to the customer, and the landlord, where applicable. 
Service Discontinued Due To Nonpayment: If payment is not received within ten (10) days from the date of shutoff notice, service will be discontinued due to nonpayment. The city will accept no liability for damages to customer's property or facilities in the event of discontinuance of service.
Payment Of Delinquent Charges: If the utility service is thereafter discontinued for failure to make payment, then before the utility service to the premises shall again be provided, all outstanding utility charges must have been paid in full to the city, or arrangements made for their payment in a manner satisfactory to the city. Furthermore, in addition to such payments and penalties, a delinquent customer may be required to make and file a new application and deposit if the previous deposit has theretofore been applied to the payment of delinquent bills. 
Fee Charged For Reconnection: If a payment is made after a collector or other city employee has been dispatched to disconnect the service of a customer, a reconnection fee shall be added to the customer's account. 
Charge For Utility Meter Tampering: It is a class B misdemeanor to unlawfully tamper with any utility meters. In addition to other penalties imposed, the customer will be charged for all damage done to utility meters. 
Rate To Be Charged Upon Failure Of Utility Meter: When, for any reason, the water or electric meter fails to register, operate or otherwise does not function properly, the account shall be charged as follows: 
If the account holder has had twelve (12) months' continuous service prior to the failure of the meter, the account shall be charged the amount as for the same billing period of the month of the previous year plus any utility rate adjustment taking effect since that time. The amount charged shall be based on the average daily consumption multiplied by the number of days in the current billing period; or 
If the account holder had not had continuous service of twelve (12) months, the amount charged to the account shall be based on the average daily consumption for the history of the account multiplied by the number of days in the current billing period. 
Agricultural Pump Billing: Electrical service for agricultural pump use will be billed on a month to month basis; however, the bill will not be considered due until July 1 for the months of April through June, and November 1 for July through October. Pump billing is subject to the same conditions and fees for delinquency of payment as are regular utility users. Pump owners will be responsible to let the city know when utility service for the pump is to be turned on and off each year. 
Equal Pay Option: The city offers the opportunity to enter into an equal pay plan for utility services according to the terms of city policy. 
Deferred Payment Agreement: 
Execution Of Deferred Payment Agreement: A customer who is having difficulty paying for his/her utility service or who has been disconnected for nonpayment shall be eligible to execute at the city offices a deferred payment agreement for the payment of the delinquent utility account. A deferred payment agreement shall be executed provided that at the time of the execution of the agreement the following requirements are satisfied: 
All delinquent amounts shall be paid within a period not to exceed twelve (12) months from date of execution of the deferred payment agreement. A separate utility account will be set up for that purpose. All other fees and deposits associated with disconnection must be paid prior to execution of a deferred payment agreement. 
At the time of execution of the deferred payment agreement, the customer shall pay a first time payment of fifty dollars ($50.00) to be applied to the delinquent amount. 
Customer shall not be entitled to execute more than one deferred payment agreement within any eighteen (18) consecutive months' period of time. 
The account holder shall have the right to prepay the outstanding balance due under a deferred payment agreement at any time during the term of the agreement. 
The terms of the deferred payment agreement shall be set forth in a written agreement, a copy of which shall be provided to the customer. 
A deferred payment agreement may include a onetime processing fee and a monthly interest charge as enacted by resolution of the city council on the total amount due. 
After entering into a deferred payment agreement all utility accounts must be kept current. It will be considered a breach of contract if all utility accounts are not kept current. If an applicant or account holder breaches any condition or term of a deferred payment agreement all accounts become due and payable, and the city may treat that breach as a delinquent account and shall have the right to terminate service according to the provisions of this chapter, and the account holder shall not have the right to a renewal of the deferred payment agreement. 
Restrictions Upon Termination During Serious Illness: 
Service Not To Be Terminated: Residential water, sewer and electric utility service may not be terminated and will be restored if terminated where such termination will cause or aggravate a serious illness or infirmity of a person living in the residence. 
Physician's Statement Required: Upon receipt of a city approved physician's statement, on the physician's letterhead stationery, identifying the health infirmity or potential health hazard, the city utility will continue or restore residential utility service for the period set forth in the physician's statement or one month, whichever is less; provided however, that the person whose health is threatened or illness aggravated petitions the hearing officer for an extension of time. 
Liability For Cost: During the period of continued service, the account holder is liable for the cost of residential utility service. However, no action to terminate the service may be undertaken until expiration of the period of continued service. 
Payment Made To The City: For payment of past charges and charges incurred during hardship period, a delayed payment agreement must be completed and entered into. 
Collection And Enforcement: The city treasurer is hereby authorized to take all action necessary to enforce collection, including, but not limited to, the commencement of legal proceedings in a court of proper jurisdiction seeking judgment for the amount of the delinquent fees and service charges and all costs of collection, including court costs and attorney fees in the name of the city. 
Termination Without Notice: The city may terminate residential utility service without notice where, in its judgment, a clear emergency or serious health or safety hazard exists for so long as such condition exists, or where there is unauthorized use of or diversions of residential utility service or tampering with wires, pipes, meters, or other equipment owned by the city. The city shall immediately attempt to notify the customer of the termination and the reasons therefor. 
Discontinuance Of Service: 
Written Notice Required: Any customer deciding to discontinue service shall notify the city in writing before the date such service shall be discontinued. On giving such written notice, the customer shall not be responsible for utility bills incurred after the date specified in the notice. Any credit balance in favor of the customer as a result of an advance payment of bills or a deposit made will be refunded upon discontinuation of service. 
Exceptions For Discontinuance Of All Utility Services: Discontinuance of one utility shall constitute discontinuance of all utilities with the following exceptions: 
If a unit has an individual water meter or electric meter that can be turned off, the owner or agent may make a request for one or more of the utilities to be shut off; and the owner may keep only those utilities they feel are necessary to maintain the unit while it is vacant. Units that qualify for the exception will not be billed the minimum monthly service charge for utilities requested to be disconnected. (For the purposes of this paragraph K,2,a, water and sewer services constitute 1 utility.) 
Garbage disposal service may be terminated separately from other utility services if the dwelling or unit is unoccupied, regardless of whether or not the unit has an individual water meter or electric meter. 
City Not To Be Held Liable: The city will accept no liability for damages to customer's property or facilities for discontinuance of service. 
Use Without Payment Prohibited: 
It shall be unlawful for any person by himself, family, servants, or agents: 
To utilize the city power, water or sewage system without paying therefor, as herein provided. 
To open any fire hydrant, stopcock, valve, or other fixtures attached to the system of water supply unless it is done pursuant to proper application, agreement or resolution. 
To injure, deface, or impair any part or appurtenance of the water, sewer, or power system. 
To cast anything into any reservoir or tank belonging to the water system. 
Damage To Any Part/Portion Of City Utilities: The city shall have authority to recover the costs associated with any damage to any city utility system from such persons causing the damage. (Ord. 14-02, 8-8-2014)
8.12.020 Water Use And Service
Water Division: 
Creation: The water division of the city is hereby created. It shall administer the operation and maintenance of the water system of the city. 
Responsibilities And Duties: The public works director shall manage and supervise the city water system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and pursuant to resolutions, rules and regulations adopted by the city council from time to time prescribing the director's powers and duties. 
Fees, Delinquency, Nonpayment, Discontinuance Of Service: See ECC 8.12.010. 
Use Without Authority; Restrictions: 
Turning On Water After Being Turned Off Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, after the water has been turned off from the premises for nonpayment of water charges or other violation of the ordinances, rules, regulations, or resolutions pertaining to the water supply, to turn on or allow the water to be turned on or used without authority from the public works director or city manager. 
Separate Connections: It shall be unlawful for two (2) or more families or service users to be supplied from the same service pipe, connection or water meter unless special permission for such combination usage has been granted by the utility board and the premises served are owned by the same owner. In all such cases, a failure on the part of any one of the users to comply with this paragraph shall warrant a withholding of a supply of water through the service connections until compliance or payment has been made. Nothing herein shall be deemed to preclude the power of the city to require separate pipes, connections, or meters at a subsequent time. 
Common Meter; Common Owner: Should a common water meter be approved to service multiple user units, all units serviced by the common meter must have one owner. If at any time one or more of the multiple user units sharing a common meter are sold, and more than one owner/company becomes involved, the city may require a separate meter to be installed for each user unit purchased, at the expense of the new owner, for utility billing purposes. 
Unauthorized Users: It shall be unlawful for any water service user to permit any person from other premises or any unauthorized person to use or obtain water services regularly from his premises or water facilities, either outside or inside his premises. 
Adjoining Premises: No consumer shall be permitted to conduct water pipes across lots or buildings to adjoining premises without permission from the public works director and subject to such requirements relating to controls as may be imposed by him. 
Visitors: Individuals visiting the premises of an authorized user in a recreational vehicle not including a mobile home and continuing to live therein during the period of visitation may receive water service from the service pipes or facilities of the host during the visitation period which shall not exceed one month. Continued use thereafter shall be deemed unauthorized and violative of the provisions of this chapter relating to separate connections and unauthorized "use". 
City Not To Be Held Liable: The city will accept no liability for water once it is removed from the system, and placed in another system; whether stationary or mobile. 
Installation Of Water Lines: 
Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to lay, repair, alter or connect any water line to the city culinary water system without first having received a construction permit from the city.
General Contractor; Licensed Plumber; Exception: It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any water pipe to the city water system unless the person is a duly licensed general contractor or duly licensed plumber or unless, in the absence of a duly licensed plumber, any proposed connection to, alteration of, or change of connection to the sewer system shall be first submitted to the board and the sewer superintendent (or either or both) for review and approval. After such approval, the installation or work done shall be subject to inspection by the public works director or his agent. The city will not be held liable for any work performed by a noncity employee/agent. 
Application: Applications for permits to make water connections or other alteration or for laying or repairing lines connected directly or indirectly to the city water system must be made in writing by a general contractor, licensed plumber, his authorized agent, or by the owner of the premises who shall describe the nature of the work to be done for which the application is made. 
Determination Of Approval: The application shall be granted if the public works director or his designee determines that: 
The connection, repair, alteration or installation will cause no damage to the street in which the water main is laid, or that it will not be prejudicial to the interests of persons whose property has been or may thereafter be connected to the water main. 
The connection conforms to the ordinances, regulations, specifications and standards of materials required by the city. 
Line And Grade Designation: All connections, alterations or installations shall be to the line and grade designated by the public works director. 
Fees: Fees for permits or for inspection services shall be of such amounts as the city council shall from time to time determine by resolution. 
Moving Or Replacement Of Water Lines: In the event that the city in its sole discretion determines that any water line of the city must be moved or replaced, the city shall bear that portion of the cost of such move or replacement which applies to main lines up to the property line of the customer. The cost of reconnecting such new line or lines from the house of the customer to his property line shall be borne by the customer.
When Permits Shall Not Be Issued: Permission to connect with the city water system shall not be given unless the plumbing in the house or building to be connected meets the provisions of the building and plumbing codes of the city. 
Pipe Requirements: 
Good Repair: All users of water services shall keep their service pipes and connections and other apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at their own expense. No person, except under the direction of the public works director, shall be allowed to dig into the street for the purpose of laying, removing or repairing any service pipe. 
Quality Of Service Pipe: All service and other pipe used in conjunction with the water services of the city shall be of such material, quality, and specifications as the city council may from time to time by resolution provide, and shall be installed at such distances below ground as may be specified by regulations relating to the water division. All work, alterations, or extensions affecting water pipes shall be subject to the acceptance of the public works director, and no connections with any water mains shall be made without first obtaining a permit from the city. 
Water Mains Extended: 
Petition To Public Works Director Or His Designee: Any person or persons, who desires to have the water mains extended within the city, and is willing to advance the whole expense of such extension, and receive the return of an agreed portion thereof, as hereinafter provided, may make application to the public works director or his designee by petition. The petition shall contain a description of such proposed extension, accompanied by a map showing the location of the proposed extension, together with a cost estimate for the whole expense thereof, which cost shall be verified by the public works director or his designee. After the public works director or his designee has verified the entire cost or expense of making such extension, one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of such extension shall be paid by the person making the application. 
Recapture Of Construction Costs: At the time the petition is considered it shall also be decided whether or not any portion of the costs is to be refunded under an aid in construction agreement, and the manner and circumstances under which such refund shall be made or credited to the applicant, his successors or representatives. Such determination shall be duly recorded in writing and a copy thereof furnished to the applicant. 
Ownership Of Extension: Any such extension shall be deemed the property of the city whether or not there is an aid in construction agreement. 
Access By Department: The public works director and his agents shall at all ordinary hours have free access to any place supplied with water services from the city system for the purpose of examining the apparatus and ascertaining the amount of water service being used and the manner of its use. 
Water Use For Motors And Certain Machinery Restricted: No water shall be supplied from the pipes of the city water system for the purpose of driving a motor, siphon, turbine, or other wheels, or any hydraulic engines, or elevators, or for driving or propelling machinery of any kind whatsoever, nor shall any license be granted or issued for any such purpose except by special permission of the city council. 
Fire Hydrants: Water for fire protection will be furnished free of charge by the city. Installation and repairs on hydrants located on public property shall be at the expense of the city and shall be made under the direction of the city. Fire hydrants located on private property are the sole responsibility of the property owner for maintenance, repair, and all other associated costs, unless waived by the city for unusual circumstances. All customers shall grant the city, upon demand, a right of way or easement to install and maintain such hydrants on their premises if the city concludes that hydrants shall be so installed for the protection of the residents of the city. 
Water Lines: Water lines located on private property are the sole responsibility of the property owner for maintenance, repair, and all other associated costs, unless waived by the city under unusual circumstances. All customers shall grant the city, upon demand, a right of way or easement to install and maintain such water lines on their premises if the city concludes that water lines shall be so installed for the protection of the residents of the city. 
Scarcity Of Water: In time of scarcity of water, whenever it shall in the judgment of the mayor and the city council be necessary, the mayor (or when appropriate by the board) shall by proclamation limit the use of water to such extent as may be necessary. It shall be unlawful for any person, his family, servants, or agents, to violate any proclamation made by the mayor (or the board) in pursuance of this paragraph. 
Waste Of Water: 
Prohibited Acts: It shall be unlawful for any water user to: 
Waste water. 
Allow it to be wasted by stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes, or to allow tanks or watering troughs to leak or overflow. 
Wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets, or stops, or through basins, water closets, urinals, sinks or other apparatus. 
Use the water for purposes other than for those which he has applied, or to use water in violation of the rules and regulations of the governing body or the board for controlling the water supply. 
Refer To City Council: Users of water from the city water system shall not permit water to continue to run wastefully and without due efforts to conserve water. If, in the judgment of the board, the public works director or of any of the officers of the city, a user of city water engages in practices which result in the needless waste of water and continues to do so after reasonable notice to discontinue wastefulness has been given, the public works director or any officer may refer the matter to the board or the city council for appropriate action. 
Termination Of Service; Meeting: The board, or the city council may thereupon consider terminating the right of the individual to use culinary water. If the board or city council elect to consider the matter of termination, they shall give notice to the water user of the intention to terminate his water connection at least five (5) days prior to the meeting of the utility board at which termination of water service is to be considered. The notice shall inform him of the time and place of the meeting and the charges which lead to the consideration of the termination. 
Appearance By Water User: A water user whose right to utilize city water is being reviewed shall have opportunity to appear before the board with or without counsel and present the reasons why his water service should not be discontinued. 
Determination: After due hearing, and upon approval from the board thereto, the city council may arrive at a determination. If the determination is to discontinue the wasteful water user's service connection, the board or the city council shall notify the user of the decision and of the period during which the service will remain discontinued. 
Water Meters: 
Single Meters For Multiple Units: The city may, at its option, approve or recommend the installation of a single water meter which services multiple user units. Such an approval or recommendation is intended as a cost saving measure and is done solely for the benefit of the developer of the project. An approval or recommendation on the part of the city does not constitute a waiver of the city's right to collect the water charges for each individual user unit. Each user's unit, whether serviced by its own meter or a common meter, will pay the minimum charge as if serviced by its own water meter. The quantity of water allowed under the minimum charge of a single water meter until further action of the governing party shall be the number of user units serviced times the number of gallons covered by the minimum charge for water. If the amount of water used is over the aggregate of the minimum allowances, the additional cost will follow the schedule set forth above and shall be divided equally among the users of the single water meter. Should multiple user units, supplied by a common meter, be sold at any time to more than one owner, the common meter; common owner rule will apply. (See paragraph C,3) 
Meters Furnished By City: Meters, although paid for by the user, shall be deemed to be and remain the property of the city. Meters will be furnished by the city upon application for a connection, and upon payment of such meter and its connection and connection fees and other costs as may be established by the city council from time to time by resolution. 
Meter Readings: The public works director shall cause meter readings to be taken regularly and shall advise the city utility billing clerk thereof for the purpose of recording the necessary billings for water service. 
Tampering: Meters may be checked, inspected or adjusted at the discretion of the city, and they shall not be adjusted or tampered with by the customer. Meter boxes shall not be opened for the purpose of turning on or off the water except by an authorized representative of the city unless special permission is given by the city through its representatives to the customer to do so. 
Meter Testing: If a customer submits a written request to the public works director to test his water meter, the city may, if under the circumstances it deems it advisable and in its discretion, order a test of the meter measuring the water delivered to such customer. If such request is made within twelve (12) months after the date of the last previous test, the customer may be required to pay the cost of such test. If the meter is found in such test to record from ninety seven percent (97%) to one hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy under acceptable methods of testing, the meter shall be deemed to accurately measure the use of water. 
Estimation In Case Of Failure: If the city's meters fail to register at any time, the water delivered during the period of failure shall be estimated on the basis of previous consumption during a period which is not questioned. In the event a meter is found to be recording less than ninety seven percent (97%) or more than one hundred three percent (103%) of accuracy, the city shall make such adjustments in the customer's previous bills as are just and fair under the circumstances. 
Damage By Customer: All damages or injury to the lines, meters or other materials of the city on or near the customer's premises caused by any act or neglect of the customer shall in the discretion of the city be repaired by and at the expense of the customer, and the customer shall pay all costs and expenses, including a reasonable attorney fee, which may arise or accrue to the city through its efforts to repair the damage to the lines, meters or to other equipment of the department or collect such costs from the customer. 
Leak In Water Pipe: When a water user experiences a water leak, whether it is on the city's side of the meter or the water user's side of the meter, where proof of leak being fixed is shown, and upon approval from the public works director, they will receive up to one month of water adjustments. The city will credit their water balance to reflect the balance during the same time a year earlier, plus any utility rate adjustment taking affect since that time. If more than one month's adjustment is sought, the customer may appeal to the utilities board for their approval. Requests will be reviewed by the city on a case by case basis, and a reasonable charge assessed based on circumstance.
Service Outside City: 
Scope: The city generally does not provide water outside the city limits. However, a petition for service outside city boundaries may be made according to current city standards for connections located outside city limits. Should the petition be accepted by the board and city council, the city may, at its sole discretion, furnish water service from its water system to persons outside the city in accordance with the provisions of this title. 
Petition For Service: Should a petition for service to connect to the water system outside the city limits be accepted, the applicant must be willing to prepay the whole expense or be willing to post a bond with the city to extend the water system to his property, including the cost of extending any water main beyond its present location. The petition shall include the following: 
A description of the proposed extension. 
A map showing the location thereof. 
In the case of a water shortage, the water service provided to petitioner shall comply with city policy at the time. 
Lines Maintained: The city shall operate and maintain any extended water lines in accordance with all other policies and practices for lines maintained within city limits. 
Extensions May Be Master Metered: On rare occasions, at the sole discretion of the city, when an extension supplying more than one house or user outside the city limits is allowed to be connected to city water mains, the public works director may require a master meter to be installed near the point where the connection is to be made to the city main. This installation will be at the expense of the persons served by such extension according to the regular rates for meter installation. For billing purposes, all parties must agree on "one" primary owner to take full responsibility and agree to pay all bills for water served through the meter at the applicable water rates in accordance with Ephraim City utility billing practices; otherwise service may be terminated. 
Nonpreference For Outside Users: Under no circumstances shall this section, paragraph, this title or any other provisions of city legislation make it obligatory for the city to extend use of water services outside the city or to limit the charges outside the city to any specific amount nor to make it unlawful or improper to assess different rates for uses outside the city when compared to rates within the city. 
Water Outside City Limits: Should water be extended to any structure outside city limits, the applicant also agrees to comply with all other provisions of this title and other city codes. 
Nonliability For Damages: The city shall not be held liable for any damage to a water service user by reason of stoppage or interruption of his or her water supply service caused by fires, scarcity of water, accidents to the water system or its mains, or which occurs as the result of maintenance and extension operations, or from any other unavoidable cause. This title shall not be construed to extend the liability of the city beyond that provided in the governmental immunity act. 
Disconnection To System: Anyone seeking to demolish a building must do so by filing a demolition permit with the city planning director. When a unit becomes abandoned or demolished and service is no longer required, it is the owner's responsibility to contact the city public works director to have their line disconnected at the city water main, according to city standards, and pay all costs associated with such. 
Bulk Water Usage: Bulk water users are required to follow city policy regarding bulk water usage. (Ord. 14-02, 8-8-2014)
8.12.030 Sewer Service Regulations
Sewer Division: 
Creation: The sewer division is hereby created. It shall comprise all of the property, equipment and personnel necessary to the maintenance and operation of the city's sewage collection and disposal system. The division shall administer the operation and maintenance of the city sewer system. 
Responsibilities And Duties: The public works director shall manage and supervise the city's sewer system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and pursuant to resolutions, rules and regulations adopted by the city council from time to time prescribing the director's powers and duties.
Use Of System Mandatory: It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person occupying or having charge of any residence within the city which is located within three hundred feet (300') of a sewer main to dispose of sewage therefrom by any means other than by use of the city sewer system. Newly extended mains require everyone within three hundred feet (300') to connect onto the city system within a reasonable amount of time at their own expense. Anyone installing a line must do so by following city construction standards. It shall be unlawful to construct or to continue the use of any other sewage disposal system such as a privy, vault, cesspool, or septic tank on the property except by written approval of the city council in cases of undue hardship. 
Fees, Delinquency, Nonpayment, Discontinuance Of Service: See ECC 8.12.010.
Installation And Connection To System: 
Permit Required: It shall be unlawful for any person to directly or indirectly engage in the laying, repairing, altering or connecting of any drain or sewer pipe connected with or part of the city sewer system without first having received a permit from the office of the recorder, or the public works director. 
General Contractor; Licensed Plumber; Exception: It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any drain or sewer pipe with the city sewer system unless the person is a duly licensed general contractor or duly licensed plumber or unless, in the absence of a duly licensed plumber, any proposed connection to, alteration of, or change of connection to the sewer system shall be first submitted to the board and the sewer superintendent (or either or both) for review and approval. After such approval, the installation or work done shall be subject to inspection by the public works director or his agent. The city will not be held liable for any work performed by a noncity employee/agent. 
Disconnection To System: Anyone seeking to demolish a building must do so by filing a demolition permit with the city planning director. When a unit becomes abandoned or demolished and service is no longer required, it is the owner's responsibility to cap the existing sewer connection according to city standards and pay all costs associated with such. 
Pipe Requirements: 
Good Repair: All users of the sewer services shall keep their service pipes, connections, and other apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at the user's own expense. No person, except under the direction of the public works director, shall be allowed to dig into the street for the purpose of removing or repairing any sewer service pipe or main. 
Quality Of Service Pipe: All service and other pipes used in conjunction with the sewer services of the city shall be of such material, quality and specifications required by city construction standards. 
Access By Division: The public works director and his agents shall have an unrestricted "easement" as defined in this title including free access to places supplied with sewer services from the city system for the purpose of examining the apparatus, ascertaining the sewer service being used and the manner of its use. 
Prohibited Uses And Regulations: 
Scope: The city council with the advice of the utilities board shall have power to and retains the right to adopt regulations controlling the manner and circumstances under which the sewer system may be used in addition to the regulatory provisions set forth expressly in this chapter. 
Inflammables: It shall be unlawful for any person to injure, break or remove any part or portion of any sewer appliance or appurtenance, or to discharge into a sewer any inflammable gas, gasoline or oil, any calcium carbide or residue therefrom, or any liquid or other materials or substance which will emit an inflammable gas when in contact with water, sewage or fire. Oil separators installed in any building where volatile fluids are used must not be connected directly or indirectly with a sewer. 
Waste From Certain Establishments: The contents of waste pipes from water filters, gas engines, air compressors, vacuum or dry cleaners, garages, wash racks, stores or warehouses containing inflammable substances, car barns, buildings for the stabling or keeping of horses, cows and other animals, or plants using milk or processing milk products, and all similar establishments shall not be disposed of through connection with a sanitary sewer unless such contents are discharged into settling tanks properly trapped and vented and specifically approved in writing by the board. The construction of such tanks must be approved by the city engineer and the board, and must be subject to their mutual inspection, approval, or condemnation before cement is poured and at all times thereafter until completion of such construction. Upon condemnation by the city engineer, the sewage from the tanks shall not be allowed to flow into the sewer until satisfactory alterations have been made and the construction approved by the board after consultation with the city engineer or his representative. 
Obstructive Materials: It shall be unlawful for any person to empty or discharge into the public sanitary sewer any garbage, refuse or other similar matter or substance likely to obstruct the sewer, or any substance, solid or liquid other than the waste products for which the sewer is provided on a reasonable basis. 
Drainage Waters And Destructive Materials: It shall be unlawful for any person to connect with a public sanitary sewer any drain or pipe which discharges rainwater, cellar or surface water, acids, alkalis, lye or other injurious liquids, or the contents of any spring, flowing well, creek, ditch, or other watercourses. No boiler or heating plant shall be directly connected to the sanitary sewer. The overflow from boilers or heating plants, when cooled to a temperature not to exceed one hundred twenty degrees Fahrenheit (120°F), will be allowed to run to a sump, which sump shall be connected to the sewer. The discharge of the contents of waste pipes from water filters, gas engines, air compressors, vacuum or dry cleaners, garages, wash racks, stores or warehouses which contain inflammable substances, buildings, for the stabling or keeping of horses, cows and other animals, and all similar establishments, shall not be made into or connected with the sanitary sewer, unless such contents are discharged into settling tanks properly trapped and vented. Settling tanks shall be constructed of a material approved by the board and the public works director and shall be at all times subject to inspection and approval or condemnation. Upon condemnation by the public works director, the sewage from said tanks shall not be allowed to flow into sewer until satisfactory alterations have been made and the construction approved by the public works director. 
Destruction Of System: It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface, injure or interfere with the operation of any part or appurtenance of the sewer system. 
Ownership Of Connecting Lines: The sewer lateral shall be the property and responsibility of the property owner served by the lateral. It shall be the sole responsibility of the property owner to inspect, clean, maintain and/or repair the sewer lateral for the entire length of the lateral up to, and including, the point of connection to the sewer main. The property owner is required to make contact with, and obtain permission from, Ephraim City before installing, excavating or otherwise opening access to the lateral. Prior to backfilling the excavation, the city must inspect and approve lateral installations and repairs. The property owner shall hold the city harmless and indemnify the city from any defect in the installation of the lateral and shall be responsible for any damage caused to his or her own property, or the property of others, caused by any obstruction in the lateral or in the installation of the sewer lateral. 
Sewer Manholes: It shall be unlawful for any person to open any sewer manhole without permission from the public works director. 
Service Outside City: Anyone located outside city limits, desiring to hook onto the city's sewer system may petition the city to do so in accordance with the requirements listed under ECC 8.12.020 Paragraphs N,1 through N,4 (water use and services, outside city limits) of this chapter. If a main trunk line is located adjacent to the property desiring to connect, the cost of connecting to the system, including impact and connection fees, will be charged to the property owner. The property owner shall also be responsible to properly disconnect existing septic tanks pursuant to county and state and municipal regulations. (Ord. 14-02, 8-8-2014)
8.12.040 Power Use And Service
Power Division: 
Creation: The power division of the city is hereby created. It shall administer the operation and maintenance of the electric system of the city. 
Responsibilities And Duties: The power superintendent shall manage and supervise the city power system pursuant to the provisions of this chapter and pursuant to resolutions, rules and regulations adopted by the city council from time to time prescribing the superintendent's powers and duties.
Fees, Delinquency, Nonpayment, Discontinuance Of Service: See ECC 8.12.010.
Use Without Authority; Restrictions: 
Turning On Power After Being Turned Off Prohibited: It shall be unlawful for any person, after the power has been turned off from the premises for nonpayment of power charges or other violation of the ordinances, rules, regulations, or resolutions pertaining to the power supply, to turn on or allow the power to be turned on or used without authority from the power superintendent. 
Unauthorized Users: It shall be unlawful for any power service user to permit any person from other premises or any unauthorized person to use or obtain power services regularly from his premises or power facilities, either outside or inside his premises. 
Access By Department: The power superintendent and his agents shall have free access to any place supplied with power services from the city system for the purpose of examining the apparatus and ascertaining the amount of power service being used and the manner of its use. 
Service Outside City: Except as provided in Utah Code § 10-8-14, a municipality may not sell or deliver the electricity produced or distributed by its electric works constructed, maintained, or operated to a retail customer located beyond its municipal boundary. Should state code be met, and power be allowed outside city limits the procedure shall be as follows: 
Petition To Power Superintendent Or His Designee: Any person or persons, who desire to have the power lines extended outside city limits, and are willing to advance the whole expense of such extension and receive the return of an agreed portion thereof, as hereinafter provided, may make application to the power superintendent or his designee by petition. The petition shall contain a description of such proposed extension, accompanied by a map showing the location of the proposed extension, together with a cost estimate for the whole expense thereof, which cost shall be verified by the power superintendent or his designee. After the power superintendent has verified the entire cost or expense of making such extension, if it is to be installed by the city, one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of such extension shall be paid in advance by the person making the application, or a financial guarantee submitted consistent with ECC 11.32 "Guarantee Of Improvements". 
Recapture Of Construction Costs: At the time the petition is considered it shall also be decided whether or not to grant petition for an extension, and whether or not any portion of the costs is to be reimbursed under an aid in construction agreement as approved by the utilities board, and the manner and circumstances under which such reimbursement shall be made or credited to the applicant, his successors or representatives. Such determination shall be duly recorded in writing and a copy thereof furnished to the applicant. 
Ownership Of Extension: Any such extension shall be deemed the property of the city whether or not there is an aid in construction agreement. 
Protection Of Customer's Equipment: The customer shall furnish, install, inspect, and keep in good and safe condition all electrical wires and lines on the customer's side of the point of delivery. The customer shall provide devices to protect his/her equipment from high and low voltage, overload, single phasing, phase reversal or other abnormal conditions. 
Nonliability For Damages: The city shall not be held liable for any damage to a power service user by reason of stoppage or interruption of his or her power supply service caused by fires, scarcity of power, accidents to the power system or its lines, or which occurs as the result of maintenance and extension operations, or from any other unavoidable cause. This title shall not be construed to extend the liability of the city beyond that provided in the governmental immunity act. 
Alternative Energy: See ECC 8.20 "Net Metering". (Ord. 14-02, 8-8-2014)
8.12.050 Class B Misdemeanor
Any violation of this chapter shall constitute a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 14-02, 8-8-2014)

8.16 DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION
8.16.010 Short Title And Purpose
8.16.020 Definitions - Drinking Water Source Protection
8.16.030 Establishment Of Drinking Water Source Protection Zones
8.16.040 Permitted Uses
8.16.050 Prohibited Uses
8.16.060 Administration

8.16.010 Short Title And Purpose
This chapter shall be known as the DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION ORDINANCE. 
The purpose of this chapter is to ensure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by the establishment of drinking water source protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. (Ord. 10-05, 12-1-2010, eff. 12-1-2010)
8.16.020 Definitions - Drinking Water Source Protection
When used in this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in this section:

DESIGN STANDARD: A control which is implemented by a potential contamination to prevent discharges to the groundwater. Spill protection is an example of a design standard.

LAND MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES: Zoning and nonzoning controls which include, but are not limited to, the following: zoning and subdivision ordinances, site plan reviews, design and operating standards, source prohibitions, purchase of property and development rights, public education programs, groundwater monitoring, household hazardous waste collection programs, water conservation programs, memorandums of understanding, written contracts and agreements, and so forth.

POLLUTION SOURCE: Point source discharges of contaminants to groundwater or potential discharges of the liquid forms of "extremely hazardous substances" which are stored in containers in excess of "applicable threshold planning quantities" as specified in SARA title 111. Examples of possible pollution sources include, but are not limited to, the following: storage facilities that store the liquid forms of extremely hazardous substances, septic tanks, drain fields, class V underground injection wells, landfills, open dumps, landfilling of sludge and septage, manure piles, salt piles, pit privies, and animal feeding operations with more than ten (10) animal units. The following clarify the definition of pollution source:

ANIMAL FEEDING OPERATION: A lot or facility where the following conditions are met: animals have been or will be stabled or confined and fed or maintained for a total of forty five (45) days or more in any twelve (12) month period, and crops, vegetation forage growth, or postharvest residues are not sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility. Two (2) or more animal feeding operations under common ownership are considered to be a single feeding operation if they adjoin each other, if they use a common area, or if they use a common system for the disposal of wastes.
ANIMAL UNIT: A unit of measurement for any animal feeding operation calculated by adding the following numbers: the number of slaughter and feeder cattle multiplied by 1.0, plus the number of mature dairy cattle multiplied by 1.4, plus the number of swine weighing over fifty five (55) pounds multiplied by 0.4, plus the number of sheep multiplied by 0.1, plus the number of horses multiplied by 2.0.
EXTREMELY HAZARDOUS SUBSTANCES: Those substances which are identified in the section 302(EHS) column of the "Title III List Of Lists, Consolidated List Of Chemicals Subject To Reporting Under SARA Title II" (EPA 560/4-91-011). (Ord. 10-05, 12-1-2010, eff. 12-1-2010)
8.16.030 Establishment Of Drinking Water Source Protection Zones
There are hereby established use districts to be known as zones one, two, three, and four of the drinking water source protection area, identified and described as follows: 

Zone one is the area within a one hundred foot (100') radius from the wellhead. 
Zone two is the area within a two hundred fifty (250) day groundwater time of travel to the wellhead, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the groundwater source, or the groundwater divide, whichever is closer. 
Zone three (waiver criteria zone) is the area within a three (3) year groundwater time of travel to the wellhead or margin of the collection area, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the groundwater source, or the groundwater divide, whichever is closer. 
Zone four is the area within a fifteen (15) year groundwater time of travel to the wellhead, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the groundwater source, or the groundwater divide, whichever is closer. (Ord. 10-05, 12-1-2010, eff. 12-1-2010)
8.16.040 Permitted Uses
The following uses shall be permitted within drinking water source protection zones: 

Any use permitted within existing agricultural, single-family residential, multi-family residential, and commercial districts so long as uses conform to the rules and regulations of the regulatory agencies. 
Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. (Ord. 10-05, 12-1-2010, eff. 12-1-2010)
8.16.050 Prohibited Uses
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within drinking water source protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under ECC 8.16.040: 

Zone one: The location of any "pollution source" as defined herein. 
Zone two: The location of a pollution source unless its contaminated discharges can be controlled with design standards. 
Zones three and four: The location of a potential contamination source unless it can be controlled through land management strategies. (Ord. 10-05, 12-1-2010, eff. 12-1-2010)
8.16.060 Administration
The policies and procedures for administration of any source protection zone established under this chapter, including, without limitation, those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city of Ephraim, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. (Ord. 10-05, 12-1-2010, eff. 12-1-2010)

8.20 NET METERING
8.20.010 Title For Citation
8.20.020 Net Metering Requirements

8.20.010 Title For Citation
The provisions codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the EPHRAIM NET METERING ORDINANCE. (Ord. 16-02, 6-15-2016)

8.20.020 Net Metering Requirements
Total Energy: Ephraim City allows customer owned grid connected electric generating systems (net metering) based upon the requirements and standards of this section, provided that the total energy generated by customer owned systems pursuant to this chapter shall not exceed one percent (1%) of the average total energy load with the city tor the three (3) preceding fiscal years. Net metering allows for interconnected non-utility owned electric generation to be connected for parallel operation with the electrical system of Ephraim City Power. 
Interconnection: Net metering will be allowed to interconnect with Ephraim City Power's electrical distribution system at a service level voltage only after determination by Ephraim City Power that such interconnection will not interfere with the operation of the distribution circuit and ensures the safety of Ephraim City Power employees and customers. 
Interconnection Requirements: 
Compliance With Codes: Customer shall comply with all the latest applicable national electric code (NEC) requirements (NEC articles 690 and 705), national electric safety code (NESC) requirements, state of Utah requirements, building codes, and shall obtain building permit(s) for the equipment installation. 
Labeling: Meter and transformer or transformer pole serving the customer-generator shall be labeled to indicate potential electric current back feed. Ephraim City Power will provide and install labels when customer-generator's electric system is approved for interconnection. 
Space: Customer shall provide space for metering equipment and meter base as per Ephraim City Power requirements. 
Overcurrent Device: Customer's overcurrent device at the service panel must be marked to indicate power source and connection to Ephraim City Power's distribution system. 
Maintenance: The customer shall assume the full responsibility for all maintenance of the generator and protective equipment and keeping of records for such maintenance. These records shall be available to Ephraim City Power for inspection at all times. 
Specific Compliance: Customer's power production control system shall comply with NEC articles 690 and 705; and applicable and current Institute Of Electrical And Electronics Engineers (IEEE) standards including standard number 1547 "Interconnecting Distributed Resources With Electric Power Systems" for parallel operation with Ephraim City Power; in particular the following: 
Power output control system shall automatically disconnect from Ephraim City Power source upon loss of voltage and not reconnect until Ephraim City Power's voltage has been restored for at least five (5) minutes continuously. 
Power output control system shall automatically initiate a disconnect from the Ephraim City Power source within six (6) cycles if customer's voltage falls below sixty (60) volts rms to ground (nominal 120 V rms base) on any phase. 
Power output control system shall automatically initiate a disconnect from Ephraim City Power's system within two (2) seconds if the voltage rises above one hundred thirty two (132) volts rms phase to ground or falls below one hundred four (104) volts rms phase to ground (nominal 120 V rms base) on any phase.
Power output control system shall automatically initiate a disconnect from Ephraim City Power's system within three (3) cycles for any reverse power flow condition. 
Written Description Of Compliance: Customer shall provide a written description of how the protection devices will achieve compliance with the requirements of this policy as part of the building permit application. 
Safety Disconnect Switch: Customer shall furnish and install on customer's side of the meter, a UL approved safety disconnect switch which shall be capable of fully disconnecting the customer's generating facility from Ephraim City Power's electric system. The disconnect switch shall be located adjacent to Ephraim City Power's meters and shall be of the visible break type in a metal enclosure which can be secured by a padlock. The disconnect switch shall be accessible to Ephraim City Power personnel at all times. 
Additional Metering: For purposes of gathering research data, Ephraim City Power may, at its own expense, install and operate additional metering and data gathering devices. 
Solar Photovoltaic Equipment: Solar photovoltaic equipment shall be in compliance with Underwriters Laboratories (UL) 1741, "Standard For Static Inverters And Charge Controllers For Use In Photovoltaic Systems", UL 1703, "Standard For Safety: Flat-Plate Photovoltaic Modules And Panels"; and IEEE 1262-1995, "Recommended Practice For Qualification Of Photovoltaic (PV) Modules"; and the solar system shall be installed in compliance with IEEE standard 929-2000, "Recommended Practice For Utility Interface Of Photovoltaic Systems". 
Wind Turbines: Wind turbines shall meet the requirements of this code. 
Safety: All safety and operating procedures for joint use equipment shall be in compliance with the occupational safety and health administration (OSHA) standard 29 CFR 1910.269, the NEC, the NESC, state of Utah rules, city standards, and equipment manufacturer's safety and operating manuals. 
Guidelines For System Diagrams: 
A system diagram or schematic must be submitted with a building permit application. The required system diagram is used by Ephraim City Power during the review and approval process, and again during field testing and meter installation. The diagram is a permanent record copy of the system and is filed at Ephraim City Power for reference. Discrepancies between the diagram and the actual installation as built are cause for rejection at the final testing and net meter installation. 
The system diagram can be anything from One-Line, to a schematic, to a complete wiring diagram that shows every wire and every connection throughout. Any of these are acceptable as long as the minimum key information is included. Ephraim City Power has the discretion to reject the diagram submitted and require a specified format. The diagram does not need to be overly complex, but accuracy and clarity are critical. (Some systems have more complex requirements for interconnection and will require much more significant design drawings for review and approval.) 
At a minimum, the system diagram must show how the components of the customer-generator system are connected electrically. Additional information, such as equipment part numbers and physical locations, should also be included on the diagram. Some of this additional information may be contained in the application forms as well, but documenting it on the system diagram provides a single complete reference for the project and speeds the engineering reviews and fieldwork. 
The system diagram should provide the information as described below: 
Generator (PV panels, wind turbine, hydro turbine, etc.): Include manufacturer, part number, nameplate maximum capacity (kW), and physical location. For modular systems (e.g., PV panels), also include: number of modules, configuration, nameplate maximum capacity of each module, and total nameplate maximum capacity. 
Inverter: Include manufacturer, type or series, part number, serial number, nameplate maximum capacity (kW), output voltage, physical location. 
Disconnect switch: Include the physical location relative to the Ephraim City Power service meter. 
Electrical service panel: Include the panel or main breaker size and the position at which the generation is connected. Show all panels (if there are multiple panels or subpanels) even if not directly connected into the generation system. 
Ephraim City Power service meter: Include existing meter serial number, meter form, and class. 
Other related equipment (battery banks, transfer or bypass switches, backup generators, etc.). 
License Approval: 
Each customer desiring to engage in net metering must enter into a net metering license agreement as prepared by Ephraim City Power. The license agreement will contain additional conditions to maintain the integrity and reliability of the Ephraim City Power system and/or conditions deemed necessary to maintain the health, safety, and welfare of the residents and employees of the city. 
The license agreement application shall be accompanied by the design or schematic required by this section, together with a filing fee as established by resolution of the Ephraim City council in the consolidated fee schedule. Adjustments to the amount of the fee may be made by the city council in the annual budget, or by resolution. 
The license may be revoked for violations of any of the terms of the license agreement or for the violation of any of the terms of this section. 
Fees And Reimbursement: 
All net metering customers will be charged a monthly interconnection fee as established by resolution of the Ephraim City council. 
Reimbursement rates will periodically be reviewed and/or changed at the discretion of the council. 
Temporary Connections: This section shall not apply to the temporary generation of the electric energy for emergency or standby purposes, except as noted below: 
All emergency or standby generation shall not be interconnected with Ephraim City Power's system at any time. A positive, physical means of transferring and separating loads between normal and alternate sources of supply must be used to prevent inadvertent interconnection. 
All emergency or standby generation shall comply with the provisions of the latest revisions of the national electric code and national electric safety code. (Ord. 16-02, 6-15-2016)
8.24 CONTROL OF BACKFLOW AND CROSS CONNECTIONS
8.24.010 Cross Connection Control - General Policy
8.24.020 Definitions - Control Of Backflow And Cross Connections
8.24.030 Requirements
8.24.040 Violation Of This Policy

8.24.010 Cross Connection Control - General Policy
Purpose of Chapter:
To protect the Public drinking water supply of Ephraim City from the possibility of contamination or pollution by requiring compliance with the Utah State Rules for Public Drinking Water Systems and the Plumbing Code as adopted by the State of Utah, that require a cross connection control protection of all public drinking water systems in the State of Utah. Compliance with these minimum safety codes will be considered reasonable diligence for the prevention of contaminants or pollutants which could backflow into the public drinking water system; and,
To promote the reasonable elimination or control of cross connection in the plumbing fixtures and industrial piping system(s) of the consumer, as required by the state and plumbing regulations to assure water system safety; and,
To provide for the administration of a continuing program of backflow prevention which will systematically examine risk and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of the drinking water system.
Responsibility; Drinking Water Purveyor:
Ephraim City shall be responsible for the protection of the drinking water distribution system from the foreseeable condition leading to the possible contamination or pollution of the drinking water system due to the backflow of contaminants or pollutants into the drinking water supply.
Drinking water system surveys/inspections of the consumer’s water distribution system(s) shall be conducted or caused to be conducted by individuals deemed qualified by and representing Ephraim City. Survey records shall indicate compliance with the State of Utah Regulations. All such records will be maintained by Ephraim City.
Ephraim City shall schedule and notify in writing, all consumers of the need for the periodic system survey to insure compliance with exiting applicable minimum health and safety standards.
Selection of an approved backflow prevention assembly for containment control required at the service entrance shall be determined from the results of the system survey.
Responsibility; Consumer:
To comply with this chapter as a term and condition of water supply and consumer’s acceptance of service is admittance of his/her awareness of his/her responsibilities as a water system user.
It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to purchase, install, and arrange testing and maintenance of any backflow prevention device/assembly required to comply with this chapter. Failure to comply with this chapter shall constitute grounds for discontinuation of service.
Responsibility; Plumbing Official:
The plumbing official’s responsibility to enforce the applicable sections of the plumbing code begins at the point of service (downstream or consumer side of the meter) and continues throughout the length of the consumer’s water system.
The plumbing official will review all plans to ensure that unprotected cross connections are not an integral part of the consumer’s water system. If a cross connection cannot be eliminated, it must be protected by the installation of an air gap or an approved backflow prevention device/assembly, in accordance with the Plumbing Code as adopted by the State of Utah.
Responsibility; Certified Backflow Technician, Surveyor, or Repair Person:
Whether employed by the consumer or a utility to survey, test, repair, or maintain backflow prevention assemblies the Certified Backflow Technician, Surveyor, or Repair Person will have the following responsibilities:
Insuring that acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for testing, repairing or overhauling backflow prevention assemblies.
Make reports of such testing and/or repairs to the consumer and the water purveyor on form approved for such use by the water purveyor within time frames as described by the Division of Drinking Water.
Include the list of materials or replacement parts being used of the reports.
Insuring that replacement parts are equal in quality to parts originally supplied by the manufacturer of the assembly being repaired.
Not changing the design, material or operational characteristics of the assembly during testing, repair or maintenance.
Performing all test of the mechanical devices/assemblies and shall be responsible for the competence and accuracy of all test and reports.
Insuring that his/her license is current, the testing equipment being used is acceptable to the State of Utah, and is in proper operating condition.
Being equipped with, and competent to use, all necessary tools, gauges, test tags, and other equipment necessary to properly test, and maintain backflow prevention assemblies.
Tagging each double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure backflow assembly and high hazard air gap, showing the serial number date tested and by whom. The certified technician’s license number must also be on the tag.
Responsibility; Repair of backflow assemblies: In the case of a consumer requiring an assembly to be tested, any currently Certified Backflow Technician is authorized to make the test and report the results to the consumer and the water purveyor. Any installation repair or relocation shall be done with individuals having appropriate licensure from the department of licensing.
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 19-03 on 9/4/2019
8.24.020 Definitions - Control Of Backflow And Cross Connections
APPROVED BACKFLOW ASSEMBLY: An assembly accepted by the Utah State Department of Environmental Quality, Division of Drinking Water, as meeting and applicable specification or as suitable for the proposed use.

AUXILIARY WATER SUPPLY: Any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor’s public water supply will be considered as an auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor’s public potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a s well, spring, river, stream, etc., or “used waters” or “industrial fluids”. These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute and unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have authority for sanitary control.

BACK-PRESSURE: The flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances from a region of high pressure to a region of lower pressure into the water distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source(s) other than the intended source.

BACK-SIPHONAGE: The flow or water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances under vacuum conditions into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source(s) other than the intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable water system.

BACKFLOW: The reversal of the normal flow of water caused by wither back-pressure or back siphonage.

BACKFLOW PREVENTION ASSEMBLY: An assembly or means designed to prevent backflow. Specifications for backflow prevention assemblies are contained within the Plumbing Code as adopted by the State of Utah and in the Cross Connection Control Program for Utah maintained by the Division of Drinking Water.

CONTAMINATION: Means a degradation of the quality of the potable water supply by sewage industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials that may create a health hazard.

CROSS CONNECTION: Any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures which may allow non-potable water or industrial fluids or other material of questionable quality to come into contact with potable water inside a water distribution system. This would include temporary conditions, such as swing connections, removable sections, four way plug valves, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or change-over devices or sliding multiport tubes or other plumbing arrangements.

CROSS CONNECTION-CONTAINMENT: The installation of an approved backflow assembly at the water service connection to any customer’s premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross connection within the customer’s water distribution system; or, it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention assembly on the service line leading to and supply a portion of a customer’s water distribution system; or, it shall mean the installation of an portion of a customer’s water system where there are actual or potential cross connections which cannot be affectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross connection (isolation).

CROSS CONNECTION-CONTROLLED: A connection between a potable water system and a non-potable water system with an approved backflow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.

WATER PURVEYOR: The person designated to be in charge of the Water Department of Ephraim City, is invested with the authority and responsibility for the implementation of an effective cross connection control program and for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter.

HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 19-03 on 9/4/2019
8.24.030 Requirements
Policy:
No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the Water Purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by State laws, regulations, codes, and this chapter shall be discontinued by the water purveyor after due process of written notifications of violation and an appropriate time suspense for voluntary compliance, if:
A backflow prevention assembly required by this chapter for the control of backflow and cross connections is not installed, tested, and maintained, or
If it is found that a backflow prevention assembly has been removed or by-passed, or
If an unprotected cross connection exist on the premises, or
If the periodic system survey has not been conducted.
Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
The customer’s system(s) shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the water purveyor to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violation of this chapter exist and to audit the results of the required survey (R309.105.12 of the Utah Administrative Code).
Whenever the public water purveyor deems a service connection’s water usage contributes a sufficient hazard to the water supply, and approved backflow prevention assembly shall be installed on the service line of the identified consumer’s water system, at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line.
The type of protective assembly required under paragraph A,3, shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exist at the point of cross connection (whether direct or indirect), applicable to local and state requirements or resulting from the required survey.
All presently installed backflow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this section but were approved assemblies for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under paragraph A,6, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the water purveyor is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the public water system. Whenever the existing is moved from the present location or, requires more than minimum maintenance or, when the water purveyor finds that the operation or of this assembly constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention assembly meeting all local and state requirements.
It shall be the responsibility of the consumer at any premises where backflow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified surveys; inspections, and operational test made at least once per year at the consumer’s expense. In those instances where the Public Water Purveyor deems the hazard to be great, he may require certified surveys/inspections and test at a more frequent interval. It shall be the duty of the purveyor to see that thee test are made according to the standards set forth by the State Department of Environmental Quality, Division of Drinking Water.
All backflow prevention assemblies shall be tested within ten (10) working days of installation.
No backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed so as to create a safety hazard. (Example: Installed over and electrical panel, steam pipes, boilers, or above ceiling level).
HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 19-03 on 9/4/2019
8.24.040 Violation Of This Policy
If violation of this chapter exist of if there has not been any corrective action taken by the consumer within ten (10) days of the written notification of the deficiencies noted within the survey or test results, then the water purveyor shall deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with all State and local regulations and statutes relating to plumbing, safe drinking water suppliers, and this chapter.

HISTORY
Adopted by Ord. 19-03 on 9/4/2019
9 BUILDING REGULATIONS
9.04 BUILDING CODE
9.08 IMPACT FEES
9.12 ELECTRICAL CODE
9.16 PLUMBING CODE
9.20 HOUSING CODE
9.24 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
9.28 FIRE CODE
9.32 FALLOUT SHELTERS

9.04 BUILDING CODE
9.04.010 Uniform Building Code Adopted
9.04.020 Building Official
9.04.030 Building Permit Required
9.04.040 Penalty; Exception

9.04.010 Uniform Building Code Adopted
The Uniform Building Code, current edition, published by the International Conference of Building Officials, and printed in book form, three (3) copies of which have previously been filed with the City Recorder for use and examination by the public, hereby is approved and adopted as the Building Code of the City. (1983 Code § 9-531; amd. 1998 Code)

9.04.020 Building Official
Created: There is hereby created the position of Building Official who shall also be known as the City Building Inspector. (1983 Code § 9-511) 
Powers: 
The Building Inspector shall have the power to order all work stopped on construction, alteration or repairs of buildings in the City when such work is being done in violation of any provisions of any ordinance relating thereto, or in violation of the Subdivision or Zoning Titles of the City. Work shall not be resumed after the issuance of such order except on the written permission of the Inspector; provided, that if the stop order is an oral one, it shall be followed by a written stop order within one hour. Such written stop order may be served by any peace officer or other authorized person. (1983 Code § 9-512)
The Building Inspector shall have the power to enter into any building or the premises where the work of altering, repairing or constructing any building or structure is going on, for the purpose of making inspections at any reasonable hour, pursuant to any of the provisions of this Title and Title 4 of this Code. (1983 Code § 9-513) 
Duties: The Building Inspector shall, in addition to all other duties imposed on him by the City: 
Enforce the provisions of the Uniform Building Code. 
Inspect all buildings, structures, ditches, signs, fences and objects to determine their safety and effect on the persons who are within the City. 
Until such time as a Plumbing Inspector is appointed or designated, the Building Inspector shall be responsible for enforcing ECC 9.16. 
Review all building permit applications for new construction or substantial improvements to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. If a proposed building site is in a location that has a flood hazard, any proposed new construction or substantial improvement (including prefabricated and mobile homes) must: 
Be designed (or modified) and anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure; 
Use construction materials and utility equipment that are resistant to flood damage; and 
Use construction methods and practices that will minimize flood damage. 
Review subdivision proposals and other proposed new developments to assure that: 
All such proposals are consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
All public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems are located, elevated, and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage; and
Adequate drainage is provided so as to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
Require new or replacement water supply systems and/or sanitary sewage systems to be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters, and require on site waste disposal systems to be located so as to avoid impairment of them or contamination from them during flooding. (1983 Code § 9-514)
9.04.030 Building Permit Required
Application And Plans: A building permit shall be secured from the City Recorder on written application accompanied by plans and specifications in duplicate, which must state the specific nature of the construction or alterations to be made. The plan must be verified by the person who will perform or be in charge of the construction or alteration. (1983 Code § 9-522) 
Variations Of Plan Prohibited: No material variation from the approved plan shall be allowed unless such variations shall first have been approved in writing by the Building Inspector. (1983 Code § 9-524) 
Approval Of Plan: The application and plans shall be forwarded from the City Recorder to the Building Inspector, who shall review the plan to determine whether the proposed construction or alteration conforms to the Building Codes and ordinances of the City. The Building Inspector shall return the plans to the City Recorder within ten (10) days with the statement "approved" if the plans do conform or "disapproved" if the plans do not conform. If the plans are disapproved, the reasons therefor shall be annexed to the plans. On receipt of an approved plan, the City Recorder shall issue a permit to the applicant, together with one set of the approved plan. One set of the plans shall be retained by the Building Inspector. The Building Inspector may revoke at any time a permit which has been issued for any building constructed or being constructed or which would be or result, if constructed, in a violation of any ordinance of the City. (1983 Code § 9-523)
9.04.040 Penalty; Exception
It shall be a Class C misdemeanor for any homeowner and a Class B misdemeanor for any person who receives payment or anything of value, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010, to construct or alter any building or structure, except a fence, without first securing the permit required by this Chapter. (1983 Code § 9-521; amd. 1998 Code)
This Section shall not apply where the retail cost of the materials used in the construction or alteration is less than five hundred dollars ($500.00), except that it shall apply in all cases where the construction or alteration results in an enlarged structure or affects the walls of the building or structure. (1983 Code § 9-521)
9.08 IMPACT FEES
9.08.010 Definitions - Impact Fees
9.08.020 Service Area
9.08.030 Assessment And Calculation Of Impact Fees
9.08.040 Administrative Appeal

9.08.010 Definitions - Impact Fees
BUILDING PERMIT: The permit required for any "development activity", as defined herein, and pursuant to this title.

DEVELOPMENT ACTIVITY: Any construction or expansion of a building, structure, or use, and change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land, which is accompanied by a request for a building permit.

DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by more than two (2) families.

DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by one family, the structure only having one dwelling unit. 

DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by two (2) families, the structure having two (2) dwelling units.

DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms in a dwelling, designed for occupation by one family for living or sleeping purposes and having kitchen facilities for the use of not more than one family.

ENCUMBER: To reserve, set aside or otherwise earmark the impact fees in order to pay for commitments, contractual obligations or other liabilities incurred for public facilities.

IMPACT FEE: Any fee levied pursuant to this chapter as a condition of allowing or providing a connection to a city utility service.

INDEPENDENT FEE CALCULATION: An impact fee calculation prepared by a fee payer to support assessment of an impact fee different from any fee set forth herein.

OWNER: The owner of record of real property, or a person with an unrestricted written option to purchase property; provided, that if the real property is being purchased under a recorded real estate contract, the purchaser shall be considered the owner of the real property.

PROJECT IMPROVEMENT: Site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide utility services for the development activity and are necessary for the use and convenience of the users of the development resulting from the development activity.

PUBLIC FACILITY: Any structure built by or for, or maintained by a governmental entity.

WASTEWATER CONNECTION: The impact fee, calculated as an expression of new equivalent residential units (ERUs), imposed as a condition precedent to a sewer connection that is used to offset the proportionate impact of the development activity on the need for the planning, design, engineering, acquisition, financing and construction of sewer collection mains, property, and sewerage treatment cells.

WATER CONNECTION: Any service line connected to a water meter owned and operated by the city water utility enterprise fund.

WATER CONNECTION IMPACT FEE: The impact fee, calculated as an expression of new equivalent residential units (ERUs), imposed as a condition precedent to a water connection that is used to offset the proportion ate impact of the development activity on the need for the acquisition and transfer of water rights and points of diversion, the planning, design, engineering, acquisition, financing and construction or upgrading of physical sources to realize those water rights, water delivery systems, and water storage facilities. (Ord. 2002-1, 1-26-2002)

9.08.020 Service Area
All properties currently serviced and those properties required or requesting to be serviced by the city sewer utility enterprise fund, city water utility enterprise fund, city road and street facilities, city public library, city parks and recreational facilities, and/or city emergency services. (Ord. 2002-1, 1-26-2002)

9.08.030 Assessment And Calculation Of Impact Fees
Minimum Assessed: The city shall collect a minimum impact fee of one equivalent residential unit (ERU) and/or one development for all services as stated below. 
Assessment: The city shall collect the following impact fees from those properties required or requesting to be serviced by the city as follows: 
Wastewater Connection: 
Capacity Guidelines: The capacity of units for each type of establishment it takes to make an equivalent residential unit (ERU) will be compared using table 1 of this section. The table shows the approximate number of units required for each type of user to make an equivalent residential unit.

TABLE 1
ESTABLISHMENT AND RESIDENTIAL COMPARISON

ERU = Equivalent residential unit

User	Units	Units to Make 1 ERU
Residential	Each	1
Motel	Rooms	4
Campground (with showers and restrooms)
Sites	6
RV park (with full
connections)	Sites	4
Restaurant	Seats	12
Business	Employees	24
Laundromat	Washers	4
Store	Toilet rooms	2
Church	People	80
(Ord. 2002-1, 1-26-2002) 
Accounting For Wastewater Facilities Impact Fee: Ephraim City shall establish one separate interest bearing ledger account for the wastewater facilities impact fee and combine into the new ledger account all funds previously collected under any prior impact fee for the wastewater collection facilities and the wastewater treatment facilities. The city shall deposit impact fee receipts in the appropriate ledger account; retain the interest earned on each fund or account showing the source and amount of all monies collected, earned, and received by the fund or account, and each expenditure from the fund or account. The city shall expend fees received from the wastewater facilities impact fee in accordance with and pursuant to Utah Code Annotated. (Ord. 13-01, 6-5-2013) 
Water Connection:
Capacity Guidelines: The capacity of units for each type of establishment it takes to make an equivalent residential unit (ERU) will be compared using table 4 of this section. The table shows the approximate number of units required for each type of user to make an equivalent residential unit.

TABLE 2
ESTABLISHMENT AND RESIDENTIAL COMPARISON

ERU = Equivalent residential unit

User	Units	Units to Make 1 ERU
Residential 	Each 	1
Motel	Rooms 	5.33
Campground (with showers)	Sites	12
RV park (with full connections)	Sites	8
Restaurant	Seats	16
Business	Employees 	32
Laundromat	Washers	1.38
Store	Toilet rooms 	1.60
Church	People	160 
Culinary Water Facilities Impact Fee: The city does hereby impose and shall collect from the applicant for any "development activity" an impact fee to be known as the culinary water facilities impact fee for culinary water facilities, which are defined to include water sources, storage facilities, water distribution systems and the water rights necessary to supply culinary water to the residents of Ephraim City in the amount of three thousand eight hundred twelve dollars ($3,812.00) per each equivalent residential unit.
Accounting For Culinary Water Facilities Impact Fee: Ephraim City shall establish one separate interest bearing ledger account for the culinary water facilities impact fee and combine into the new ledger account all funds previously collected under any prior impact fee for the culinary water facilities, including the culinary water source impact fees, culinary water storage impact fee, culinary water distribution impact fee, and the water rights impact fee culinary water facilities. The city shall deposit impact fee receipts in the appropriate ledger account; retain the interest earned on each fund or account showing the source and amount of all monies collected, earned, and received by the fund or account; and each expenditure from the fund or account. The city shall expend fees received from the culinary water facilities impact fee only on culinary water facilities, identified in the city's capital facilities plan. (Ord. 08-05, 10-1-2008)

TABLE 5
ESTABLISHMENT AND RESIDENTIAL COMPARISON

ERU = Equivalent residential unit

User	Units 	Units to Make 1 ERU 
Residential 	Each	1
Motel	Rooms	5.5
Campground (with showers) 	Sites	12
RV park (with full connections)	Sites	8
Restaurant	Seats	16
Business	Employees	32
Laundromat	Washers	1.5
Store	Toilet rooms	2
Church	People	160
Emergency Services Impact Fees: 

TABLE 6
EMERGENCY SERVICES IMPACT FEE SCHEDULE 

ERU = Equivalent residential unit

User
Units 	Units To Make 1 ERU	Cost Per ERU	Impact Fee Per Unit
Residential	Each	1	$315.00	$315.00
Motel	Rooms	5.33	315.00	59.10
Campground (with showers)	Sites	12	315.00	26.25
RV park (with full connections)	Sites	8	315.00	39.37
Restaurant	Seats	16	315.00	19.69
Business	Employees	32	315.00	9.85
Laundromat	Washers	1.38	315.00	228.26
Store	Toilet rooms	1.6	315.00	196.87
Church	People	160	315.00	1.97
Maximum Fee: The maximum impact fee per building will be no more than six (6) ERUs. (Ord. 2002-1, 1-26-2002) 
9.08.040 Administrative Appeal
Adjustments To the Standard Impact Fees: The city may adjust the standard impact fee in order to respond to the following: 
Unusual circumstances in specific cases. 
To ensure that the impact fees are imposed fairly. 
A provision governing calculation of the amount of the impact fee to be imposed on a particular development that permits adjustment of the amount of the fee based upon studies and data submitted by the developer. 
Form Of Request: The request for hearing must be made in writing to the mayor or city recorder and made within thirty (30) days following the date notice of written request for a utility service connection. 
Procedure: 
Following receipt of a request for hearing, the city council shall inform the person requesting a hearing of the time and place the hearing is to be held. 
At the hearing, the aggrieved party shall have the right to hear and examine any witnesses the city may produce to support its decision and to present their own evidence in support of their contention. 
The city council shall, within thirty (30) days from the date the challenge to the impact fee is filed, hold the hearing and inform the person who requested the hearing of the decision of the city council. (Ord. 2-14-96, 2-14-1996)
9.12 ELECTRICAL CODE
9.12.010 Electrical Code Adopted
9.12.020 Enforcement Official
9.12.030 Permit Required
9.12.040 Electrical Installations
9.12.050 Inspection
9.12.060 Electrical Disturbances

9.12.010 Electrical Code Adopted
The national electrical code, current edition, published by the National Electrical Contractors Association and approved by the National Board Of Fire Underwriters, American Standards Association and the National Fire Protection Association and printed as a code in book form, three (3) copies of which have been previously filed with the city recorder for use and examination by the public, hereby is approved and adopted as the electrical code of the city. (1983 Code § 9-540; amd. 1998 Code)

9.12.020 Enforcement Official
The building inspector shall perform all functions of electrical inspect ion and shall, among other things, inspect and supervise the construction, installation, and repairs of all electric light and power wiring, fixtures, appliances, or apparatus installed within the limits of the city and shall require compliance with the provisions of the electrical code. Wiring, fixtures, and apparatus heretofore installed need not necessarily be made to conform strictly to all the provisions of the electrical code. The building inspector shall require the correction of such defects as he deems actually dangerous to life or property. Those same enforcement standards established in the uniform building code shall be followed by the building inspector for all electrical work. (1983 Code § 9-541)

9.12.030 Permit Required
No alterations or additions shall be made in existing wiring, nor shall any wiring or any apparatus which generates, transmits, transforms or utilizes any electricity be installed without first obtaining a permit therefor, except minor repair work such as repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping bare joints and repairing drop cords. Applications for such permit describing such work shall be made in writing and shall conform as far as practicable to the requirement set forth in ECC 9.04.030 Paragraph A. This section shall not apply to installations in powerhouses and substations belonging to electric light companies. No permit shall be issued to any applicant for a permit during the time that he shall fail to correct any defective electrical installations after he has been duly notified to correct such defective work by the building inspector. (1983 Code § 9-542)

9.12.040 Electrical Installations
Business License Required: No person shall engage in the installation, alteration, repair, or construction of any electrical work, wiring, fixtures, appliances, or equipment inside or outside of any building, except work done for or on the property of the city, without first securing a business license and paying the fee therefor as provided by resolution of the city council. (1983 Code § 9-551; amd. 1998 Code) 
Notification To Building Inspector: It shall be unlawful for any person to do or cause to be done any electrical wiring or other electrical installation in the building or structure within the city without first notifying the building inspector of the kind and nature of such electric wiring or other electrical installation and the location of the building or structure in which the same is to be installed. (1983 Code § 9-552) 
Subject To Supervision And Inspection: All electric wiring or other electrical installations shall be subject to supervision and inspection by the building inspector. It shall be unlawful for any person to do or cause to be done any electrical wiring or electrical installations without first obtaining the permit required by ECC 9.12.030. (1983 Code § 9-553) 
Unlawful Installation: 
Disconnection; Seal: If the building inspector shall find any part of any electric light or power wiring, appliances, apparatus, or fixtures in or upon any building in the City to have been installed without permit, or installed not in accordance with the provisions of the Electrical Code or to be dangerous to life or property, the Inspector shall have the right and power to disconnect such defective work, fixtures, appliances, or apparatus and place a seal upon the same, and shall at the same time give written notice of such disconnection to the owner or occupant of the building. 
Removal Of Seal: After such disconnected wiring, fixtures, appliances, or apparatus have been put in the condition required by this Chapter, the seal so placed shall be removed by order of the Inspector. (1983 Code § 9-554)
9.12.050 Inspection
Notification To Building Inspector; Issuance Of Certificate: Upon completion of the installation of any electrical wiring, fixtures, appliances or apparatus in or on any building, it shall be the duty of the person doing the work to notify the Building Inspector, who shall cause the same to be inspected and, if approved, to issue a certificate of inspection which shall contain the date of such inspection and a statement that the installation is approved. (1983 Code § 9-555) 
Unlawful To Connect Current Without Certificate: It shall be unlawful for any person to turn on or connect the current with such installation until such certificate shall be issued and it shall also be unlawful to make any change, alteration, or extension in or to the installation of any electrical wiring, fixtures, appliances, or apparatus in or on any building after inspection without notifying the Building Inspector and securing a permit to do so. (1983 Code § 9-555; amd. 1998 Code) 
Exception: The requirement of permits, inspection, and supervision shall not apply to minor repair work such as repairing flush and snap switches, replacing fuses, changing lamp sockets and receptacles, taping bare joints, and repairing drop cords, and wiring for appliances and devices operating at less than 25 volts. (1983 Code § 9-555)
9.12.060 Electrical Disturbances
Declared Nuisance: Electrical installations for signs, equipment, or other facilities which create electrical disturbances that cause interference with normal radio or television reception beyond the immediate vicinity of such electrical installations are hereby declared to be a nuisance. The owners or operators thereof shall so install and maintain such installations as to avoid or eliminate such interference, using all known means and devices for such purpose, such as proper grounding, connections, condensers, resistors, and live chokes. 
Abatement: The Building Inspector shall withhold or withdraw approval of any electrical installation causing the above disturbance, and is hereby authorized to take all steps necessary for the abatement of such conditions. (1983 Code § 9-544)
9.16 PLUMBING CODE
9.16.010 Plumbing Code Adopted
9.16.020 Scope
9.16.030 Building Inspector
9.16.040 Permits
9.16.050 Reinspection Charges
9.16.060 Allowance For Exception
9.16.070 Right Of Entry
9.16.080 Interest In Sale Of Equipment Prohibited
9.16.090 Power To Condemn
9.16.100 Penalty

9.16.010 Plumbing Code Adopted
The Utah State Plumbing Code, current edition, published by the Utah Plumbing, Heating and Cooling Contractors as a code in book form, three (3) copies of which have been filed for use and examination by the public in the office of the City Recorder, hereby is approved and adopted as the Plumbing Code of the City, except as otherwise altered or modified by the ordinances of the City. (1983 Code § 9-561; amd. 1998 Code)

9.16.020 Scope
The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to, but not be limited to, all new construction, relocated buildings, and to any installation, alteration, repair or reconstruction of a plumbing system within the City, except as otherwise provided for in this Chapter. (1983 Code § 9-562)

9.16.030 Building Inspector
Created: There is hereby created the position of Building Inspector.
Duties: The Building Inspector shall issue permits to properly licensed, bonded and registered persons. Licensing should be for work to be done within the scope of this Chapter. The Building Inspector: (1983 Code § 9-563; amd. 1998 Code) 
Shall order changes in workmanship and/or materials essential to enforce compliance with all provisions of the Plumbing Code. 
Shall investigate any construction or work regulated by this Chapter and issue such notices and orders as are necessary to prevent or correct dangerous or unsanitary conditions. 
May recommend the revocation of any license to the State Department of Business Regulation for cause, and report to the Department of Business Regulation all violations of this Chapter by journeymen, apprentices or contractors. (1983 Code § 9-563)
9.16.040 Permits
Required; Application: No plumbing shall be installed, nor additions or alterations made in existing plumbing, except as provided in paragraph C, without first obtaining a permit. Application for such permits shall be in writing to the City Recorder and shall describe the nature of the work to be done and affirm that the plumbing will conform to the Plumbing Code. No permit shall be issued to any applicant during the time that he shall fail to correct any defective plumbing installed by him after he has been notified in writing by the Building Inspector of the defective work. (1983 Code § 9-568; amd. 1998 Code) 
Homeowners Permit: Any permit required by this Chapter may be issued to any person to do any plumbing or drainage work regulated by this Chapter in a single-family dwelling used exclusively for living purposes, including the usual accessory buildings and quarters in connection with such buildings in the event that any such person is the bona fide owner of any such dwelling and accessory buildings and quarters and that the same are occupied by or designed to be occupied by the owner, and further; provided, that the owner shall furnish the Building Inspector with a complete layout drawing of the proposed work, satisfies the Building Inspector that he has a working knowledge of the requirements contained in this Chapter, pays the necessary fees, and calls for all inspections required by this Chapter. (1983 Code § 9-573; amd. 1998 Code)
Exceptions: 
Repairs which involve only the working parts of a faucet or valve, the clearance of stoppages, the repairing of leaks or the replacement of defective faucets or valves may be made without a permit; provided, that the permits shall be procured to replace fixtures, traps, soil, waste, and vent pipes unless waived by the Building Inspector. (1983 Code § 9-572; amd. 1998 Code) 
Any person regularly employed by an owner or lessee of property, or his agents, for the sole purpose of operating and maintaining such property and to make minor repairs thereof, and any owner or lessee of property, shall be exempt from the provisions of this Chapter when doing work for which permits are not required. (1983 Code § 9-572) 
Denial: The Building Inspector may refuse to issue permits for any plumbing work to any person who has had a permit revoked in accordance with this Chapter during such time as such person fails to perform plumbing work in conformance with this Chapter. (1983 Code § 9-571; amd. 1998 Code) 
Expiration: Every permit issued by the Building Inspector shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within sixty (60) days from the date such permit is issued, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned at any time after the work is commenced for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days or more. (1983 Code § 9-570; amd. 1998 Code) 
Revocation: The Building Inspector may revoke any permit when the person to whom the permit is issued fails, neglects, or refuses to do the work thereunder in conformance with this Chapter, or when the permit is issued in error. (1983 Code § 9-569; amd. 1998 Code)
9.16.050 Reinspection Charges
After notice that any plumbing work is ready for inspection, if the Building Inspector calls at the place designated to make such inspection and finds the work not ready for inspection, he shall charge an additional fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each additional inspection required, except that the City Council may from time to time change the inspection fee required in this Section by resolution. (1983 Code § 9-575; amd. 1998 Code)

9.16.060 Allowance For Exception
Where structural conditions impose extreme difficulty in fully complying with the plumbing regulations of this Chapter, any aggrieved party may apply in writing to the Building Inspector for special permission to deviate from the regulations. If, in the judgment of the Building Inspector, such deviation is reasonable and does not create an unsanitary or unsafe condition, he shall recommend to the City Council that the request for deviation be approved or disapproved, or that approval is subject to such conditions as the City Council may require. The City Council, on review, may approve or disapprove the application or vary the conditions on which approval is granted. (1983 Code § 9-564; amd. 1998 Code)

9.16.070 Right Of Entry
The Building Inspector shall have the right of entry within reasonable hours to any building or premises for the purpose of inspection or to investigate any work or conditions governed by this Chapter. (1983 Code § 9-565; amd. 1998 Code)

9.16.080 Interest In Sale Of Equipment Prohibited
The Building Inspector and his assistants shall not in any way engage in the sale or installation of plumbing equipment upon which they are required to make inspection hereunder. (1983 Code § 9-567; amd. 1998 Code)

9.16.090 Power To Condemn
Granted; Penalty: The Building Inspector is hereby empowered to condemn and order repaired, removed, replaced or changed any plumbing found in any unsanitary condition or not in accordance with this part. Failure to comply with the order within a reasonable time is an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. (1983 Code § 9-566; amd. 1998 Code) 
Refusal To Comply: It shall be unlawful for any owner, agent or occupant of any building or premises to fail, neglect or refuse to repair, remove, replace or change within ten (10) days after written notice to do so from the Building Inspector, any plumbing condemned by such Inspector; provided, that this paragraph shall not apply to any occupant not responsible for the installation or repair of the condemned plumbing. (1983 Code § 9-576; amd. 1998 Code)
9.16.100 Penalty
Homeowner, Building Owner Or Manager: The violation of any provision of this Chapter by any homeowner, building owner or manager of any building, apartment, hotel, motel or other structure shall be an infraction, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. 
Person Receiving Payment: The violation of any provision of this Chapter by any person who receives payment or anything of value for performing such work shall be a Class B misdemeanor, subject to penalty as provided in ECC 1.16.010. (1983 Code § 9-577; amd. 1998 Code)
9.20 HOUSING CODE
9.20.010 Adoption Of Uniform Housing Code
9.20.020 Scope
9.20.030 Permit Required
9.20.040 Violations

9.20.010 Adoption Of Uniform Housing Code
The Uniform Housing Code, current edition, printed as a code in book form by the International Conference of Building Officials (providing minimum requirements for the protection of life, limb, health, safety, and welfare of the general public and the owners and occupants of residential buildings), is hereby approved and adopted as the Housing Code of the City. (1983 Code § 9-651; amd. 1998 Code)

9.20.020 Scope
Applicability: The provisions of the Uniform Housing Code shall apply to all buildings or portions thereof used, designed for or intended to be used for human habitation. Occupancies in existing buildings may be continued as provided in section 104(g) of the Uniform Building Code, except for such. structures as are found to be substandard as defined in the Uniform Housing Code. (1983 Code § 9-652) 
Alterations To Existing Buildings: Existing buildings which are altered or enlarged shall be made to conform to the Uniform Housing Code, insofar as the new work is concerned, in accordance with section 104(a) through (f) of the Uniform Building Code. (1983 Code § 9-653; amd. 1998 Code) 
Relocation Of Existing Buildings: Existing buildings which are moved or relocated shall be considered as new buildings and shall comply with all requirements of the Uniform Housing Code. (1983 Code § 9-654)
9.20.030 Permit Required
It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert, or demolish any building or structure, cause or allow the same to be done, without first obtaining a separate building permit for each such building or structure from the Building Inspector in the manner and according to the applicable conditions prescribed in the Uniform Housing Code. (1983 Code § 9-657)

9.20.040 Violations
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether as owner, lessee, sublessee, or occupant, to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, demolish, equip, use, occupy, or maintain any building or premises, or cause or permit the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of the Uniform Housing Code or any order issued by the Building Inspector pursuant thereto. (1983 Code § 9-656)

9.24 ABATEMENT OF DANGEROUS BUILDINGS
9.24.010 Adoption Of Uniform Code For Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings
9.24.020 Scope
9.24.030 Dangerous Buildings Declared Nuisance
9.24.040 Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings

9.24.010 Adoption Of Uniform Code For Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings
The Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, current edition, printed as a code in book form by the International Conference of Building Officials (providing for a just, equitable and practicable method whereby buildings or structures which from any cause endanger the life, limb, health, morals, property, safety or welfare of the general public or their occupants, may be required to be repaired, vacated, or demolished), is hereby approved and adopted as the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code of the City. (1983 Code § 10-341; amd. 1998 Code)

9.24.020 Scope
Applicability: The provisions of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings shall apply to all dangerous buildings as therein defined, which now exist or which may exist or hereafter be constructed in the City. (1983 Code § 10-342) 
Alterations, Additions And Repairs: All buildings or structures which are required to be repaired under the provisions of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings shall be subject to the provisions of subsections (a) through (f) of section 104 of the Uniform Building Code. (1983 Code § 10-343; amd. 1998 Code)
9.24.030 Dangerous Buildings Declared Nuisance
All dangerous buildings within the terms of this Chapter are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be vacated or demolished as hereinbefore and hereinafter provided. (1983 Code § 10-346)

9.24.040 Abatement Of Dangerous Buildings
All buildings or portions thereof which are determined, after inspection by the Building Inspector to be dangerous, as defined in the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings, are hereby declared to be public nuisances and shall be abated by repair, rehabilitation, demolition, or removal in accordance with procedures specified in section 401 of the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings. (1983 Code § 10-344)

9.28 FIRE CODE
9.28.010 Uniform Fire Code Adopted
9.28.020 Definitions - Fire Code

9.28.010 Uniform Fire Code Adopted
There is hereby adopted as the Fire Code by the City, for the purpose of prescribing regulations governing conditions hazardous to life and protecting property from fire or explosion, that certain code known as the Uniform Fire Code, current edition, and all appendices as recommended by the Western Fire Chiefs Association and the International Conference of Building Officials. (Ord. 3-17-93, 3-17-1993)

9.28.020 Definitions - Fire Code
CORPORATION COUNSEL: As used in the Uniform Fire Code, shall mean the attorney for the City.

JURISDICTION: As used in the Uniform Fire Code, shall mean the boundaries of the City. (1983 Code § 10-153)

9.32 FALLOUT SHELTERS
9.32.010 Definition - Fallout Shelters
9.32.020 Exemption From Building Code Requirements
9.32.030 Administrative Application Of Building Code
9.32.040 Design
9.32.050 Construction

9.32.010 Definition - Fallout Shelters
For the purpose of this Chapter, a family fallout shelter is a structure designed and constructed for emergency use only, to afford minimum protection from nuclear radiation, commonly known as fallout, resulting from a nuclear incident which recently has been or is likely to be of catastrophic proportions. (1983 Code § 9-662)

9.32.020 Exemption From Building Code Requirements
Due to the specialized purpose of emergency nature for which family fallout shelters are designed, any such shelter which complies with the provisions of this Chapter are hereby exempt from the provisions of the Building Code, except as otherwise provided herein. (1983 Code § 9-661)

9.32.030 Administrative Application Of Building Code
Notwithstanding the provisions contained in this Chapter, the provisions contained in the Building Code relating to administration, permits and inspections shall be applicable to family fallout shelters. (1983 Code § 9-665)

9.32.040 Design
A family fallout shelter shall be of a design conforming to that recommended or accepted by the Federal Department of Defense, Office of Civil Defense. (1983 Code § 9-663)

9.32.050 Construction
A family fallout shelter shall, in all matters relating to construction and structural stability, comply with not less than the equivalent of the provisions relating to design loads and general building requirements specified in the Uniform Building Code. (1983 Code § 9-664)

10 LAND USE REGULATIONS
10.04 PURPOSE, APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION
10.08 DEFINITIONS - LAND USE REGULATIONS
10.12 GENERAL AND SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
10.16 ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
10.20 TABLES

10.04 PURPOSE, APPLICABILITY AND ADMINISTRATION
10.04.010 Short Title
10.04.020 Purpose
10.04.030 Declarations And Conflicts
10.04.040 Permits
10.04.050 Enforcement And Penalties
10.04.060 Amendments
10.04.070 Annexations
10.04.080 Vacation/Abandonment Of A Public Road Or Right-Of-Way
10.04.090 Planning Director
10.04.100 Appeal Authority

10.04.010 Short Title
This Title is known as the “Land Use Regulations Ordinance of Ephraim City, Utah,” and is referred to herein as “this ordinance.”

10.04.020 Purpose
Authority and Purpose: This ordinance is adopted pursuant to the authority contained in Utah Code § 10-9a-401 (1953 as amended) to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of the community. The purpose of this ordinance is to:
Establish land use classifications dividing the City into various zoning districts; 
Govern the use of land for residential, commercial, office, industrial, and all other uses; 
Regulate and limit the height and bulk of buildings and other structures;
Limit the occupancy and size of yards and open spaces;
Establish boards and commissions and define powers and duties for each;
Provide procedures for changing zoning districts and the standards which govern these districts, conditional use permits, variances and all other permits required by this ordinance; 
Establish penalties for violations of this ordinance.
10.04.030 Declarations And Conflicts
Declaration: In interpreting and applying the provisions of this ordinance:
the requirements herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the purposes set forth;
the plain English meaning of the text shall supersede; and
applicants, property owners and other concerned parties should be given the most favorable or permissive possible reading of these regulations.
Conflict: This ordinance shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of covenants, easements, agreements, deed restrictions, or other ordinances or laws, but shall prevail notwithstanding when such provisions are less restrictive. Nothing in this ordinance shall supersede applicable safety codes such as fire or building codes. 
Severability:
This ordinance revises and reenacts all land use laws. Whenever any provision of this ordinance refers to or cites a section of the Utah Code and that section is later amended or superseded, this ordinance shall be deemed amended to refer to the amended section or section that most nearly corresponds to that superseded section.
The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, and phrases of this ordinance are severable, and if any such section, paragraph, sentence, clause, or phrase is declared unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction in a valid judgment or decree, such unconstitutionality or invalidity shall not affect any of the remainder of the ordinance other than the part determined to be unconstitutional or invalid.
Effect on Previous Ordinance: The existing ordinances covering land use and zoning are hereby superseded and amended to read as set forth herein, this ordinance is deemed to be a continuation of previous ordinances and not a new enactment.
Adoption of Moratorium: The City Council may adopt a moratorium or “temporary land use regulation” without a prior recommendation from the Planning Commission (Utah Code § 10-9a-504(1) and (3).
10.04.040 Permits
No city officer shall grant a permit or license for the use of any building or land or for the construction or alteration of any building or structure that does not comply with the provisions of this land use ordinance. Approvals given in violation of this ordinance are void.

Land Use Permit Required: A signed Land Use Permit signifying that the proposed use complies with the land use ordinance and setting forth the relevant city fees shall be received before a building permit can be issued.
The permit must be signed by the Planning Director or his designee and such other city officials as required by the purpose for which the permit is being sought.
Some uses under this code require issuance of Conditional Use Permits by the City Council before a Zoning Permit can be signed.
Zoning Permits expire six months from the date issued if substantive work under the permit has not begun.
The zoning permit review period shall be thirty days or less.
As part of the zoning permit, the applicant may be required to obtain approval from other affected entities, such as UDOT, the Ephraim Irrigation Company, utility companies, etc. having infrastructure on the proposed lot or which will be directly affected by the proposed development. before a zoning permit will be issued by the City. (2008)
Buildable area: structures shall not be built on slopes 20% or greater unless the final design is reviewed and approved by a professional geotechnical engineer or similarly qualified professional and a conditional use permit has been issued for the development. The City Engineer may require professional review for projects on slopes less than 20% if in his opinion the field conditions of the site warrant additional review due to unusual conditions or terrain. (See definition for “Buildable Area” and “Conditional Use Permit”)
If the design or engineering of any application or proposed land use is beyond the expertise of the City Staff, the City may require third party review by an engineer approved by the City prior to the issuance of a land use permit.
The applicant shall pay an additional fee to cover the cost of the third party review.
Water Source Protection: all applications shall be reviewed for compliance with the Water Source Protection Plan requirements, as defined and adopted by Ephraim City Ordinance. Applications found to not comply with said Source Protection Plan may be denied by the City.
Building Permit Required: Erection, alteration, repair, removal or relocation of any building shall not commence or proceed without a written building permit and/or demolition permit issued by the Building Official according to the requirements of the adopted building code. Pools with electrical covers or submersed lighting, also require a permit. Flat concrete work such as driveways, sports courts, etc. do not require a building permit unless a the flat work is done as part of a larger project involving buildings and/or structures which would normally require a building permit.
Occupancy Permit Required: No land shall be used or occupied and no building hereafter structurally altered or erected shall be used or changed in use until a certificate of occupancy shall have been issued by the Building Inspector stating that the building or the proposed use thereof, or the use of the land complies with the provisions of this ordinance and any other applicable local, state or federal regulation. Certificates of Occupancy are required within ten days of completion of work.
Application Approvals: Complete applications for land use approvals are to be considered under the law that was in place when a complete application was submitted and all fees have been paid, unless the application jeopardizes a compelling, countervailing public interest; or a pending amendment to the ordinances was initiated as provided in city ordinance prior to the application. Pending amendments are of no consequence if not adopted within 180 days of being proposed. (Utah Code §. 10-9a-509)
Exactions: The city (or town) may impose an exaction or exactions on proposed land use development if:
an essential nexus exists between a legitimate governmental interest and each exaction; and
each exaction is roughly proportionate, both in nature and extent, to the impact of the proposed development.
Application Made to Conform to Zoning Map: An applicant is entitled to approval of a land use application if the application conforms to the requirements of the City’s zoning map and applicable land use ordinance in effect when a complete application is submitted and all fees have been paid, unless:
The City Council, on the record, finds that a compelling, countervailing public interest would be jeopardized by approving the application; or
In the manner provided by City ordinance and before the application is submitted, the municipality has formally initiated proceedings to amend its ordinances in a manner that would prohibit approval of the application as submitted.
Processing of Application: The City shall process an application without regard to proceedings initiated to amend the municipality's ordinances if:
180 days have passed since the proceedings were initiated; and
The proceedings have not resulted in an enactment that prohibits the approval of the application as submitted.
Application Considered Complete: An application for a land use approval is considered submitted and complete when the application is provided in a form that complies with the requirements of applicable ordinances and all applicable fees have been paid.
Reasonable Diligence: The continuing validity of an approval of a land use application is conditioned upon the applicant proceeding after approval to implement the approval with reasonable diligence.
No Unexpressed Requirements: The City shall not impose on a holder of an issued land use permit a requirement that is not expressed:
In the land use permit or in documents on which the land use permit is based; or
In the City’s ordinances.
Certificate of Occupancy: The City will not withhold issuance of a certificate of occupancy because of an applicant's failure to comply with a requirement that is not expressed:
In the building permit or in documents on which the building permit is based; or
In the City’s ordinances.
Compliance: The City is bound by the terms and standards of applicable land use ordinances and shall comply with mandatory provisions of those ordinances. (2008)
Appeals: Appeals shall be done in accordance with the Noticing Requirements as provided in ECC 10.20.060 Table E: Notice Matrix and Appeals Process, and Utah Code 10-9A Part 7.
10.04.050 Enforcement And Penalties
Planning Director Responsibilities: The Planning Director shall administer and enforce this ordinance. The Planning Director, by assignment, may, from time to time, entrust such administration, in whole or in part, to any other office of the government without amendment to this ordinance.
Permit Required: It shall be the duty of all architects, engineers, contractors, subcontractors, builders and other persons having to do with the establishment of any use of land or the erection, alteration, changing or remodeling of any building or structure to see that a proper permit has been granted before such work is begun. Any person doing or performing any such work without a permit having been issued is in conflict with the requirements of this ordinance in the same manner and to the same extent that the owner of the premises or the persons for whom the use is established, and shall be subject to the penalties herein prescribed for violation.
 Penalties:
Any firm, corporation, person or persons, or any action in behalf of such person, persons, firms or corporation, violating any of the provisions of this ordinance shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor or lesser offense at the discretion of the City Attorney. Each day that the violation of this ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense.
In addition to, or independent of the criminal penalties provided above, the City may bring a civil proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to enforce compliance with the terms of this ordinance, or to prevent, restrain, or abate any violation of the terms of this ordinance.
Any violation of this ordinance is declared to be a public nuisance, and instead of, or in addition to, any criminal or civil enforcement measure authorized by this ordinance, may be enjoined or restrained by the City as other nuisances are abated under city ordinances or state law.
10.04.060 Amendments
Amendments to this Land Use Ordinance which change property from one zoning district to another, which modify ordinance text, or which amend or modify stipulations or conditions of approval shall be adopted in accordance with this section. Any amendments or modifications to the maps or text of the City’s General Plan must also be done in accordance with the provisions of this section, in addition to the requirements found in Section 1.4 of the General Plan. (2008)

Amendments Submitted to Planning Commission: The city may not make any amendment authorized by this paragraph unless the amendment was proposed by the Planning Commission or is first submitted to the Planning Commission for its recommendations. (2006)
Procedure:
The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing and provide the proper notice in accordance with ECC 10.20.060 Table E: Notice Matrix.
If changing property from one zone to another, when considering any amendments to the Land Use Ordinance, the Planning Commission shall ensure compliance with the Land Use Classification Map found in the General Plan.
The Planning Commission shall make recommendations to the City Council concerning all proposed amendments.
After the Planning Commission’s recommendation, the City Council may:
adopt the land use ordinance as proposed;
amend the land use ordinance and adopt or reject the land use ordinance as amended; or
reject the ordinance.
Spot Zoning: The area within a zone need not be of a minimum size or include a minimum number of landowners. (Spot Zoning. Utah Code § 10-9a-505).
Reconsideration of Denied Amendments:
One Year Limitation: If a petition for a land use change or an ordinance amendment is denied by the City Council, or is withdrawn after the Planning Commission hearing, the Planning Commission shall not consider the petition or any other petition for the same land use change or amendment of this Ordinance as it applies to the same property described in the original petition, or any part thereof, within a period of one year from the date of such a denial, unless the conditions upon which the date of the original denial was based have substantially changed.
Substantial Change: For purposes of this Section, a substantial change in a request shall mean a substantial reduction in density and/or land area involved, a change in the proposed use, such as residential rather than commercial, or other factors which in the opinion of the City Council clearly constitute a significant change in a land use change request.
Subdivision Plat Amendments:
Lot line adjustments- metes and bounds: A petition to adjust common lot lines between one two or more properties by metes and bounds may be reviewed and approved by the Planning Director if the following conditions have been met:
No new lot is being created
All resulting lots will comply with the required setbacks, minimum lot size, and minimum frontage for the zone in which they reside
All affected property owners agree to the adjustment
Noticing requirements followed as outlined in ECC 1.20.060 Table E: Notice Matrix.
All Other Plat Amendments: All other plat amendments will be done in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, and in accordance with the Noticing Requirements as specified in ECC 10.20.060 Table E: Notice Matrix.
10.04.070 Annexations
Zone Classification: All land annexed to the city shall immediately receive the same zoning designation as the already zoned land with compatible surrounding uses within the City. 
Land Use Designations Outside City: Notwithstanding A above, the Planning Commission shall have the authority to recommend and the City Council to adopt, land use designations for properties lying outside of the city limits to determine, in advance of annexation, the zone or zones into which property will be zoned upon annexation.
Compliance: All annexations to the city shall comply with all laws and requirements of the city as laid out in the adopted Annexation Policy Declaration, and all laws and requirements of the state relative to annexation of land.
10.04.080 Vacation/Abandonment Of A Public Road Or Right-Of-Way
Hearing and notice for proposal to vacate, alter, or amend a public street or right of way. For any proposal to vacate, alter, or amend a public street or right-of-way, the legislative body shall hold a public hearing and shall give notice of the date, place, and time of the hearing in accordance with the Noticing Requirements as provided in ECC 10.20.060 Table E: Notice Matrix for Land Use Applications. The City Council may approve, approve with conditions, or reject the road vacation. (See Utah Code §§ 10-9-A-208, and 10-9-1-609.5)

10.04.090 Planning Director
Land Use Authority: The Planning Director shall act together with the Planning Commission as the Land Use Authority unless otherwise specified herein. The Planning Director shall be responsible for: 
Administration and interpretation of this ordinance, including clarification of the intent, and review of land uses described and included in a land use district. 
Enforcement of this ordinance.
Preparing application guidelines, forms, and administrative procedures.
Additional Responsibilities: Additional details of certain responsibilities may be provided in other sections of this ordinance. All decisions and interpretations of the Planning Director or Land Use Authority may be appealed to the appeal authority in accordance with Utah Code § 10-9a-701.
10.04.100 Appeal Authority
(see definition) In order to provide for just and fair treatment in the administration of local land use ordinances, and to ensure that substantial justice is done, there is hereby created an Appeal Authority to exercise the powers and duties provided by this section.

Organization: The Appeal Authority shall be appointed by the mayor with the consent of the City Council.
Powers and Duties: The Appeal Authority shall hear and decide:
Appeals from decisions applying the land use ordinance made by the Planning Director or Land Use Authority as designated by the City Council;
Variances from the terms of the land use ordinance.
Variances: Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of the requirements of this ordinance as applied to a parcel of property that he owns, leases, or in which he holds some authority for a variance from the terms of the ordinance:
The Appeal Authority may grant a variance only if all of the following five conditions are satisfied:
literal enforcement of the ordinance would cause an unreasonable hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general purpose of the land use ordinances:
there are special circumstances attached to the property that do not generally apply to other properties in the same zone;
granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zone:
the variance will not substantially affect the general plan and will not be contrary to the public interest;
the spirit of the land use ordinance is observed and substantial justice done
In determining whether or not enforcement of this ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship under paragraph C,1,a. The Appeal Authority may not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged hardship:
is located on or associated with the property for which the variance is sought; and
comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from conditions that are general to the neighborhood.
In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship under paragraph C,1,a, the Appeal Authority may not find an unreasonable hardship if the hardship is self-imposed or economic
In determining whether or not there are special circumstances attached to the property under paragraph B,2, the appeal authority may find that special circumstances exist only if the special circumstances:
relate to the hardship complained of; and
deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in the same zone.
The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the conditions justifying a variance have been met.
Variances run with the land.
The Appeal Authority may not grant a use variance; ie, change allowance uses for that particular zone, such as changing the use from residential to commercial, etc.
In granting a variance, the Appeal Authority may impose additional requirements on the applicant that will:
mitigate any harmful affects of the variance; or
serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived or modified. (Utah Code § 10-9a-702)
Appeals: Appeals from decisions made by the Planning Director or Land Use Authority in administering or interpreting this ordinance shall be processed and reviewed in accordance with this section.
The applicant, a board or officer of the municipality, or any person adversely affected by the land use authority’s decision administering or interpreting a land use ordinance may, within 10 days, appeal that decision by alleging that there is error in any order, requirement, decision, or determination made by the land use authority in the administration or interpretation of this ordinance.
The appellant has the burden of proving that the land use authority erred.
The Appeal Authority shall respect the due process rights of each of the participants.
Only those decisions in which the Planning Director or Land Use Authority has applied the land use ordinance to a particular application, person, or parcel may be appealed to the Appeal Authority. (Utah Code §§ 10-9a-703; 705; 706 (2); 707 (4))
Review and Public Hearing Procedures: Completed applications for both variances and appeals will be reviewed by the Planning Director or Land Use Authority and shall forward a recommendation to the Appeal Authority for approval, approval with conditions, or denial based upon consideration and evaluation of the “Findings.” The Appeal Authority shall hold at least one (1) public meeting on the application. Prior to the meeting, notice shall be given in accordance with State Law. as specified in the ECC 10.20.060 Table E: Notice Matrix. Where a variance will affect the location of a building or structure; i.e. setbacks, etc., any affected utilities must also be notified in writing at least 7 days before the meeting, including Natural Gas, Power, or other utility which requires minimum spacing from buildings, structures, etc. Notwithstanding the notice requirements set forth above, the failure of any person or entity to receive notice shall not constitute grounds for any court to invalidate the action for which the notice was given.
The Appeal Authority shall consider the recommendation of the Planning Director, or Land Use Authority together with information provided by the applicant, and any statements made at the public meeting both for and against the application. The Appeal Authority may approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application.
Final Decision: A decision of an appeal authority is final and takes effect on the date when the appeal authority issues a written decision, or within 30 days of the decision by appeal authority; whichever is sooner. (Utah Code § 10-9a-708)
10.08 DEFINITIONS - LAND USE REGULATIONS
10.08.010 Definitions - Land Use Regulations

10.08.010 Definitions - Land Use Regulations
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and construction of this Ordinance. Words used in the present tense include the future; the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; "building" shall include the word "structure"; the words "used" or "occupied" shall include arranged, designed, constructed, placed, located, altered, converted, rented, leased, or intended to be used or occupied; the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory, and the word "may" is permissive; the word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation as well as an individual; the word "lot" includes the words plot, or parcel. Words used in this Ordinance but not defined herein shall have the meaning as defined in any other Ordinance adopted by the City Council or as defined in the latest edition of Webster’s New Collegiate Dictionary.

"A" FRAME SIGN: Temporary and/or movable sign constructed with two sides attached at the top so as to allow the sign to stand in an upright position.

ABANDONED SIGN: A sign which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product, or activity, and/or for which no legal owner can be found.

ACCESSORY USE OR BUILDING: A use or building on the same lot with, and of a nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal use or building. For the purposes of this ordinance, accessory buildings include both permanent and temporary structures such as garages, carports, sheds, shipping containers, etc. regardless of whether said structures are unenclosed or enclosed. 

ACCESSORY APARTMENT: A dwelling unit that has been added onto, or created within, a single family house, incidental and secondary to the primary residence (not a duplex). See also “Dwelling Unit, Accessory”

AFFECTED ENTITY: A county, municipality, independent special district under Utah Code 17A-2, Independent Special Districts, local district under Utah Code 17B-2, Local Districts, school district, interlocal cooperation entity established under Utah Code 11-13, Interlocal Cooperation Act, specified public utility, or the Utah Department of Transportation, if: 

the entity’s services or facilities are likely to require expansion or significant modification because of an intended use of land; 
the entity has filed with the municipality a copy of the entity’s general or long-range plan; or 
the entity’s boundaries or facilities are within one mile of land which is the subject of a general plan amendment or land use ordinance change.
AGENT OR OWNER: Any person who can show written proof that he is acting for the property owner and with the property owner's knowledge and permission.

AGRICULTURE: The cultivating of the soil, raising of crops, horticulture and gardening; breeding, grazing and keeping or raising of domestic animals and fowl, except household pets; and not including any agricultural industry or business.

AGRICULTURAL INDUSTRY OR BUSINESS: An industry or business involving agricultural products in manufacturing, packaging, treatment, sales, intensive feeding, or storage, including but not limited to commercial greenhouses, feed yards, fruit stands, fur farms, food packaging or processing plants; commercial poultry or egg production, and similar uses as determined by the Planning Commission; provided, that any such use is of a substantial commercial or industrial character as determined by standards developed by the Planning Commission and approved by the City Council.

AIRPORT: Any area of land or water designed and set aside for the landing and the taking off of aircraft.

AIRPORT AREA: The area covered by airport approach zones, horizontal zones, conical zones, and transition zones, as defined herein.

ALLEY: A public access-way or thoroughfare less than sixteen feet but not less than ten feet in width, which is dedicated or deeded to the public for public use and is designed to give secondary access to lots or abutting properties; an alley shall not be considered a street, for the purpose of this Ordinance.

ALTERATIONS, SIGN: A change or rearrangement in the structural parts or design whether by extending on a side; increasing in area or height; or by relocation or changing the position of a sign.

ALTERATIONS, STRUCTURAL: Any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, columns, beams or girders.

AMUSEMENT PARK: Any place of organized amusement activity not conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building.

ANIMATED SIGN: (see also and note the difference from changeable sign) A sign or display manifesting either kinetic or illusionary motion occasioned by natural, manual, mechanical, electrical, or other means. Animated signs include the following types:

NATURALLY ENERGIZED SIGNS: Signs whose motion is activated by wind or other atmospheric impingement. Wind-driven signs include flags, banners, pennants, streamers, metallic disks, or other similar devices designed to move in the wind.
MECHANICALLY ENERGIZED SIGNS: Signs manifesting a repetitious pre-programmed physical movement or rotation in either one or a series of planes activated by means of mechanical based drives. Electrically Energized - Illuminated signs whose motion or visual impression of motion is activated primarily by electrical means. Electrically energized animated signs are of two types: 
FLASHING SIGNS: Illuminated signs exhibiting a preprogrammed repetitious cyclical interruption of illumination from one or more sources in 	which the duration of the period of illumination (on phase) is either the same as or less than the duration of the period of darkness (off phase), and in which the intensity of illumination varies from zero (off) to 100 percent (on) during the programmed cycle.
ILLUSIONARY MOVEMENT SIGNS: Illuminated signs exhibiting the illusion of movement by means of a pre-programmed repetitious sequential switching action in which illuminated elements of the sign are turned on or off to visually simulate the impression of motion characteristic of chasing, running, blinking, oscillating, twinkling, or expanding and contracting light patterns.
ANTENNA: A transmitting or receiving device used in telecommunications that radiates or captures electromagnetic waves used for communication.


APPEAL AUTHORITY: A person, board, commission, agency, or other body appointed by the mayor and approved by the City Council to decide an appeal of a decision of a land use application or a variance.

ARCHITECTURAL PROJECTION: Any building or structural projection which is not intended for occupancy and which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building or structure, but not including signs.

AREA  OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: The land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.

AREA, SIGN: (see "Sign, Area of")

ATTIC: That part of the building that is immediately below and wholly or partly within the roof framing. 
 
AUTOMATIC CAR WASH: A facility for automatic or self-service washing and cleaning of automobiles and small trucks not exceeding one and one-half tons capacity.

AUTOMOBILE PAINT AND BODY SHOP: A facility for the painting and body repair of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, or other travel or recreation vehicles or units.

AUTOMOBILE SALES AREA: An open area used for display, sale, or rental of new or used motor vehicles in operable condition.

AUTOMOBILE REPAIR FACILITY OR SERVICE STATION: A place where gasoline, or any other motor fuel, lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public and repair services performed may include tube and tire repair, battery charging, storage of merchandise, lubricating of automobiles, replacement of spark plugs, lights, fans and other small parts, including major auto repair.

AVERAGE PERCENT OF SLOPE: An expression of rise or fall in elevation along a line perpendicular to the contours of the land to the lowest point of land within an area or within a lot. A vertical rise of one hundred feet between two points one hundred feet apart, measured on a horizontal plane is a one hundred percent slope.

AWNING: A shelter projecting from and supported by the exterior wall of a building constructed of non-rigid materials on a supporting framework. (Compare "Marquee")

AWNING SIGN: A sign painted on, printed on, or attached flat against the surface of an awning.

BACK LIT AWNING: (see "Electric Awning Sign")

BANNER SIGN: A sign made of fabric or any no rigid material with no enclosing framework.

BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

BASEMENT: A story partly underground. A basement shall be counted as a story for the purposes of height measurement if its height is one half or more above the grade.

BASEMENT HOUSE: A residential structure without a full story structure above grade.

BED AND BREAKFAST: Shall mean overnight accommodations and a morning meal in a dwelling unit provided to individuals on a temporary basis for compensation

BEDROOM: A private room planned and intended for sleeping, separated from other rooms by a door, and accessible to a bathroom within the same dwelling unit.

BEGINNING OF CONSTRUCTION: The pouring of concrete footing for a building or structure.

BILLBOARD: (see "Off-premise Sign")

BLADE SIGN: (see "Ground Sign")

BLOCK: The land surrounded by streets or other rights-of-way, other than an alley, or land which is designed as a block on any recorded subdivision plat.

BOARDING HOUSE: Shall mean a dwelling or part thereof with shared facilities in which, for compensation, lodging is provided which may or may not include meals. For purposes of this ordinance, a boarding house shall not be considered as a temporary lodging facility.
 
BODY AND FENDER SHOP: A facility for major automobile, truck, mobile home, recreational vehicle repairs to the body, or fenders, and including major rebuilding.

BUILDABLE AREA: The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided, except that land with an average grade exceeding twenty (20) percent shall not be considered buildable area unless it is approved by conditional use permit for construction, after study by a geologist, soils engineer, or other qualified professional as required by the Planning Commission. See also ECC 10.04.040 Paragraph A and ECC 10.12.020 Paragraph C.

BUILDING: Any structure used or intended to be used for the sheltering of any use or occupancy, or enclosure of persons, animals, or property.

BUILDING, ACCESSORY: A building which is subordinate to, and the use of which is incidental to, that of the main building or use of the same lot. See also “Accessory Use or Building”. 

BUILDING, HEIGHT OF: The vertical distance from the average finished grade surface to the highest point of the building roof or coping.

BUILDING INSPECTOR: The official designated as the building inspector for Ephraim City.

BUILDING LINE: The line of the building that defines the space for that building’s occupancy.

CAMPGROUND: A public area designated by a public agency for camping, or a private area licensed by the county for camping.

CAMPING: A temporary establishment of living facilities such as tents or recreational vehicles for a period not to exceed fourteen days as regulated by this Ordinance.

CANOPY (BUILDING): A rigid multi-sided structure that may or may not be illuminated by means of internal or external sources, covered with fabric, metal or other material and supported by a building at one or more points or extremities and by columns or posts embedded in the ground at other points or extremities. (compare "Marquee")

CANOPY (FREESTANDING) A rigid multi-sided structure that may or may not be illuminated by means of internal or external sources, covered with fabric, metal or other material and supported by columns or posts embedded in the ground.

CANOPY SIGN: A sign affixed or applied to the exterior facing surface or surfaces of a building or freestanding canopy.

CARPORT: A private garage not completely enclosed by walls or doors. For the purposes of this Ordinance, a carport shall be subject to all the regulations prescribed for a private garage. (see also accessory buildings)

CELLAR: A room or rooms wholly under the surface of the ground, or having more than fifty percent of its floor to ceiling height under the average level of the adjoining ground. A cellar access shall be outside and not enter directly into another building or dwelling.

CHANGEABLE SIGN: A sign whose informational content can be changed or altered by manual or electric, electro-mechanical, or electronic means. Changeable signs include the following types:

MANUALLY ACTIVATED SIGNS: Signs whose alphabetic, pictographic, or symbolic informational content can be changed or altered by manual means.
ELECTRICALLY ACTIVATED SIGNS: Signs whose alphabetic, pictographic, or symbolic informational content can be changed or altered on a fixed display surface composed of electrically illuminated or mechanically driven changeable segments. Includes the following two types:
FIXED MESSAGE ELECTRONIC SIGNS: Signs whose basic informational content has been pre-programmed to include only certain types of information projection, such as time, temperature, predictable traffic conditions, or other events subject to prior programming.
COMPUTER CONTROLLED VARIABLE MESSAGE ELECTRONIC SIGNS: Signs whose informational content can be changed or altered by means of computer-driven electronic impulses. 
MOBILE CHANGEABLE COPY SIGN: A sign mounted on a trailer; frame or legs, lighted or unlighted, box or "A" frame and shall have changeable lettering.
CHILD NURSERY: An establishment for the care and/or the instruction of five or more children, for compensation, other than for members of the family residing on the premises, but not including a public school. A child nursery may be operated as a secondary use in a residential dwelling or in a building designed for a commercial operation as is permitted in the zoning district.

CHURCH: A building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, maintained and controlled by a duly-recognized religious organization where persons regularly assemble for worship.

CITY: The City of Ephraim, Utah.

CITY-OWNED PROPERTY: Real property that is owned, leased or controlled by the City.

CLEARVIEW ZONE; DRIVEWAYS (CORNER LOTS): refers to that portion of the corner lot lying within a triangular area formed by measuring back ten feet from the point where the interior property line shared with the adjacent lot meets the property line along the public right of way. See figure 1 below:



Figure 1: Clearview Zone: Driveways

CLEARVIEW ZONE; INTERSECTIONS: The area of a corner lot closest to the intersection which is kept free of impairment to allow full view of both pedestrian and vehicular traffic. Such area is established by marking a point at which the two curb lines intersect, measuring back forty feet along each street, and drawing a line between the two back points to form a triangular area, also referred to as “sight triangle”. See figure 2 below:



Figure 2: Clearview Zone (Sight Triangle)

CLINIC, DENTAL OR MEDICAL: A building in which a group of dentists, physicians, and allied professional assistants are associated for the conduct of their professions. The clinic may include a dental and/or a medical laboratory and an apothecary, but it shall not include in-patient care or operating rooms for major surgery.

CLUB, SOCIAL: Any organization, group, or association supported by its members where the sole purpose is to render a service to its members and their guests. Includes private non-profit locker clubs.

CO-LOCATION: The location of an antenna on an existing structure, tower or building that is already being used for personal wireless services facilities.

COMMON AREA: Any area or space designed for joint use of residents of a mobile home park, condominium, apartment complex, etc.

COMMUNITY MANAGEMENT: The person or persons who own or has charge, care or control of a mobile home park, condominium, apartment complex, etc.

COMPREHENSIVE PLAN: See General Plan

CONDITIONAL USE: A land use that, because of its unique characteristics or potential impact on the municipality, surrounding neighbors, or adjacent land uses, may not be compatible in some areas or may be compatible only if certain conditions are required that mitigate or eliminate the detrimental impacts. 
 
CONDOMINIUM: A project of two or more units where an individual owns the air space in a single unit together with undivided interest in common in the buildings, common areas and facilities of the property.

CONGREGATE RESIDENCE: Any building or portion thereof which contains facilities for living, sleeping and sanitation and may include facilities for eating and cooking, for occupancy by other than a family, but with a maximum occupancy of the lesser of ten persons or 2 persons per bedroom. A congregate residence may be a shelter, convent, monastery, dormitory, fraternity or sorority house, but does not include jails, hospitals, nursing homes, hotels or lodging houses. A congregate residence is permitted according to ECC 10.20.030 Table B. In the R2 and R3 residential zones, the maximum density may be further limited at the discretion of the land use authority, upon recommendation from the Planning Director, in order to mitigate any potential negative impacts to the adjoining residential properties. A congregate residence is not permitted in any R1, R1A, or RA zones of the City.

CONSERVATION STANDARDS: Guidelines and specifications for soil and water conservation practices and management, enumerated in the Technical Guide prepared by the USDA Soil Conservation Service, adopted by the Soil and Water Conservation District supervisors, and containing suitable alternatives for the uses and treatment of land based upon its capabilities, from which the land-owner selects that alternative which best meets his needs in developing his soil and water conservation plan.

CONSTRUCTION SIGN: A temporary sign identifying an architect, contractor, subcontractor, and/or material supplier participating in construction on the property on which the sign is located.

CONVENIENCE STORE: A one story commercial retail operation containing less than 2,500 square feet of gross floor area, designed and stocked to sell primarily food, beverages, limited variety of goods for personal consumption, and other household supplies to retail customers who purchase only a relatively few items as well as gasoline and car care items.

COPY, SIGN: The graphic content of a sign surface in either permanent of removable letter, pictographic, symbolic, or alphabetic form.

CORRAL: A space, other than a building, less than one (1) acre in area, or less than one hundred (100) feet in width, used for the confinement of animals or fowl.

COURT, BUILDING: An open, unoccupied space, other than a required yard, on the same lot with a building or group of buildings, and which is bounded on two or more sides by such building or buildings.

COVERAGE, BUILDING: The percent of the total site area covered by buildings.

CROSSWALK OR WALKWAY: A right-of-way to facilitate pedestrian access through a subdivision block; designed for use by pedestrians and not for use by motor vehicles; may be located within or without a street right-of-way, or separated from vehicular traffic.

DAIRY: A commercial establishment for the manufacture, processing or packaging of dairy products, and their sale; for purpose of this definition, the production of milk on a farm for wholesale marketing off the premises shall not be classified as a dairy.

DENSITY: The number of persons, units, apartments, dwellings, mobile homes or mobile home stands per acre of gross area.

DESIGN, SUBDIVISION: The design includes; alignment, grade and width for easements and rights-of-way for utilities; the grading and general layout of lots and streets within the area; location of land to be dedicated for park and/or recreational purposes; and, such specific requirements in the plan and configuration of the entire subdivision as may be necessary or convenient to insure conformity to or implementation of applicable general or specific plans.

DEVELOPMENT: Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations.

DIAGONAL TIE: Any tie-down designed to resist horizontal or shear forces and which deviates not less than 30 degrees from a vertical direction.

DIRECTIONAL/INFORMATION SIGN: An on-premise sign giving directions, instructions, or facility information and which may contain the name or logo of an establishment, but no advertising copy, e.g., parking or exit and entrance signs. May contain logo provided that the logo may not comprise more than 20% of the total sign area. May include information about sales of agricultural products produced upon the premises.
 
DISTRICT, LAND USE: A portion of the unincorporated territory of Ephraim City, established as a zoning district by this Ordinance, within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this Ordinance; also includes "zone" and "zoning district".

DOUBLE-FACED SIGN: A sign with two faces diverged from a common angle of not more than 45 degrees or back-to-back.

DRIVEWAY: A private right-of-way, providing access to only one parcel or facility the use of which is limited to persons residing, employed, or otherwise using or visiting the parcel on which the driveway is located.

DWELLING: Shall mean any building or portion thereof designed exclusively for residential occupancy, but not including hotels, motels, bed and breakfasts, or other temporary use lodging facilities. A dwelling can consist of one or more “dwelling units”. 

DWELLING, FARM OR RANCH HOUSING: Dwelling units constructed to provide housing for migratory or temporary farm workers, or for persons or families permanently working on a farm or a ranch.

DWELLING, MOBILE HOMES: (See "Mobile Homes")

DWELLING, SINGLE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by one family, the structure having only one dwelling unit.

DWELLING, TWO-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by two families, the structure having only two dwelling units.

DWELLING, THREE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by three families, the structure having only three dwelling units.
 
DWELLING, FOUR-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by four families, and having more than four dwelling units.

DWELLING, MULTIPLE-FAMILY: A building arranged or designed to be occupied by more than four families, and having more than four dwelling units.

DWELLING GROUP: A group of two or more detached buildings used as dwellings, located on a lot or parcel of land.

DWELLING UNIT: One or more rooms with private bath and kitchen facilities comprising of an independent, self-contained space for occupancy by one family, individual, and/or individuals for living and sleeping purposes. A unit may be attached or detached.

DWELLING UNIT, ACCESSORY: Shall mean a dwelling unit within a dwelling that is incidental and secondary to the primary residence (not a Duplex). See also “Accessory Apartment”

DWELLING UNIT, APARTMENT: A dwelling which contains three or more dwelling units

DWELLING, DUPLEX: A building containing two single family dwelling units totally separated from each other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof. 
 
EASEMENT: That portion of a lot or lots reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal owner of said property. The easement may be for use under, on or above said lot or lots. A vested or acquired right to use land, other than as a tenant, for a specific purpose; such right being held by someone other than the owner who holds title to the land.

ELECTRIC, MOBILE HOME PARK: All of the electrical wiring, fixtures, equipment and appurtenances related to electrical installations within a mobile home park feeder assembly.

ELECTRIC AWNING SIGN (also "Back Lit Awning"): An internally illuminated fixed space-frame structure with translucent, flexible reinforced covering designed in awning form and with graphics or copy applied to the visible surface of the awning.

ELECTRICAL SIGN: A sign or sign-structure in which electrical wiring, connection, or fixtures are used.

ELECTRONIC MESSAGE CENTER: (see "Changeable Signs, Electrically Activated")

ESSENTIAL FACILITIES: Utilities or sanitary and public safety facilities provided by a public utility or other governmental agency for overhead or surface or underground services. Any privately owned electrical sub-station or transmission line of fifty KV or greater capacity, including related facilities such as buildings, etc. requires a conditional use permit. (2010)

FAA - Federal Aviation Administration.

FCC - Federal Communications Commission.

FACADE: The entire building front including the parapet.

FACE OF A SIGN: The area of a sign on which the copy is placed.

FAMILY: An individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage or adoption, living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or a group of not more than two (2) persons living together as a single housekeeping unit in a dwelling unit; or a group of not more than four (4).
 
FARM OR RANCH: A farm is a parcel of land in an Agricultural land use district which is used primarily for horticultural or farming purposes, such as the growing of crops or other vegetative, or fruit agricultural uses. A ranch is a parcel of land in an Agricultural zoning district which is used primarily for ranching purposes, such as grazing of livestock or other non-vegetative or fruit agricultural use.

FEED YARD: A building or open enclosure where horses, cattle, sheep, goats, hogs, turkeys, ducks, geese, or guinea hens are kept in a relatively restricted area for intensive feeding in preparation for being sold or slaughtered as contrasted to open pasturage, provided that any such use is of a substantial commercial or industrial character as determined by standards developed by the Planning Commission and adopted by the City Council.

FEEDER ASSEMBLY: The overhead or under-chassis feeder conductors, including the grounding conductor, together with the necessary fittings and equipment, or a power supply cord listed for mobile home use, designed for the purpose of delivering energy from the source of electrical supply to the distribution panel board within the mobile home.

FENCE: An artificially constructed barrier of any material or combination of materials erected to enclose, screen, or separate areas.

FESTOONS (SIGN): A string of ribbons, tinsel, small flags, or pinwheels.

FINAL PLAT: A subdivision map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, which is designed to be placed on record in the office of the County Recorder.

FIRE PROTECTION: Such water supply, water lines, fire hydrants and other protective devices as may be required in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.

FLASHING SIGN: (see "Animated Sign, Electrically Energized")

FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 

The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or 
the unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD HAZARD: A hazard to land or improvements due to inundation or overflow water having sufficient velocity to transport or deposit debris, scour the surface soil, dislodge or damage buildings, or erode the banks of water courses.

FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (FIRM): An official map of a community on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated areas of special flood hazard designated as Zone A.

FLOODLIGHTED SIGN: (see "Illuminated Sign")

FLOODPLAIN: Any land area susceptible to be inundated by water from the base flood. As used in this ordinance, the term refers to that area designated as subject to flooding from the base flood (100 year flood).

FLOODWAY: The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot.
 
FLOOR AREA: Area included within surrounding walls of a building or portion thereof, exclusive of vents, shafts, and courts.

FOREST INDUSTRY: An industry which uses forest products, such as sawmill, pulp or paper plant, wood products plant, and similar uses.

FREESTANDING SIGN: A sign supported permanently upon the ground by poles or braces and not attached to any building.

FRONT YARD SETBACK: That part of a lot, extending the full width of the lot, which is between the front property line and the front building line. The depth of the front yard is measured from the front lot line, curb face, or the edge of the pavement of the road (if the city finds that no widening of the road is anticipated) to the building line of the building. If the property line falls within the easement of a prescriptive use right of way, a substitute front lot line shall be established by finding the centerline of the road, measuring thirty feet from that centerline and then measuring the front setback from there. Unenclosed stoops (porches) of thirty six square feet or less are not considered the front line of a building. (See also: Setback, Front and Lot, Corner)

FRONTAGE, BLOCK: All property fronting on one side of the street between intersecting or intercepting streets, or between a street and a right-of-way, waterway, end of dead-end streets, or political subdivision boundary, measured along the street line. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the frontage on the side of the street which it intercepts or that common line between a lot and a public street.

FRONTAGE, BUILDING: The length of an outside building wall on a public right-of-way or an approved private road.

FRONTAGE, LOT: The lineal measurement of the front lot line.

GARAGE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building, or a portion of a main building, used or intended to be used for the storage of motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, snow mobiles, or other recreational vehicles.

GARAGE, REPAIR: A structure or portion thereof, other than a private garage, used for the repair of self-propelled vehicles, trailers, or boats, including general repair, rebuilding or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles, recreational vehicles, and minor collision service, but not including major body, frame or fender repairs or overall automobile or truck painting, except as permitted in the land use matrix. A repair garage may also include incidental storage, care, washing, or sale of automobiles.

GENERAL PLAN (OR MASTER PLAN): A long range generalized plan adopted by the City Council for Ephraim City, Utah.

GEOLOGICAL HAZARD: A hazard inherent in the crust of the earth, or artificially created, which is dangerous or potentially dangerous to life, property, or improvements, due to the movement, failure, or shifting of the earth. Such hazards also include rock fall or avalanche.

GRADE: The lowest point of elevation of the finished surface of the ground, paving or sidewalk within the area between the building and the property line or, when the property line is more than five feet from the building, between the building and a line five feet from the building.

GOVERNING BODY: The City Council of Ephraim City, Utah.

GOVERNMENT SIGN: Any temporary or permanent sign erected and maintained by the city, county, state or federal government.

GROUND ANCHOR: Any device used for the purpose of securing a mobile home or any other structure to the ground.

GROUND SIGN (also "Blade Sign"): A sign which is anchored to the ground similar to a pylon or freestanding sign, but which has a monolithic or columnar line and which maintains essentially the same contour from grade to top. Height and setbacks are to be the same as for freestanding signs.

GUYED TOWER: A tower that supports an antenna or antennas and requires guy wires or other stabilizers for support.

HEIGHT (of a Sign): The vertical distance measured from the highest point of the sign, excluding decorative embellishment (see “Sign: area”), to the grade of the adjacent street or the surface grade beneath the sign, whichever is less. (compare "Sign: Clearance")

HOME OCCUPATION: Any use conducted entirely within a dwelling and carried on by persons residing in the dwelling unit and no more than one employee hired outside of the home who will work within the home, which use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character thereof and in connection with which there is no advertising, except as otherwise permitted herein, no public display outside of the dwelling unit except as provided in ECC 10.20.040 Table C, and no noise created which is audible at the boundaries of the premises. The intent of this definition is that the conditional use permit approving any home occupation shall assure that the character of the premises and of the neighborhood will remain in harmony with the general intent of the zoning district and that, where uncertainty exists, neighborhood residential values shall be considered paramount. (See ECC 10.12.020 Paragraph G governing issuance of home occupation permits). 

HOSPITAL: Institution for the diagnosis, treatment and care of human illness or infirmity, but not including sanitariums, clinics and instant care facilities.

HOTEL/MOTEL: Shall mean a building with or without kitchen facilities offering temporary use accommodations to general public

HOUSEHOLD PETS: Animals or fowl ordinarily permitted in the house and kept for company or pleasure, such as dogs, cats, and canaries, etc.. Household pets shall not include the keeping of inherently or potentially dangerous animals, such as lions or tigers, etc.

IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A sign whose copy is limited to the name and address of a building, institution, or person and/or to the activity or occupation being identified.

ILLEGAL SIGN: A sign which does not meet the requirements of this code and which has not received non-conforming status.

ILLUMINATED SIGN: A sign with an artificial light source incorporated internally or externally for the purpose of illuminating the sign.
 
IMPROVEMENT: May include, but is not limited to, street construction, water systems, sewer systems, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, drainage facilities, on site, street trees, street signs, street lights, traffic control or safety devices, fire hydrants, and such other facilities, utilities, or construction as is required by the Subdivision Chapter, Regulations or the Planning Commission and/or City Council.

INCIDENTAL SIGN: A small sign, emblem, or decal informing the public of goods, facilities, or services available on the premises, e.g., a credit card sign or a sign indicating hours of business.

INOPERATIVE VEHICLE OR TRAILER: Any vehicle or trailer that due to mechanical, electrical, structural problems, or lack of maintenance, cannot operate as it was originally constructed and designed to do or should not be operated due to conditions rendering it as unsafe. This includes any vehicle or trailer that is not currently licensed or which its operation is in violation of local, state and federal laws. 

INTERIOR SIGN: A sign located within a building so as to be visible only from within the building in which the sign is located.

INUNDATION: Ponded water or water in motion of sufficient depth or velocity to damage property, due to the presence of the water or to the deposit of silt.

JUNK: Any salvaged or scrap copper, brass, iron steel, metal, rope, rags, batteries, paper, wood, trash, plastic, rubber, tires, waste, or other articles or materials commonly designated as junk. Junk shall also mean any dismantled, wrecked or inoperable motor vehicles or parts thereof which remain in such condition for a period of time in excess of sixty days. An automobile, truck or bus shall be considered as inoperable if it is parked or stored on property outside of an enclosed garage and is not currently registered and licensed in this state or another state.

JUNK YARD: The use of any lot, portion of a lot, or tract of land for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap material, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles, or other vehicles, or machinery or parts thereof; provided that this definition shall be deemed not to include such uses which are clearly accessory and incidental to any agricultural use permitted in the district.

KENNEL: Any premises where three or more dogs older than four months are kept, except that more than three of such dogs may be kept in the agricultural, and multiple-use districts as an accessory to permitted and conditional uses allowed in that zoning district, examples are: sheep dogs on a ranch, seeing eye dogs in a handicapped residential facilities, etc.

LAND USE APPLICATION: An application required by any Ephraim City Land Use Ordinance.

LAND USE AUTHORITY: A person, board commission agency or other body designated by the City Council to act upon a land use application. Unless otherwise specified, the Planning Commission and/or Planning Director shall act as Land Use Authority for all land use decisions as governed by the provisions of this ordinance.

LAND USE ORDINANCE: The uniform land use ordinance of Ephraim City, Utah, which are also known as Zoning, Subdivision, and Development Ordinances. (2006)

LANDSCAPING: The installation of some combination of planted trees, shrubs, vines, ground cover, flowers, or lawns. In addition, the combination of design may include rocks, and such structural features as fountains, pools, artworks, screens, walls fences, walks, or benches, but such objects alone shall not meet the requirements of this title. 

LATERAL SEWER: A sewer which discharges into another sewer and has only sewer inlets from buildings and structures tributary into it.

LATTICE SEWER: A self-supporting three or four-sided, open steel frame structure used to support telecommunications equipment.

LIGHT VEHICLE OR EQUIPMENT MAINTENANCE: The performance of routine maintenance tasks such as; Changing the oil, checking tire pressure, replacing water hoses, etc., which do not involve the removal, repair or replacement of major mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, pneudralic, or components of the vehicle. 

LOCAL ATTORNEY: The City Attorney or any other attorney officially representing Ephraim City.

LOCAL BUILDING INSPECTOR: The building inspector employed by or officially representing Ephraim City.

LOCAL ENGINEER: The engineer employed by or officially representing Ephraim City.

LOCAL GOVERNING BODY: (See Governing Body)

LOCAL HEALTH OFFICER: The health officer or department with jurisdiction in Ephraim City.

LOCAL JURISDICTION: Ephraim City, Utah

LOCAL PLANNER: The Planning Director or any other planner employed by or officially representing Ephraim City, Utah.

LOCAL SURVEYOR: The County surveyor or any other surveyor officially representing Ephraim City, Utah.

LOT: A parcel or unit of land described by metes and bounds and held or intended to be held in separate lease or ownership, either as an undeveloped or developed site, or a parcel or unit of land shown as a lot, plat, or parcel on a recorded subdivision map, or shown on a plat used in the lease or sale or offer of lease or sale of land resulting from the division of a larger tract into two or more smaller units.

LOT AREA: The total area reserved for exclusive use of the occupants of a dwelling unit.

LOT, CORNER: A lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection or upon two parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five degrees. For placement of structures on a corner lot please see definition for Setbacks, Corner.

LOT DEPTH: The horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines measured in the main direction of the side lot lines.

LOT FRONTAGE: The lot frontage required is the length of the front lot line which, is coterminous with the front street lines.

LOT, INTERIOR: A lot other than a corner lot.

LOT LINE: The property lines bounding the lot. A line bounding the lot as shown on the accepted plot plan.

LOT LINE, FRONT: To an interior lot, the lot line adjoining the street; for a corner lot or through lot, the lot line adjoining either street, as elected by the lot owner. (2006)
 
LOT LINE, REAR: Ordinarily, that line of a lot which is opposite and most distant from the front line of the lot. In the case of a triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line ten (10) feet in length within the parcel parallel to and at the maximum distance from the front line. In cases where these definitions are not applicable, the land use officer or building inspector shall designate the rear lot line.

LOT LINE, SIDE: Any lot boundary line not a front or rear lot line. A side lot line separating a lot from another lot or lots is an interior side lot line; a side lot line separating a lot from a street is a street side lot line.

LOT RIGHT-OF-WAY: A strip of land of not less than sixteen feet in width connecting a lot to a street for use as private access to that lot.

LOT WIDTH: The minimum lot width for each zoning district shall either remain consistent or expand larger form the front to the rear setback.

LOW PROFILE SIGN (also "Monument Sign"): A sign mounted directly to the ground with maximum height not to exceed six feet.

MAINTENANCE SIGN: For the purposes of this Ordinance, the cleaning, painting, repair, or replacement of defective parts of a sign in a manner that does not alter the basic copy, design, or structure of the sign.

MAINTENANCE, VEHICLE OR EQUIPMENT: The maintenance or repair of a vehicle or piece of equipment that is other than routine maintenance, which the result of is to make it operable or safe to operate. May involve; the removal and/or replacement of major mechanical, electrical, hydraulic, pneumatic or other components, modification in design, operation or structure.

MANSARD: A sloped roof or roof-like facade architecturally comparable to a building wall.

MANUFACTURED HOME: A transportable factory built housing unit constructed on or after June 15, 1976, according to the Federal Home Construction and Safety Standards act of 1974 (HUD Code), in one or more sections, which in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length, or when erected on site, is 400 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems. All manufactured homes constructed on or after June 15, 1976, shall be identifiable by the manufacturer's data plate bearing the date the unit was manufactured and a HUD label attached to the exterior of the home certifying the home was manufactured to HUD standards. (Refer to Utah Code § 10-9-1-514.)

MARQUEE: A permanent roof-like structure or canopy of rigid materials supported by and extending from the facade of a building. (Compare "Awning")

MARQUEE SIGN: Any sign attached to or supported by a marquee structure.

MINE: A site from which ore, gravel, rock, minerals, precious metals or natural substances, that are other than plant or animal organisms, can be extracted. It includes the site of the mine with its surface buildings, structures, elevator shafts, and equipment.
 
MINING: The process or business of extracting ore, gravel, rock, minerals, precious metals or natural substances from the surface and/or below the surface of the earth.

MOBILE HOME: A transportable factory built housing unit built prior to June 15, 1976, in accordance with a state mobile home code which existed prior to the Federal Manufactured housing and Safety Standards Act (HUD Code). Designed to be a long term residential dwelling unit, with or without a permanent foundation, and originally constructed as a complete package which includes major appliances, plumbing, and electrical facilities prepared for appropriate connections. No permanent connections for water or sewer shall be granted, nor shall occupancy be permitted for any structure which is less than 40 feet long or 8 feet wide. Temporary offices on work sites are permitted in accordance with the other provisions of this ordinance. See also “Trailers”. (2010)

MODULAR HOME: A permanent dwelling structure built in prefabricated units, which are assembled and erected on the site, or at another location and brought as a unit to the site; said modular home is classed as a mobile home until it is placed on a permanent foundation and complies with all applicable building codes.

MONOPOLE:A single, self-supporting, cylindrical pole, constructed without guy wires or ground anchors which acts as the support structure for antennas.

MONUMENT SIGN: (see "Low Profile Sign")

MOTEL/HOTEL: Shall mean a building with or without kitchen facilities offering temporary use accommodations to general public

MULTIPLE-FACE SIGN: A sign containing three or more faces, not necessarily in back-to-back configuration.

NAMEPLATE (SIGN): A non-electric on-premise identification sign giving only the name, address, and/or occupation of an occupant or group of occupants.

NATIONAL COOPERATIVE SOIL SURVEY: The soil survey conducted by the U.S. Department of Agriculture in cooperation with the State Agricultural Experiment Station and other Federal and/or Utah State agencies.

NATURAL WATERWAYS: Those areas, varying in width, along streams, creeks, springs, gullies or washes which are natural drainage channels as determined by the Building Inspector in which areas no buildings shall be constructed.

NONCOMPLYING STRUCTURE: A structure that; 

legally existed before its current land use designation; and
because of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not conform to setback, height restrictions, or other regulations, excluding those regulations that govern the use of land. (2006) 
NONCONFORMING SIGN: 

A sign which was erected legally, but which does not comply with subsequently enacted sign restrictions and regulations.
A sign which does not conform to the sign code requirements, but for which a valid sign permit has been issued.
NONCONFORMING USE: A use of land that; 

legally existed before its current land use designation; 
has been maintained continuously since the time the land use ordinance regulation governing the land changed; and 
because of one or more subsequent land use ordinance changes, does not conform to the regulations that now govern the use of the land. (2006)
NURSING HOME: An institution, other than a hospital, for the care of human illness or infirmity in which care, rather than diagnosis or treatment, constitutes the principal function. The term "nursing home" shall also include "rest home" and "convalescent home".

OCCUPANCY: The portion of a building or premises owned, leased, rented, or otherwise occupied for a given use.

OCCUPIED AREA: The total of all of the lot area covered by a building and its accessory buildings on a lot.

OFFICE, LOW IMPACT BUSINESS OR PROFESSIONAL: A professional office business that meets the following criteria and requirements:

Contains a maximum of four (4) employees on any given shift or as otherwise approved by the Planning Commission on a case-by-case basis;
Operating Hours are limited to between 7 AM - 6 PM;
Adequate off-street parking is provided for employees and customers;
Professional offices only – no food/retail/manufacturing;
Occupies an existing residential structure;
Sight obscuring fence required (6’ tall minimum) along the perimeter of the property;
Aesthetic landscaping – particularly along the front of the property – is provided and maintained; and
Signs limited as per sign ordinance for residential zones
OFFICIAL MAP: A map of the city used to show existing and/or future roads, zoning, rights of way and/or other land use applications. (2006)

OFF-PREMISE SIGN (also "Billboard"): A sign structure advertising an establishment, merchandise, service, or entertainment, which is not sold, produced, manufactured, or furnished at the property on which said sign is located, e.g., "billboards" or "outdoor advertising".

OFF-SITE DIRECTIONAL SIGN: A sign which provides directional assistance to access an establishment conveniently and safely. Such signs shall be limited by the Land Use Authority in size, height, and placement as justified.

OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE: The space required to park one passenger vehicle, which space shall meet the requirements of this Ordinance.

OFF-SITE IMPROVEMENTS: Improvements not on individual lots but generally within the boundaries of the subdivision which they serve, and as further outlined in this Ordinance.

ON-SITE IMPROVEMENTS: Construction or placement of the dwelling and its appurtenant improvements on a lot.

ON-PREMISE SIGN: A sign which pertains to the use; product or commodity sold; service performed on the premises and/or property on which it is located.

OPEN SPACE: The area reserved in parks, courts, playgrounds, golf courses, and other similar open areas to meet the density requirements of planned unit developments.

OPEN SPACE, USABLE: Usable open space shall be any portion of a lot or building which meets all the following conditions: 

The space shall be open to the sky or shall be open to view in at least two sides.
The space shall be readily accessible by foot traffic from the building to which it is accessory. 
The space shall not be provided from any required front or side yard, parking area, or driveway space.
OWNER: The holder of the fee title to land or buildings or to property, whether a person, partnership, corporation, or other entity recognized by law, and his or its lessees, permittees, assignees, or successors in interest.

OVERHANGING SIGN: (see "Mansard, Roof Sign")
 
PACKAGE AGENCY: A retail liquor location operated under a contractual agreement with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Department, by a person other than the state, who is authorized by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission to sell package liquor for consumption off the premises of the agency.

PAINTED WALL SIGN: Any sign which is applied with paint or similar substance on the surface of a wall.

PARAPET: The extension of a false front or wall above a roofline.

PARCEL OF LAND: (See "Lot")

PARKING LOT: An open area, other than a street, used for the parking of automobiles and available for public use, whether free, for compensation, or accommodation for clients or customers.

PEDESTAL SIGN: A temporary and/or movable sign supported by a column(s) and a base so as to allow the sign to stand in an upright position.

PEDESTRIAN-WAY: (See "Cross-walk")

PERMANENT MONUMENT: Any structure of concrete, masonry and/or metal permanently placed on or in the ground, including those expressly placed for surveying reference, which meets the requirements of Sanpete County and/or the State of Utah for permanent monuments.

PERSON: Any individual, corporation, association, firm, partnership, or similarly defined interest.

PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES: “Personal wireless services” has the same meaning as provided in Section 704 of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (47 U.S.C. § 332(c)(7)(c)), which includes what is commonly known as cellular and Personal Communication System (PCS) services.

PERSONAL WIRELESS SERVICES FACILITIES: Facilities for the provision of personal wireless services, hereafter referred to as “wireless facilities”. Wireless facilities include transmitters, antennas, structures supporting antennas, and electronic equipment that is typically installed in close proximity to a transmitter.

PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT ZONE (PUD ZONE): A zoning district, the boundaries of which are to be shown on the land use map, but the regulations for which shall be determined by a general development plan to be adopted by the City Council, after public hearing, as required for other zoning districts.

PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT (PUD): An integrated design for development of residential, commercial or industrial uses, or limited combinations of such uses, in which the density and location regulations of the district in which the development is situated may be varied or waived to allow flexibility and initiative in site and building design and location, in accordance with an approved plan and imposed requirements.
 
PLAT: Any map, plan or chart of a city, town, section or subdivision, indicating the location and boundaries of individual properties.

PLOT: A parcel of land consisting of one or more lots or portions thereof which is described by reference to a recorded plat or metes and bounds.

PLOT PLAN: A plat of a lot, drawn to scale, showing its actual measurements, the size and location of any existing buildings and/or structures or buildings and/or structures to be erected, the location of the lot in relation to abutting streets, and such other information as may be required by the Planning Commission.
 
POINT OF PURCHASE DISPLAY: Advertising of a retail item accompanying its display, e.g., an advertisement on a product dispenser, tire display, etc.

POLE COVER (SIGN): Cover enclosing or decorating poles or other structural supports of a sign.

POLITICAL SIGN: A temporary sign used in connection with a local, state, or national election or referendum.

PORTABLE SIGN: Any sign designed to be moved easily and not permanently affixed to the ground or to a structure or building.

PREFABRICATED HOUSING: (See Modular Home)

PREMISES: A parcel of land with its appurtenances and buildings which, because of its unity of use, may be regarded as the smallest conveyable unit of real estate for that zoning district.

PRELIMINARY PLAT: A drawing, to scale, representing a proposal to subdivide a tract, lot or parcel of land, and meeting the preliminary plat requirements of this ordinance.

PRE-SECTIONED HOME: (See Modular Home)

PRIVATE NON-PROFIT LOCKER CLUB: A social, recreational, or athletic club, or kindred association, incorporated under the provisions of the Utah Non-profit Corporation and Cooperation Act, which maintains or intends to maintain premises upon which liquor is or will be stored, consumed, or sold.

PRIVATE NON-PROFIT RECREATIONAL GROUNDS AND FACILITIES: Non-profit recreational grounds and facilities operated by a non-profit corporation, association, or group.

PRIVATE PROPERTY: Any real property not owned by the City or another public or governmental entity.

PRIVATE STREET: A private owned way or lane which affords principal means of access to abutting individual dwellings, mobile homes, condominiums, community service buildings or apartments.

PROCESS OR PROCESSING: The act, business or procedure of taking raw, extracted or pre-processed material and adding to or taking away from it, to produce a product that is purer, used, marketed, or uniquely different than the original raw material or product before the procedure was enacted.

PROJECTING SIGN: A sign, other than a flat wall sign which is attached to and projects from a building wall or other structure not specifically designed to support the sign.

PROPERTY SIGN: A sign related to the property upon which it is located and offering such information as the address, the property, warning against trespassing, any hazard, or other danger on the property. (see "Identification Sign")

PROTECTION STRIP: A strip of land between the boundary of a subdivision and a street within the subdivision, for the purpose of controlling the access to the street by property owners abutting the subdivision.

PUBLIC STREET: A public way which affords principal means of access to abutting properties. 

PUBLIC SYSTEM (WATER OR SEWAGE): A system which is owned and operated by a local governmental authority or by an established public utility company which is adequately controlled by a governmental authority. Such systems are usually existing systems serving a municipality, a township, an urban county, or a water or sewer district established and directly controlled under the laws of the state of Utah.

PUBLIC HEARING: A hearing at which members of the public are provided a reasonable opportunity to comment on the subject of the hearing.

PUBLIC MEETING: A meeting that is required to be open to the public under Utah Code 52-4, Open and Public Meetings.

REAL ESTATE SIGN: A temporary sign advertising the real estate upon which the sign is located as being for rent, lease, or sale.

REAR YARD SETBACK: That part of a lot between the rear building line and the rear lot line, and extending the full width of the lot. The depth of the rear yard is measured from the rear lot line to the building line of the building. Unenclosed stoops of thirty-six square feet or less are not considered the rear line of a building. (See also Setback, Rear.)

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle, such as a travel trailer, tent camper, camp car or other vehicle with or without motive power, designed and/or constructed to travel on the public thoroughfare in accordance with the provisions of the Utah Vehicle Code, and designed for use as a human habitation for a temporary and recreational nature.

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARK: Any area or tract of land or a separate designated section within a mobile home park where lots are rented or held out for rent to one or more owners or users of recreational vehicles for a temporary time not to exceed thirty days. Such park may also be designated as "Overnight Park."

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE SPACE: A plot of ground within a recreational vehicle park designated and intended for the accommodation of one recreational vehicle.

RESIDENCES WITH A DISABILITY: Refer to Utah Code § 10-9-A-520.

RIGHT-OF-WAY: The area, either public or private, over which the right-of-passage exists.

ROOFLINE: The top edge of a roof or building parapet, whichever is higher, excluding any mansards, cupolas, pylons, chimneys or minor projections.

ROOF LINE: On buildings without a pitched roof, the roof line shall mean the top of the exterior wall elevation. On buildings with a pitched roof, roof line shall mean the ridgeline of the roof.

ROOF MOUNTED ANTENNA: An antenna or series of individual antennas mounted on a roof, mechanical room or penthouse of a building or structure.

ROOF SIGN: Any sign erected partly or wholly over or on the roof of a building. A structure having main supports embedded in the ground shall not be considered to be a roof sign even if the sign's supports pass through a roof, canopy, or parapet of a building. (compare "Mansard, "Wall Sign")

ROTATING SIGN: (see "Animated Sign, Mechanically Energized")

RUNWAY (AIRPORT) A defined area on an airport prepared for landing and takeoff of aircraft.

SALT: Any component, solid or liquid, of the Sodium elements, such as Sodium Chloride, Potash, Sodium Hydroxide, Brine, etc.

SCHOOL PRIVATE: A school which is operated by a quasi-public or private group, individual, or organization, and which has curriculum similar to that provided in any public school in the state of Utah. Private schools may be non-profit, or profit-making establishments.

SCHOOL, PUBLIC: A school operated by a school district or other public agency in the State of Utah.

SETBACK, CORNER LOT: Those setbacks required for structures on a corner lot. (see definition Lot, Corner). When considering the placement of a structure on the lot, corner lots are considered to have a front setback adjoining each street, along with a rear setback and an interior side setback. The property owner may choose which is the rear setback, and which is the interior side setback. The street location determines the front setback, not the orientation of the house, The Planning director may allow two front setbacks and two side setbacks if normal rear setbacks cannot be met with any other configuration of the house on the lot. 

SETBACK, FRONT: That part of a lot, extending the full width of the lot, which is between the front property line and the front building line. The depth of the front yard is measured from the front lot line to the front line of the building. If the property line falls within the easement of a prescriptive use right of way, a substitute front lot line shall be established by finding the centerline of the road, measuring thirty three feet from that centerline and then measuring the front setback from there. Unenclosed stoops (porches) of thirty six square feet or less are not considered the front line of a building. (See also: Lot, Corner)

SETBACK, REAR: That part of a lot between the rear building line and the rear lot line, and extending the full width of the lot. The depth of the rear yard is measured from the rear lot line to the building line of the building. Unenclosed stoops of thirty-six square feet or less are not considered the rear line of a building.

SETBACK, SIDE: That part of a lot between the side building line and the side lot line, and extending from the Front Yard setback to the Rear Yard setback. The width of the side yard is measured from the side lot line to the building line of the building. Unenclosed stoops of thirty six square feet or less are not considered the side line of a building.
 
SEWER CONNECTION: A connection consisting of all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the drain outlet of the building to the inlet of the corresponding sewer riser pipe of the sewage system serving the development.

SEWER RISER PIPE: That portion of the sewer which extends vertically to at least ground elevation and terminates at each mobile home stand.

SIDE YARD SETBACK: That part of a lot between the side building line and the side lot line, and extending from the Front Yard setback to the Rear Yard setback. The width of the side yard is measured from the side lot line to the building line of the building. Unenclosed stoops of thirty six square feet or less are not considered the side line of a building. (See also Setback, Side)

SIGN: Any device, structure, fixture, or placard using graphics, symbols, and/or written copy for the primary purpose of identifying, providing directions, or advertising any establishment, person, entity, interest, product, goods, or services. It includes any structural supports, lighting systems, attachments, ornaments or other features.
	
SIGN, AREA OF:

PROJECTING AND FREESTANDING SIGN: The area of a freestanding or projecting sign shall have only one side of any double or multiple-faced sign counted in calculating its area. The area of the sign shall be measured as follows if the sign is composed of one (1) or more individual cabinets:
A rectilinear line of not more than eight (8) sides shall be drawn around and enclosing the perimeter of each cabinet or module. The area shall then be summed and totaled to determine total area. The perimeter of measurable area shall not include embellishments such as pole covers, framing, decorative roofing, support structures, etc., provided that there is no written advertising copy on such embellishments.
WALL SIGN: The area shall be within a single, continuous perimeter composed of any rectilinear line, geometric figure which encloses the extreme limits of the advertising message. If the sign is composed of individual letters or symbols using the wall as the background with no added decoration, the total sign area shall be calculated by measuring the area within the perimeter of each symbol or letter. The combined areas of the individual figures shall be considered the total sign area.
SIGN CLEARANCE: The smallest vertical distance between the grade of the adjacent street, highway, or street curb and the lowest point of any sign, including framework and embellishment, if extended over that grade.

SIGN, ELECTRONIC MESSAGE: (see "Animated Sign, Electrically Energized")

SIGN, FREE-STANDING: (see "Freestanding Sign")

SIGN IDENTIFICATION AND INFORMATION: (see "Identification Sign")

SIGN, ILLUMINATED: (see "Illuminated Sign")

SIGN, MARQUEE: (see "Marquee Sign")
 
SIGN SETBACK: The minimum distance that any portion of a sign or sign structure shall be from any street right-of-way line and yard line coterminous with a street or road.

SIGHT TRIANGLE: See “clearview zone” 

SITE PLAN: A plan required by, and providing the information required by this ordinance.

SKETCH PLAN: A generalized layout of a proposed subdivision or development, with accompanying general proposals and intentions of the subdivider or developer, and relating the proposed subdivision or development to its area, public utilities, facilities, services, and to special problems which may exist in the area.

SNIPE SIGN: A temporary sign or poster affixed to a tree, fence, etc.

SPECIAL DISTRICT: An entity established under the authority of Utah Code 17A, Special Districts, and any other governmental or quasi-governmental entity that is not a county, municipality, school district, or unit of the State. (2006) 

STABLE, PRIVATE: A detached accessory building for the keeping of horses owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for hire, enumeration or sale.

STABLE, PUBLIC: Any stable where horses are boarded and/or kept for hire.

STATE STORE: A facility for the sale of package liquor located on premises owned or leased by the state of Utah and operated by state employees. State store does not apply to any licensee, permittee, or to package agencies.

STEALTH FACILITIES: Wireless facilities, including transmission antennas, support equipment, equipment buildings and structures, that have been designed to be compatible with the natural setting and surrounding structures, that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas, towers or equipment, and that have been certified as “Stealth Facilities” by the Planning Commission.

STORY: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it and including those basements used for the principal use. 

STORY, HALF: A partial story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which on at least two opposite exterior walls do not extend more than four feet above the floor of such story, and the floor area does not exceed two-thirds of the floor area immediately below it.

STREET: Shall mean public or private land used as a public thoroughfare primarily for vehicular traffic which provides access to property including all land which has been dedicated, condemned, or abandoned to the public for such use whether improved or unimproved. 

STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building or manufactured home that is principally above ground.

STRUCTURE HEIGHT (CELL TOWER): The vertical distance of a transmission facility measured from its base at grade to the top of the facility, including any attached antenna. If the facility is on a slope, the height shall be measured from the average elevation point to the top of the structure.

STRUCTURE APPROVED FOR CO-LOCATION (CELL TOWER): A structure approved by the Planning Commission with space for co-location as per ECC 10.12.080 Paragraph E.

SUBDIVIDER: Any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who causes land to be divided into a subdivision for himself of others.

SUBDIVISION: Any land that is divided, re-subdivided or proposed to be divided into two (2) or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease, or development either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms, and conditions. It includes the division or development of land whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise and testacy, lease, map, plat, or other recorded instrument. It does not include a bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for agricultural purposes or of commercial, manufacturing, or industrial land for commercial, manufacturing or industrial purposes.

SUBDIVISION, CLUSTER: A subdivision of land in which the lots have areas less than the minimum lot area of the district in which the subdivision is located, but which complies with the cluster subdivision provisions of this Ordinance and in which a significant part of the land is privately reserved or dedicated as permanent common open space to provide low-density character for the residential lots in the subdivision.

SUBDIVISION IDENTIFICATION SIGN: A freestanding or wall sign identifying a recognized subdivision, condominium complex, or residential development.

SUBDIVISION VACATION: The process of removing from record a section of land that was subdivided into plats for development or sale, lease or to offer for sale. The subdivision area vacated ceases to exist, and the land is one parcel, and must be re-subdivided to sell in smaller sections.

TEMPORARY SIGN: A sign not constructed or intended for long-term use, with a maximum time period of ninety days.

TIEDOWN: Any device designed for the purpose of anchoring a mobile or manufactured home or other structure to ground anchors.

TRAILER: A structure standing on wheels, towed or hauled by another vehicle, and used for short-term human occupancy, carrying of materials, goods, or objects, or as a temporary office. See also: definition of “Mobile Home”, and ECC 10.12.020 of this ordinance for provisions for temporary buildings. 

TOWER: A free-standing structure, such as a monopole tower, lattice tower, or guyed tower, that is used as a support structure for antenna(s).

UNDER-CANOPY SIGN: A sign suspended beneath a canopy, ceiling, roof, or marquee.

UNLICENSED MOTOR VEHICLE: Any vehicle which initially was designed or constructed to be self-propelled and which is not currently registered or licensed by the State of Utah, but does not include vehicles exempt from registration under state law. "Unlicensed Motor Vehicle" does not include any motor vehicle kept or stored at an approved impound lot or commercial storage yard.

USE: The purpose for which a building, lot, sign or structure is intended, designated, occupied, or maintained.

VACATION PLAT: A plat submitted for the purpose of removing a subdivision from the records of the County Recorder and the County Assessor. The plat shows the area that is to return to its original state. No plats exist in the area, the land is one parcel after approval.

VICINITY PLAN: A map or drawing, to scale, showing the physical relationships of the proposed development to existing or proposed streets, buildings and utilities; other relevant information such as special terrain or surface drainage, and existing land use classifications of all land within three hundred feet of the property proposed for development.

VIEW-OBSCURING FENCE, WALL OR HEDGE: A fence, wall, or hedge of vegetation growth which prevents full view of property on one side by a viewer standing on the other side.

WALL MOUNTED ANTENNA: An antenna or series of individual antennas mounted on the vertical wall of a building or structure.

WALL SIGN: A sign attached essentially parallel to and extending not more than eighteen inches from the wall of a building with no copy on the sides or edges. This definition includes painted, individual letters, and cabinet signs, and signs on a mansard.

WATER CONNECTION: A connection consisting of all pipes, fittings, and appurtenances from the water riser pipe to the water inlet pipe of the distribution system within the dwelling.

WATER RISER CONNECTION: That portion of the water supply system which extends vertically to at least ground elevation and terminates at the water inlet pipe for each mobile home lot or dwelling.

WINDOW SIGN: A sign installed inside a window and intended to be viewed from outside the building.

WIRELESS FACILITY(IES): See Personal Wireless Services Facilities.

YARD: A required open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as permitted elsewhere in this Ordinance.

YARD, FRONT: (See: Front Yard Setback)

YARD, REAR: (See: Rear Yard Setback)

YARD, SIDE: (See: Side Yard Setback)

ZONE: (See "district, land use")

ZONING ADMINISTRATOR: The local official designated by the City Council to enforce the regulations of the Ordinance.

HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 16-01 on 3/30/2016
10.12 GENERAL AND SUPPLEMENTARY REGULATIONS
10.12.010 Effect
10.12.020 Supplementary Regulations To All Zones
10.12.030 Nuisance And Abatement
10.12.040 Fences, Walls And Hedges
10.12.050 Signs; General Regulations
10.12.060 Parking
10.12.070 Conditional Uses
10.12.080 Cell Phone Towers
10.12.090 Storm Water And Flood Damage Prevention
10.12.100 Center Of Block Development Standards
10.12.110 Condominium Conversion Projects
10.12.120 Sexually Oriented Businesses
10.12.130 Nonconforming Uses
10.12.140 Development Sequence (Reserved)
10.12.150 Enforcement And Responsibility
10.12.160 Guarantee Of Improvements Required
10.12.170 Option 1; Deposit With City (Preferred)
10.12.180 Option 2; Bond
10.12.190 Option 3; Escrow
10.12.200 Legal Remedies For Violation
10.12.210 Prohibited Travel Of Heavy Vehicles On City Streets

10.12.010 Effect
The regulations hereafter set forth in this Chapter qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the zone regulations appearing elsewhere in this Ordinance.

10.12.020 Supplementary Regulations To All Zones
Zoning Map: There shall be a map created and maintained for the purposes of graphic illustration and physical location of the various zoning in the City; hereafter known as the official zoning map of Ephraim City. This map shall be located in the department of Planning and Zoning and maintained by the Planning Director or his designee, according to the direction of the City Council. For the purposes of this ordinance, the terms “zoning” and “land use” may be used interchangeably. (2006)
Lots in Separate Ownership: The minimum lot area, lot widths, or minimum setback requirements of this ordinance shall not be construed to prevent the use for a single family dwelling any lot or parcel of land if that lot or parcel of land was held in separate ownership as of January 1, 1994.
Lot Standards:
Lot Standards:
Except for planned unit developments, large lots as defined herein, or as otherwise provided by City ordinance, every lot shall have such area, width and depth as required for the zoning district in which it is located and shall have frontage upon a dedicated or publicly-approved street which meets the adopted road standards of the City before any building permit may be issued, except residential lots may front upon private roads approved by the City Council after consideration by the Planning Commission. Any lot fronting a private street shall only be allowed if emergency access requirements are met as determined by the Ephraim Fire Chief. Flag Lots and center of block developments shall be developed in accordance with ECC 10.12.100. For lots which are one and a-half acres or bigger frontage improvements will be required as per ECC 11.16.020 Paragraph B; Subdivisions.
Buildable Lot Requirements on Slopes: Structures shall not be built on slopes 20% or greater unless the final design is reviewed and approved by a professional geotechnical engineer or similarly qualified professional and a conditional use permit has been issued for the development. The City Engineer may require professional review for projects on slopes less than 20% if in his opinion the field conditions of the site warrant additional review due to unusual conditions or terrain. (See also definition for “Buildable Area”)
Lot Improvements: A building permit for a primary building on a lot will only be issued on the condition that the lot be improved with curb/gutter, sidewalk, and asphalt along the street frontage of the lot in accordance with the Development Sequence and Guarantee of Improvements as outlined in ECC 10.12.140 through 10.12.200, and minimum utilities (including water, sewer, power, and gas) are available and adequate to service the property. Except as provided herein for large lots and otherwise specifically exempted by the city council due to exceptional circumstances, all development, whether single family, multi family, commercial, or subdivision development shall provide frontage improvements as per these ordinances. Any required improvements not installed before approval (road, sidewalk, drainage, and public utilities) must be bonded, deposited to escrow, or otherwise financially guaranteed in manner acceptable to the City, prior to issuance of permit. (See also paragraph N)
Sale Or Lease Of Required Space: No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking or other requirements of this ordinance for a lot or building may be sold or leased away from such lot or building.
Sale Of Lots Below Minimum Space Requirements: No parcel of land which has less than the minimum frontage, width and area requirements for the zone in which it is located may be severed from a larger parcel of land for any purpose whatsoever.
Home Occupations: Home based businesses, which meet all of the requirements below are permitted in all commercial and residential zones and may be approved by the Planning Director or his designee. Contested applications require approval of the Planning Commission. Home based businesses require a Home Occupation permit and a business license from the City. Businesses not meeting all of the conditions below may apply for a conditional use permit in accordance with ECC 10.12.070 if the use is listed in ECC 10.20.030 Table B Land Use Matrix.
The business is conducted entirely within the dwelling.
The use is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the home for residential purposes and does not change the character thereof
There shall be no advertising signs outside of the dwelling unit except as permitted in ECC 10.20.040 Table C.
No noise is created which is audible at the boundaries of the premises
There is no outdoor storage, outdoor display of merchandise, nor parking/storage of any vehicle in excess of twelve thousand pounds (12,000 lbs) gross vehicle weight.
The use is limited to the on-site employment of immediate family members who occupy the dwelling, plus one additional employee. (This criterion is not intended to limit the number of employees who are engaged in business for the home occupation but work off-premises.);
The use shall not alter the residential character or appearance of the dwelling or neighborhood;
The use shall not occupy more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the dwelling;
The use shall not generate business-related vehicular traffic in excess of three (3) vehicles per hour;
The use shall not cause a demand for municipal services in excess of that associated with normal residential use;
The use is not a mortuary, animal hospital, kennel, clinic, hospital, RV service, junkyard, and auto repair service, public stable or adult oriented business.
All adjoining land owners which are surrounding and across from the property must be notified and have opportunity to comment on the application as instructed in the Home Occupation permit application.
Any application which is contested by the neighbors or which warrants additional review in the opinion of the Planning Director, shall be forwarded to the Planning Commission for review and consideration. If the Planning Commission deems it necessary, the application may be forwarded to the City Council for a final decision. In such a situation, the application must secure a conditional use permit from the Council after recommendation by the Planning Commission.
Exception: The following types of businesses are not required to obtain home occupation permit so long as a Business License is obtained and conditions 1 through 11 above are met:
Those businesses such as licensed contractors, painters, electricians, private consultants, etc. which typically perform their business at offsite locations, or;
Those businesses which perform their business, whether by internet or otherwise, such that clientele will typically not be entering the premise and there will be no noticeable impact to the neighborhood in the form of increased traffic, excessive noise, outdoor storage of equipment or materials, delivery trucks for other than standard mail delivery services, etc.
Those businesses meeting the above conditions may be approved as a Home Occupation in all zones regardless of whether the business is listed as permitted or not in a given zone. (2012)
Yards Unobstructed – Exceptions:
Every part of a required yard shall be unobstructed and open to the sky, except for:
accessory buildings in a rear yard;
the ordinary projections of eaves, skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices, chimneys, flues, and like features which project into a yard not more than two and one half feet; and
Projections allowed by the building or fire codes for fire safety purposes shall be allowed to extend into a yard not more than five feet.
In no case shall a stoop, cantilever, eave, or other projection extend into any designated easement for public utilities, drainage, access, etc.
Exceptions to Height Limitations: All buildings and structures must conform to the height limit of the zoning district in which they are located. No space above the height limit shall be allowed for purposes of providing additional floor space. The following are the only exceptions which shall be allowed to the height limits in any zoning district:
penthouse or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans, or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building;
fire or parapet walls, skylights, steeples, flagpoles, chimneys, smokestacks, and theater lofts;
public and quasi-public utility buildings; and
provided the City Council issues a conditional use permit authorizing the same: towers, water tanks, wireless and television masts, and silos.
Minimum Height of Main Building: No dwelling shall be erected to a height of less than one story above grade without the approval of the Planning Commission.
Accessory Buildings: (see definition) All detached buildings or structures, including carports or shipping storage containers, must meet the following requirements:
Must be located behind the front wall plane of the principal structure for non- corner lots.
For corner lots, the accessory building may not extend closer to either road than the principle structure on the lot, and/or closer than the required front or front side setbacks unless located behind a sight obscuring fence which meets the provisions for fences in this ordinance, as approved by the Planning Director.
Accessory buildings shall not cover more than 30% of the rear yard
Accessory buildings, including carports, may be attached or detached to the existing house or any other structure, in accordance with applicable fire and building codes, including provisions for fire walls.
Accessory buildings shall not contain more than one story unless the City Council issues a conditional use permit authorizing more than one story.
Accessory buildings or structures must meet the following requirements:
Must be set back at least 5 feet from property lines unless firewalls are provided for walls which lay closest and parallel to property lines, as approved by the building inspector or designee
The roof must be no taller than 12 feet tall at the property lines and may slope higher at the maximum rate of 1 vertical foot per horizontal foot away from the property line. Buildings taller than 12 feet must be set back from property lines at least 1 foot for every foot above 12 foot in height.
Exceptions to this setback requirement for height may be granted by the Planning Director or designee if all adjoining property owners agree to the proposed height in writing.
Accessory buildings or structures over 200 square feet in area must have a building permit and comply with all requirements of this ordinance and the building and fire codes.
No building which is accessory to any residential dwelling shall be erected to a height greater than twenty-five feet.
Private garages and accessory buildings located less than 5 foot from the property line must also meet the following:
the roof shall not project across the property line;
storm water runoff from the building shall not flow onto adjacent property.
Accessory buildings shall not provide living quarters nor act as a dwelling unit or an accessory apartment to the primary dwelling residence unless granted through a conditional use permit. Such accessory buildings used for residential occupancy shall only be permitted as specified in this ordinance.
Detached Dwelling Units: On properties where a primary residence exists, there shall not be allowed additional detached dwelling units on the property without first obtaining a conditional use permit. Such detached dwelling units shall be limited in the number of allowed dwelling units by the zone in which they preside, and shall meet all requirements typical of any multi-family development, including but not limited to: off street parking, setbacks, landscaping, access and ingress/egress, minimum frontage, required frontage improvements, sight-obscuring fencing, and any other provisions as required by this ordinance for multifamily use. All detached dwelling units must be spaced at least 16 feet away from the primary dwelling on the lot unless appropriate fire and safety codes can be satisfied otherwise.
Curb, Gutter and Sidewalk, and Asphalt: Except as provided elsewhere in this ordinance for large lots, at the time of issuance of a building permit for the primary structure on a lot, the installation of curb, gutter and sidewalk and asphalt of a type approved by the city is required along the frontage of the lot on any existing street where such improvements are not already in existence or where existing improvements are not in good repair in accordance with the policies of Ephraim City. (see also paragraph E). Those property owners who permanently remove existing sidewalk may be required by the City to replace the removed sidewalk at their expense. Failure by the property owner to replace the sidewalk within a reasonable timeframe after written notice from the City may result in action taken by the City in accordance with ECC 10.04.050 to compel the owner to replace the sidewalk. (2008)
Improvements Encroaching Into the Public Right of Way: Those properties with strips of land between their property line and the public right of way along the road may utilize the public right of way with soft landscaping such as grass, small shrubs, low profile flowers, or other landscaping to help maintain and beautify the street-scaping, so long as said improvements do not include permanent structures of any kind, including fencing or walls of any kinds except as provided herein, buildings, etc. and do not affect the ability to maintain pedestrian and other traffic along said right of way nor cause public safety hazard in any form.
Exception: Walkways and driveways may be paved with concrete in these areas, in accordance with Ephraim City Standards. Trees may be planted in these areas so long as they do not constitute a site or safety hazard for pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or negatively impact existing utilities in the right of way.
The City Council may approve fences, in accordance with applicable fence requirements, to be placed within the city right of way so long as provisions are made to preserve walkway and utility easement corridors as defined in city development standards, and an agreement is recorded with the property which acknowledges the presence of the city right of way and states the true location of the property line, along with appropriate conditions of approval.
Ephraim City maintains all rights of easement associated with the public right of way and shall not be liable for any damage to improvements within the public right of way due to utility or other typical municipal work done in the public right of way.
Utility Requirements: In all areas of the City, connection shall be made to public water, electrical and sewer facilities unless waived by the City due to exceptional circumstances of terrain or otherwise. All utilities shall be located underground unless specifically approved otherwise by the City, and all construction shall comply with City and State building codes and standards.
Clear View of Intersecting Streets:
In all districts requiring a front yard, no obstruction to view in excess of three feet high or twelve inches wide shall be placed on any corner lot within the clear view area. Pole signs and a reasonable number of trees pruned to at least ten feet clearance to grade to permit unobstructed vision to automobile drivers and pedestrians are permitted.
Signs or other advertising structures shall not be erected at the intersection of any street or driveway in such a manner as to obstruct free and clear vision. They shall not be erected at any location where by reason of the position, shape or color, they may interfere with, obstruct the view of or be confused with any authorized traffic sign, signal device, or make use of the words, “Stop,” “Drive-in, “Danger,” or any other words, phrases, symbols or characters in such a manner as to interfere with, mislead or confuse vehicle operators.
Permanent Residential Placement of Mobile and Manufactured Homes: This section is enacted to ensure that manufactured homes are included in the spectrum of available housing options, to ensure that they are treated as much like any other type of residential construction as is practicable (in accordance with state law) and to protect the residential character of the neighborhoods in which these units are placed.
Location and use:
Mobile homes (see definition) are hereby banned from placement in the city.
No manufactured home shall be located, placed, used or occupied in any zoning district other than where allowed by this ordinance.
Manufactured homes may be stored, displayed and sold in commercial and industrial zones when such use is permitted or conditionally permitted. They shall not be occupied in those zones except where a residential structure permit is issued for temporary placement as allowed in this ordinance.
Manufactured homes may be placed in any zone where single-family residential units are permitted, provided:
each unit is placed, with the wheels and running gear removed, on a permanent foundation in accordance with plans providing for vertical loads, uplift, lateral forces and frost protection in compliance with the applicable building code;
a building permit has been issued for the unit;
the unit is being placed on a buildable lot in accordance with city ordinances and regulations;
and the unit complies with all local land use, subdivision requirements and pertinent building codes applicable to single family residential uses within that zone.
Temporary Buildings: A building nonconforming as to type or location may be approved by the Planning Director for use as a temporary residence, sales office, commercial building or industrial building during the construction of permanent facilities. Approval shall not be made for a period extending more than one year. Extensions may be granted for cause by the Planning Director for additional six month terms up to a maximum of eighteen months or three such extensions.
Trailers shall not be granted permanent residential occupancy within the limits of the City and shall not be permitted to obtain permanent connections for water or sewer. For uses not related to construction of a building, temporary residential occupancy of trailers may be granted for no more than 90 days unless an extension is specifically granted by the City Council for cause. Permanent residential occupancy shall not be granted for any mobile structure less than 40 feet long or 8 feet wide.
Dumping or disposal:
Prohibited: The use of land for the dumping, storage, or disposal of scrap iron, junk, garbage, rubbish or other refuse, or of ashes, slag, or other industrial wastes or by products, is prohibited in every zone except as otherwise provided in this ordinance.
Excavated Material: The dumping of dirt, sand, rock or other material excavated from the earth shall be permitted in any zone provided:
that the ground surface is in a condition suitable for other use permitted in the zone; and
such fill does not increase the susceptibility of the property or surrounding properties to erosion, landslide, flooding or other dangerous condition.
Concrete may be dumped as fill in excavations where it will be buried and not remain on land surface.
Topsoil: No person shall strip, excavate or otherwise remove topsoil for sale or for use other than on the premises from which the same was taken, except in connection with the construction or alteration of a building on those premises or where an excavation permit has been issued by the city.
Any of the materials mentioned in the preceding paragraphs shall not be permitted to be dumped on any street, sidewalk, or public right of way. Violators may be given 24 hours notice to remove all materials from the public right of way after which a citation may be given in accordance with the provisions of this ordinance. (2008)
Storage Prohibited: No yard or other open space in any zone shall be used for the storage of junk, debris, abandoned or inoperable motor vehicles or equipment.
Approved Containers Required: No trash, rubbish, weeds or other combustible material shall be allowed to remain on any lot outside of approved containers in any residential or commercial zone. No junk, debris, inoperable or dismantled motor vehicle or similar material shall be stored or allowed to remain on any lot in any residential zone for longer than seven days.
Alteration of Grades: No land, parcel, or parts of a parcel shall be altered in depth or height more than four feet combined depth and height until the project has been reviewed by the city and issued a permit to do so by the Planning Director.
Historic Properties: Registered historic properties shall follow the guidelines as defined by the Historic Preservation Commission in conjunction with the Utah State Historic Registry.
Weight limit on Roads:
Prohibited Travel: No heavy vehicle shall be allowed to travel upon City streets posted by Ephraim City indicating that such travel and use is prohibited except for vehicles making deliveries or servicing the posted streets. These vehicles may include, but not be limited to public works, public safety, utility, or other vehicles making deliveries or providing services to or from destinations on said posted streets.
For purposes of this ordinance heavy vehicles shall be defined as any vehicle having a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of 20,000 pounds or greater. The GVWR shall be measured by the manufactures placard located on the vehicle.
Dogs and Cats: Up to 4 dogs, or 4 cats, or any combination of cats and dogs not exceeding 4 total animals are allowed on any premise in any zone in the city, in accordance with all applicable ordinances and laws regarding licensing, vaccinating, keeping and care of such animals.
10.12.030 Nuisance And Abatement
Public Nuisances: It is hereby declared unlawful and a public nuisance for:
Any building or structure to be erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved, or maintained contrary to the provisions of city ordinances, applicable building codes or state or federal law, and 
any land, building premises to be used, established, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of city ordinances, applicable building codes or state or federal law.
Abatement: The City Attorney shall, upon the request of the City Council, immediately commence action or proceedings for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law, and shall take other steps and apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as well as abate property use or remove such building or structure that violates this provision.
Remedies Cumulative: The remedies provided herein may be cumulative and not exclusive.
10.12.040 Fences, Walls And Hedges
Height Restrictions: Fences, walls, and hedges may not exceed seven feet in height. The City Council may waive this height requirement at its sole discretion.
Sight-Obscuring Limitations: Notwithstanding any other provisions herein, no sight-obscuring fence, wall or hedge exceeding three feet in height shall be erected or allowed closer to any street line than the required building setback line or within the clearview zone for the intersection if on a corner lot (see paragraph C). In these restricted areas, substantially open fences such as chain link or wrought iron may be four feet high unless approved otherwise by the Planning Commission.
Corner Lots: Houses on corner lots may have open or solid fencing along the rear, interior side, and exterior side property lines of the house up to seven feet tall, which do not encroach closer to the street than the primary front setback line or within the driveway and intersection clearview zones as described herein. Those properties which adjoin a driveway of the adjacent property must preserve a ten foot sight triangle to allow visibility to pedestrians on the sidewalk for those backing out of the adjoining driveway. (see figure 10-3-4-C-1 below).


Figure 10.12.040-C-1: Fence Height Restrictions & Sight Triangles
Single Shrub Planting: For purpose of this section, single shrub planting shall not constitute a hedge if the closest distance between the foliage of any two plants is and remains at least five feet.
Property Line Separation Height Requirement: Where a fence, wall, or hedge is located along a property line separating two lots and there is a difference in the grade of the properties on the two sides of the property line, the fence, wall, or hedge may be erected or allowed to the maximum height permitted on either side of the property line.
Building Permit Required: Fences over 7 feet tall must be approved by the City Council and require a building permit.
Fence Lines Adjacent to Sidewalk(s): Where sidewalk improvements have been made, fence lines may be adjacent to the sidewalk(s) in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance.
Multi Family Dwelling Unit Requirements: All new multi-family dwelling units must install a sight obscuring fence at least 6 feet tall around the interior side and rear sides of the property at the time of obtaining a building permit or expansion. (2006,2008) Note: This section does not supersede height requirements in the front setback listed in paragraph C. 
Exception: the following fences are exempt from these requirements so long as they do not constitute a safety hazard for vehicular and/or pedestrian traffic:
Fences needed for safety purposes, such as utility areas, water ways, swimming pools, etc.
Rear facing lots in subdivisions.
Fences used for Government purposes
Fences used for basketball, tennis or other sports related play areas (2006, 2008)
10.12.050 Signs; General Regulations
Purpose: It is the purpose of this section to regulate and authorize signs that are compatible with their surroundings and legible under the circumstances in which they are seen; promote traffic safety and the convenience and enjoyment of public travel by minimizing visual distraction; protect pedestrians, attract tourists, preserve and enhance property values; establish first-class business and commercial districts; and promote civic beauty and order by establishing standards and regulations for sign design, location, size, type, compatibility, and aesthetics.
Scope: This section regulates the design and placement of signs and related structures. It is not intended to regulate the protected content of public speech, and the regulations herein are intended to be content-neutral unless explicitly stated otherwise. These regulations apply to both on-premise and off-premise signs, but not to the official flags of any country, state, or other organization, provided the flag does not contain an advertisement or other commercial message; nor to hand-held placards and similar devices traditionally used for public protest and the exercise of free speech.
Interpretation: The regulations of this section are declared to be the maximum allowable. If Planning Director feels it necessary, the application may be forwarded to the Planning and Zoning Commission for review and decision. (2012)
Compliance Required: Any sign not expressly allowed by this ordinance is prohibited. When required, permits shall be secured from the city by making application to the Planning Director who shall review applications for compliance with this ordinance and all other applicable regulations. When the Planning Director determines that it is necessary, the applicant must also apply for and receive a building permit.
Prohibited Signs: The following sign devices are prohibited in any zone:
hot or cold air balloons or inflatables, except as specifically allowed by this section for temporary signs;
any sign which flashes, blinks, uses chaser lights, or moves in any way, animate or inanimate, except commercial signs with time/temperature or electronic message center capability, and except for subtle lighting changes of low intensity;
statuary bearing the likeness or suggestion of any product or logo; projecting signs which extend more than 18 inches away from or above the wall, except as provided by this ordinance;
snipe signs;
rapidly spinning wind-driven signs;
temporary signs, except as specifically allowed in this section;
signs on bus benches;
any truck, trailer, or other vehicle conspicuously or regularly parked on- or off-premise with an advertising message or logo displayed to attract attention to a business, product or promotion;
graffiti.
Other Regulations: 
No person shall paint, mark or write on, post or otherwise affix any hand-bill or sign to or upon any sidewalk, crosswalk, curb, curbstone, park strip, street lamp post, hydrant, tree, shrub, tree stake or guard, railroad trestle, electric light or power or telephone or telegraph or trolley wire pole, or wire appurtenance thereof or upon any lighting system, public bridge, drinking fountain, life saving equipment, street sign or traffic sign. 
Nothing in this section shall apply to the painting of house numbers upon curbs. Any non-commercial message may be substituted for any commercial message permitted under this section. 
Illuminated signs not intended for temporary promotional events shall prevent excess light pollution into the night time sky. Externally lit signs must be downward lit or utilize directional hoods on the lights such that excess light will not be cast into the night time sky. (2006)
The allowable sign area shall be in accordance to ECC 10.20.040 Table C. (2012)
Permitted Signs:
Primary Signs: Designed or intended to communicate or advertise to persons outside the property or to attract attention, traffic or business to the property. Rules governing primary signs shall be interpreted, as much as possible, in a content-neutral manner. Additional Rules: 
Sign area is calculated according to frontage toward which the sign is oriented, no other frontage counts toward allowable area.
20% allowable increase in sign area for monument signs - with Planning Commission approval. 
In the C-1 Commercial Zone of Ephraim, each separate building may utilize one projecting sign, subject to the following conditions: 
The maximum size allowed is twenty (20) square feet, or as otherwise determined by the available frontage of the lot; whichever is less. 
The sign may not project out from the plane of the building more than four (4) feet. 
The sign may not exceed the height of the building facade.
For buildings with multiple tenants, the owner shall decide what portion of the projecting sign will be allotted to each tenant. 
The projecting sign will be included in the total allowable sign area per lot, as defined by this ordinance. 
All other provisions of this ordinance must be met, including lighting requirements, motion/animation requirements, height and clearance requirements, etc.
No sign shall overhang the sidewalk or public right-of-way except that in commercial zones, if the building location is less than 20 feet from the property line, the sign may overhang the sidewalk if it has at least 8 and ½ feet of clearance.
The total square footage allowed is the maximum per lot. For lots with more than one tenant, or needing more than one sign, the proportion allotted to each shall be decided by the tenants or the property owner.
Exception to total allowable sign area: On premise awning signs, identification signs, incidental signs, nameplate signs, wall signs, and window signs, as defined by this ordinance, shall not be included in the total allowable sign area as established by this ordinance. Instead these signs are limited only by the area of the front wall of the building on which the sign is located, such that no sign or combination of signs listed in this paragraph shall cover more than 40% of the area of the front wall of the building. 
This exception is only to be applied to on-site, on-premise that are attached to the building. This exception shall not be applied or used for any business or other entity that does not reside in the building on which the sign is located. 
All signs which qualify for the exception to allowable area must meet all the other criteria of this ordinance, including lighting, animation, etc. (2006)
Secondary Signs: Secondary signs arise out of safety or functional needs of a given piece of property and are intended to address specific issues related to the safe or efficient use of the property. Examples of secondary signs are entrance/exit signs, parking signs, restaurant menu boards, etc (see ECC 10.20.040 Table C, Part 2). 
Government Signs: Signs erected by a government agency in the course of official operations are allowed without a permit provided they do not constitute a traffic or safety hazard. 
Historical Signs: Signs considered being historically significant to the community and meeting the intent of the General Plan may be maintained with Planning Commission approval, regardless of any non conforming status with this ordinance, so long as the sign does not impose any safety hazard or undue hardship to the public or neighboring properties.
Banners, Flags, and Decorations on City Poles: Only banners, flags, and decorations or approved by City Council will be allowed on City poles, except poles immediately adjoining Snow College campus wheron Snow College may place college-owned banners, flags, and decorations approved by City Council.
Temporary Signs: Temporary signs shall not be placed in or over a public right-of-way, may not flash, blink, spin, rotate, block traffic visibility, constitute a vehicular or pedestrian traffic hazard, or cause a public nuisance. They shall not be attached to telephone poles, light poles, or street signs/poles. They must be firmly secured. Temporary signs may be attached to existing permanent signs for the grand opening period, or may cover or obscure an existing permanent sign only if the business has changed hands or changed names.
Temporary signs announcing the initial opening of a business or the relocation or change of ownership of an existing business are allowed for not more than 60 days and only within the first year of operation. There shall be no more than two such signs allowed per business. A temporary sign permit is required.
Signs advertising a business’s special promotions require a permit if the promotion will last more than three (3) days. Such promotions shall not exceed four periods during the calendar year. Each period may not exceed ten days in length. The periods may be combined to run consecutively. A temporary sign permit is required for all promotional events lasting more than 3 days.
Signs advertising the liquidation of inventory for a failing business require a permit, which shall not exceed 90 days. Such permit will be allowed only once for any business license.
Signs advertising the availability of a building or property are allowed provided they are removed within one week of the sale or rental.
Temporary signs are allowed without a permit for 
the following holidays: 

Presidents Day - February, 5 days, 
Easter - March or April, 5 days,
Memorial Day - May, 5 days,
July 4th and July 24th, 5 days each,
Labor Day - September, 5 days,
Thanksgiving - November, 7 days,
Hanukkah, Christmas, New Year's, 21 days from Dec 15 to Jan 2.
One sign only is allowed during these periods. The sign must be removed by the end of the first working day after the holiday period ends. 
Historical markers issued or approved by a recognized governmental, nation-wide or state-wide historical society or group are allowed without a permit provided the property owner has given written permission. Other historical markers are allowed with the approval of the Planning Director. No historical marker may be placed in such a manner as to constitute a safety or traffic hazard.
Portable Signs Encroaching into the Public Right of Way: For those businesses located within the C1 zone, which have no space between the building and the right of way, A-Frame signs and/or portable signs as defined herein may be placed in the public right of way or on the sidewalk (but not in the road) so long as no hazard is created for pedestrian or vehicular traffic and pedestrian access is maintained across the sidewalk. Said signs shall only be allowed during daylight hours only and must be removed every day at the close of business. For those businesses with space between the building and right of way, said portable signs may be used for promotional events but must be placed entirely on private property such that the sign does not encroach into the public right of way and said signs must be removed within 2 days after the promotional event.
Enforcement:
When a sign has been illegally erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or in any case where a sign is used in violation of any city ordinance or code, the Planning Director may:
Issue a written notice of violation to the person having charge, control or benefit of any sign found to be unsafe, dangerous, or in violation of this ordinance;
remove unsafe signs not repaired or made safe within five working days after the owner has received written notice; 
remove illegal signs not made conforming within 30 days after written notice has been given;
remove temporary signs posted on private property without a permit or which are otherwise illegal, which, after written notice, have not been made conforming after 72 hours; 
remove any sign or hand-bill posted on public property, but shall not destroy the sign for a period less than 30 days from the date of removal; 
remove abandoned signs, signs identifying a discontinued use or non-maintained signs when such sign has not been repaired or put to use by the owner, person having control or person receiving benefit of such structure within 45 days after receiving written notice from the city.
Any person ordered to alter or remove any sign, or any person whose application for a sign permit has been denied because of conflict with regulations stated herein, may appeal to the Appeal Authority by serving a written notice to the city within thirty days of the order or denial. Any person may also appeal to the Appeal Authority for an alleged error by the Planning Director or staff.
The person having charge, control, or benefit of or who posted any sign removed by the city shall reimburse the city for the cost of the removal within thirty days of receiving a bill from the city. 
In no case shall the failure to remove illegal signs constitute approval by the city of their illegal placement.
Nonconforming Signs:
To minimize confusion and unfair competitive disadvantage, Ephraim City intends to regulate existing nonconforming signs with a view to their eventual elimination. This goal shall be achieved by limiting changes, expansions, alterations and by amortization. Excluding normal maintenance and repair, a nonconforming sign shall not be moved, altered or enlarged unless it is brought into complete compliance with this section. The following alterations are exempt from this provision:
face changes in multi-tenant signs; and 
copy changes in permanent signs which were originally approved with a changeable copy feature.
Within 45 days after vacation of an existing business, all on-site nonconforming signs must be removed or brought into compliance by the property owner. If removal does not occur, the city may remove the entire nonconforming sign, both face and structure. The property owner shall be liable for the cost of removing the sign, and the city may place a lien against the property to recover its costs if it removes the sign. 
An abandoned sign may not regain any legal nonconforming status later, even if the original business re-occupies the property.
Exceptions:
Upon appeal by a sign owner or business, the Appeal Authority may grant a special exception to allow the retention, alteration, movement, or expansion of a nonconforming sign, provided the board determines that: 
the nonconforming sign poses an alternative equivalent means of meeting the intent of this ordinance and the General Plan; 
the action will not impose a burden on other properties beyond that posed by a conforming sign; and 
approval will provide a forum for free expression or other benefits to the public.
A new business generally shall not qualify for a special exception to reuse a nonconforming sign left by a previous business. Purely economic factors such as the expense of removing or altering a nonconforming sign or of purchasing a new conforming sign are not to be considered as reasons for granting a special exception by the board.
The board may attach reasonable conditions with which the petitioner must comply as a condition of approval of a special exception.
The duration of the special exception shall not extend beyond that period allowed by the Appeal Authority from the date the exception is granted.
The Appeal Authority shall require a bond sufficient to cover the cost of removing the sign as a condition of approving a special exception.
The Appeal Authority may attach a reasonable expiration date to a special exception.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 19-02 on 8/21/2019
10.12.060 Parking
At the time any building or structure is erected, enlarged or increased in capacity, use is established or changed, or a change of occupancy takes place, there shall be provided off street parking spaces on private property for automobiles in accordance with the requirements set forth in this section.

Dimensions: The dimensions of each off street parking space, exclusive of access drives or aisles, shall be:
At least nine feet by eighteen feet (9' x 18') for diagonal or ninety degree (90°) spaces;
At least nine feet by twenty two feet (9' x 22') for parallel spaces. 
A parking stall may be reduced by two feet (2') lengthwise, if landscaping separated from the paved area of the parking stall by a curb or tire bumper guard is provided in the remaining two feet (2') of the parking stall.
Landscaping: All areas within the parking area not paved shall be landscaped.
Driveways and Access: 
Except for one and two-family dwellings, access to each parking space shall be from a private driveway and not from a public street. 
Driveways for residential lots shall not be more than twenty feet wide. 
Driveways for commercial uses shall be at least twenty feet wide, unless approved otherwise by the city engineer, except uses in the C1A zone may be treated as residential uses. 
Drives shall be spaced at least twelve feet apart.
Limit on number of drives: 
Residential uses shall be limited to two drives per lot.
Commercial uses shall be limited to two drives per 100 feet of road frontage.
In no case shall the total amount of drive width exceed 50% of the frontage. 
Drives shall not be more than thirty-six feet wide. 
Drives shall not be closer than forty feet to an intersection. 
Drives may be shared by adjoining properties. 
Standards for width and access in this section do not supersede requirements of the fire code.
Parking Requirements: See ECC 10.20.050 Table D. When a building or lot will contain more than one use, the parking requirements shall be calculated separately for each use and totaled. In the event a use is not listed in ECC 10.20.050 Table D, the Planning Director may determine the requirement based on the nearest comparable use standard in the table.
Lighting: Parking lots shall be lighted by standards not more than 36 feet high using hooded sources. No glare or cast from lights shall fall outside the lot, or be directed into the nighttime sky. (2006)
Paving: Every parcel of land hereafter used as a parking lot shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or composition of some other all weather hard surfacing material which meets applicable Fire Code and City Construction Standards Requirements. For the purposes of this ordinance, non-paved surfaces such as gravel and road base in parking lots shall not be considered as meeting the all weather hard surfacing requirement above unless specifically granted by the Planning Commission and City Council due to exceptional circumstances due to terrain or otherwise. Such exemption shall only occur after an acceptable landscaping plan has been approved by the city council.
Storm Drainage: Applicant must provide a storm drainage plan to contain or reasonably disperse storm water from the parking lot. Storm drainage may not sheet flow across a public walkway. Any storm water discharges from off of the property shall not exceed pre-development flow rates. Larger multifamily and commercial developments may be required to submit a drainage report prepared by a licensed engineer. 
Shared Parking: The Planning Director may approve shared parking arrangements if in his opinion the applicant submits sufficient evidence showing the parking will adequately serve all of the uses at the peak combined times. See also ECC 10.16.060 regarding parking for mixed use developments. 
Other Considerations: some non-complying buildings (i.e., predating any land use enactment), especially buildings in the downtown area, are incapable of complying with these requirements. In such cases, new or expanding uses shall be required to provide as much off-street parking as possible, but shall not be limited by their inability to fully comply with this ordinance unless such non-compliance creates a serious threat to public health and safety (congested on-street parking is not such a threat).
10.12.070 Conditional Uses
Certain uses have characteristics that may have a greater impact on the adjoining properties, surrounding neighborhood, or community as a whole than do other permitted uses in the specific zoning district. These uses require a more comprehensive review to determine whether the proposed use at a specific location is appropriate, or whether the use can be made compatible by placing certain conditions on its operation that mitigate or eliminate potential detrimental impacts. The Planning Commission shall review and then recommend to the City Council to grant, to grant with conditions, or to deny each conditional use permit application, subject to the requirements of this section.

Permit required: A conditional use permit shall be required for all uses listed as conditional uses in the zoning district regulations where they are, or will be located, or if the use is specified as conditional use elsewhere in this ordinance. Any change of use to other than a permitted use or any proposed expansion for a previously approved conditional use permit must reapply and secure a new conditional use permit from the City before proceeding with the proposed changes and/or expansions. 
No Presumption of Approval: The listing of a conditional use in any table of permitted and conditional uses found in this ordinance does not constitute an assurance or presumption that such conditional use will be approved. Rather, each proposed conditional use shall be evaluated on an individual basis, in relation to its compliance with the standards and conditions set forth in this ordinance and with the standards for the district in which it is located, in order to determine whether the conditional use is appropriate at the particular location. It is intended that review of conditional uses be site and case specific as well as fact-based.
Application:
Application for a conditional use permit shall be made to the Planning Director who, upon confirming that the application is complete, shall present the application to the Planning Commission for review.
Each application for a conditional use permit shall be accompanied by maps, drawings, statements or other documents as required by the Planning Commission.
Applications and submittals must be filed with the Planning Director for staff and public review by noon of the fourteenth day prior to the Planning Commission meeting. This deadline may be waived and/or adjusted at the discretion of the Planning Director.
Conditional Use Standards Of Review: The City shall not issue a conditional use permit unless the Planning Director, in the case of an administrative conditional use, or the Planning Commission, for all other conditional uses, concludes that the application fully mitigates all identified adverse impacts and complies with the following general standards applicable to all conditional uses, as well as the specific standards for the use.
General Review Criteria: An applicant for a conditional use in the zone must demonstrate:
The application complies with all applicable provisions of this chapter, state and federal law; 
The structures associated with the use are compatible with surrounding structures in terms of use, scale, mass and circulation. 
The use is not detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare;
The use is consistent with the City General Plan as amended;
Traffic conditions are not adversely affected by the proposed use including the existence or need for dedicated turn lanes, acceleration and deceleration lanes, pedestrian access, and capacity of the existing streets;
There is sufficient utility capacity;
There is sufficient emergency vehicle access; 
Off-street parking is of sufficient location and design, as well as compliance with off street parking standards (2012); 
There is a plan for fencing, screening, and landscaping to separate the use from adjoining uses and mitigate the potential for conflict in uses;
Exterior lighting that complies with the lighting standards of the zone. 
Within and adjoining the site, impacts on the aquifer, slope retention, and flood potential have been fully mitigated and is appropriate to the topography of the site.
There is sufficient landscaping and landscaped parking
There is adequate and appropriate exterior and street lighting
Specific Review Criteria For Certain Conditional Uses: In addition to the foregoing, the Planning Commission must evaluate the applicant’s compliance with each of the following criteria when considering whether to approve, deny or conditionally approve an application for each of the following conditional uses: 
Adult Oriented Businesses: The purpose and objective of this chapter is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of adult-oriented businesses or their location in areas deleterious to the health, safety and welfare of the City, and to prevent inappropriate exposure of such businesses to the community. This chapter regulates the time, place, and manner of the operation of sexually-oriented businesses, consistent with the United States and Utah State Constitutions. See also ECC 10.12.120 for additional requirements. 
No adult-oriented business may be located within five hundred feet (500') of any: school, day care facility, cemetery, public park, library, religious institution, residential zoning boundary, liquor store, or other adult-oriented business. 
For the purposes of this section, distance is measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or objects, from the closest exterior wall of the structure in which the adult-oriented business is located and:
The closest exterior wall of another adult-oriented business; 
The closest property line of any school, day care facility, public park, library, cemetery or religious institution; and 
The nearest property line of any residential zone. 
Reasonable Conditions: A conditional use permit cannot be denied if detrimental effects can be mitigated by reasonable conditions, and that conditions are to be imposed in accordance with applicable standards. 
Denial: If the reasonably anticipated detrimental effects of a proposed conditional use cannot be mitigated by the proposal or the imposition of reasonable conditions to achieve compliance with applicable standards, the conditional use may be denied. (Utah Code §. 10-9a-507)
Public Hearing: A public hearing on the conditional use permit application may be held if the Planning Director, Planning Commission or City Council shall deem a hearing to be necessary and in the public interest.
Substantial Action Required: Unless there is substantial action under a conditional use permit within one year of its issuance, the permit shall expire. 
Extension for Good Cause: The Planning Commission may grant an extension for good cause shown. Only one extension may be granted and the maximum extension shall be six (6) months. In order to obtain an extension, the permit holder must apply for an extension in writing before the expiration of the original permit. The application must be submitted to the City Recorder and the application must describe the cause for requesting the extension.
Notification: See Notice Matrix, ECC 10.20.060 Table E.
Appeals: Any person aggrieved by a decision of the City Council regarding the issuance, denial or revocation of a conditional use permit may appeal such decision to the Appeal Authority provided such appeal is filed within 30 days of the City Council’s decision. The appeal shall be filed with the City Council and with the Appeal Authority.
Revocation:
Any conditional use permit shall be revocable by the City Council at any time due to failure of the permittee to observe any condition specified or failure to observe other requirements of the city code, or state or federal law in regard to the maintenance of improvements or conduct of the use or business as approved. The city shall also have a right of action to compel offending structures or uses to be removed at the cost of the violator or owner. 
No conditional use permit shall be revoked until a hearing is held by the City Council. Written notice to the permittee shall be postmarked at least fifteen days prior to the date of the scheduled hearing. The notification shall state the grounds for complaint or reasons for revocation, and the time and location at which the hearing is to be held. At the hearing, the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard. The permittee may call witnesses and present evidence.
Transfer of Conditional Use Permit: A Conditional Use Permit granted in accordance with this section shall run with the land and continue to be valid regardless of ownership of the site or structure, as long as it operates within the conditions or stipulations of the Conditional Use Permit approval. If use is discontinued for a period of 1 year, the applicant must re-apply under the zoning ordinances which are current at the time of re-application. (2006)
10.12.080 Cell Phone Towers
It is the purpose of this section to regulate personal wireless services antennas, and related electronic equipment and structures, and to provide for the orderly establishment of personal wireless services facilities in the City, as well as to minimize the number of antenna support structures by encouraging the use of stealth facilities, by encouraging the co-location of multiple antennas on a single structure, by encouraging the location of antennas on pre-existing support structures, and by encouraging the use of City-owned property for antenna support structure, as well as to establish siteing, appearance, and safety standards that will help mitigate potential impacts related to the construction, use and maintenance of personal wireless services facilities. To comply with the Telecommunications Act of 1996 by establishing regulations that (1) do not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting the provision of personal wireless services, (2) do not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services, and (3) are not based on the environmental effects of radio frequency emissions to the extent that such facilities comply with the Federal Communication Commission’s regulations concerning such emissions.

Applicability: This Article applies to both commercial and private low power radio services and facilities, such as “cellular” or PCS (personal communications system) communications and paging systems. Neither the term “wireless facility” nor the requirements of this Article shall apply to the following types of communications devices, although they may be regulated by other City ordinances and policies:
Amateur Radio: Any tower or antenna owned and operated by an amateur radio operator licensed by the Federal Communications Commission.
Satellite: Any device designed for over-the-air reception of television broadcast signals, multi-channel multipoint distribution service or direct satellite service.
Cable: Any cable television headend or hub towers and antennas used solely for cable
Wireless Internet broadcasting.
Application Requirements: Any person desiring to develop, construct or establish a wireless facility in the City shall submit an application for site plan approval to the City in accordance with the requirements of paragraphs C and D regarding Site Plans. Additional application requirements may apply as per this article as well as per ECC 10.12.070 regarding Conditional Uses.
Approval Process: The application shall be reviewed by the City in accordance with its standard site plan approval process. An exception to this is when a wireless carrier applies for a facility to be collocated on a monopole or other structure that was specifically designed and approved with room for one or more collocated transmission facilities. In this case, the submission requirements will be the same, but the site plan may be approved administratively by the Planning Director or his designee. If a transmission facility requires a conditional use permit, the review shall be in accordance with the City’s standard conditional use permit approval process. The City shall process all applications within a reasonable time and shall not unreasonably discriminate among providers of functionally equivalent services. Any decision to deny a request to place, construct, or modify wireless facilities shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.
Land Use and Building Permits Required: No wireless facility shall be constructed until the applicant obtains a land use and building permit for the structure from the appropriate authority. No building permit shall be issued for any project for which a site plan, amended site plan or conditional use permit is required, until the site plan, amended site plan or conditional use permit has been approved by the appropriate authority. If the design or engineering of the antenna support structure is beyond the expertise of the City, the City may require third party review by an engineer selected by the City prior to the issuance of a land use permit. The applicant shall pay an additional fee to cover the cost of the third party review.
Location and Type Priority:
Priority of Antenna Site Locations: Wireless facilities shall be located as unobtrusively as is reasonably possible. To accomplish this goal, the provider shall make a good faith effort to site antennas in the following order of priority:
Existing Structures or Stealth Facilities: First priority shall be granted to antennas located on existing structures or antennas qualifying as stealth facilities, as follows:
Existing Structures: Lawfully existing wireless facilities designed for collocation, buildings, structures and antenna support structures, provided that the buildings, structures or support structures are:
located on a wireless facility designed an approved for collocation,
located in a non-residential zone, or
located in a residential zone on property that is being used for non-residential uses (e.g. government, school or church), or
located in a residential zone on a property that is being used for a multi-family residential building having eight (8) or more dwelling units;
or Stealth Facilities: Antennas certified as stealth facilities as set forth in this ordinance.
On City-owned Property: Monopoles or lattice towers constructed on City-owned property. Monopoles or lattice towers on property owned by a non-City public agency.
Monopole or lattice towers constructed on property owned by a non-City public agency.
Monopoles or lattice towers on non-residential private property. Monopoles or lattice towers constructed on private property or other non-City property owned by a public agency, provided that the private property is (1) located in a non-residential zone, or (2) located in a residential zone on property that is used for a non-residential use (e.g. government, school or church). (3) Located outside of the nationally registered historic district.
Other: Any combination of antenna type and location other than those listed above.
Burden of Proof: If the applicant desires to locate antennas on a site other than the highest priority site, the applicant shall have the burden of demonstrating to the approving authority why it could not locate antennas on sites with a higher priority than the site chosen by the applicant. To do so, the applicant shall provide the following information to the approving authority:
Higher Priority Sites: The identity and location of any higher priority sites located within the desired service area.
Reason for Rejection of Higher Priority Sites: The reason(s) why the higher priority sites are not technologically, legally or economically feasible. The applicant must make a good faith effort to locate antennas on a higher priority site. The City may request information from outside sources to justify or rebut the applicant’s reasons for rejecting a higher priority site.
Justification for Proposed Site: Why the proposed site is essential to meet the service demands of the geographic service area and the citywide network.
If the applicant desires to construct a monopole, the applicant shall also submit a detailed written description of why the applicant cannot obtain coverage using existing buildings or structures or stealth facilities.
Permitted Uses and Locations:
Permitted and Conditional Uses: Permissions are listed in the Land Use Matrix ECC 10.20.030 Table B. In determining whether or not to approve a conditional use permit the Planning Commission shall consider, as a minimum, the following:
Compatibility of the facility with the height, mass and design of buildings, structures and uses in the vicinity of the facility.
Whether the facility uses existing or proposed vegetation, topography or structures in a manner that effectively screens the facility.
Whether the facility is disguised in a manner that mitigates potential negative impacts on surrounding properties.
Whether the facility is located on a parcel of sufficient size to adequately support the facility.
Location on Parcel. Whether the structure is situated on the parcel in a manner that can best protect the interests of surrounding property owners, but still accommodate other appropriate uses of the parcel.
Location in General. Whether location or co-location of the facility on other structures in the same vicinity is practicable, without significantly affecting the antenna transmission or reception capabilities.
The willingness of the applicant to allow co-location on its facility by other personal wireless services providers on such terms as are common in the industry.
Not Permitted Uses: The following antenna types and antenna locations are not permitted, except upon a showing of necessity (inability to achieve coverage or capacity in the service area) by the applicant, in which case they shall be considered as conditional uses:
Guyed towers are not permitted in any zone. Other poles are excepted, but only as per other sections of this Title.
Towers in Residential zones. Any towers other than stealth facilities located on private property in the R1, R1A, R2, or R3 Zones, if the residentially zoned property has a residential use (as opposed to a school, church, or other non-residential use).
Specific Regulations by Type: Wireless facilities are characterized by the type or location of the antenna structure. There are four general types of antenna structures contemplated by this ordinance: wall mounted antennas; roof mounted antennas; stealth facilities; and monopoles. If a particular type of antenna structure is allowed by this ordinance as a permitted or conditional use, the minimum standards for that type of antenna are as follows, unless otherwise provided in a conditional use permit:
Wall Mounted Antennas:
Wall mounted antennas shall not extend above the roof line of the building or structure or project more than four (4) feet from the face of the building.
Wall mounted antennas shall not be located within twenty feet (20') feet of a residential zone unless it is located on a non-residential structure as approved by this title.
Antennas mounted directly on existing parapet walls, penthouses, or mechanical equipment rooms are considered to be wall mounted antennas if no portion of the antenna extends above the roof line of the parapet wall, penthouse, or mechanical equipment room.
Wall mounted antennas, equipment and supporting structures shall be painted to match the color of the building or structure or the background against which they are most commonly seen. Antennas and the supporting structure on the building shall be architecturally compatible with the building. Whip antennas are not allowed on a wall mounted antenna structure, but may camouflaged in a stealth facility as per stealth requirements of this article.
The total area for all wall mounted antennas and supporting structures on any one building shall not exceed five percent (5%) of any exterior wall of the building.
Roof Mounted Antennas:
Maximum height of a roof mounted antenna shall be eighteen feet (18') above the roof line of the building.
Roof mounted antennas shall be setback from the exterior wall of the building or structure a distance at least equal to the height of the antenna above the roof.
Roof mounted antennas may be mounted directly on a roof, or on top of existing penthouses or mechanical equipment rooms if the total height of the antennas do not exceed eighteen feet (18') above the roof line of the building.
Roof mounted antennas, equipment and supporting structures shall be painted to match the color of the building or structure or the background against which they are most commonly seen. Antennas and supporting structures shall be architecturally compatible with the building.
Stealth Facilities:
The maximum height of a stealth facility shall be eighteen feet (18’) higher than the maximum permitted structure height of the zone in which the stealth facility is located. The applicant may exceed the maximum structure height if otherwise allowed in this Chapter, or pursuant to a conditional use permit.
Not every disguised or screened wireless facility qualifies as a stealth facility. Whether or not a particular facility qualifies as a stealth facility shall be decided by the Planning Commission as part of the conditional use permit approval process. In making the decision, the Commission shall consider the definition of Stealth Facilities set forth in this Article and shall consider whether the facility is disguised, blended or screened in a manner that eliminates any negative impact to surrounding properties. Each stealth facility certification applies to one location only. Because of differing circumstances specific to each site, an antenna that qualifies as a stealth facility in one location may not qualify as a stealth facility in a different location.
Towers: If the applicant desires to construct a monopole or lattice tower, the applicant shall first submit a detailed written description of why the applicant cannot obtain coverage using existing buildings or structures or stealth facilities.
The maximum height of the monopole or lattice tower shall be eighty feet (80'), although the approving body may, as a conditional use, allow an antenna or antenna support structure up to 120 feet (120’) in height, if the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the approving body that the additional height is necessary to obtain coverage or to allow co-location, and that the applicant has taken steps to mitigate adverse effects on the surrounding neighborhood. The antenna itself shall not exceed ten feet (10') in height.
Monopoles and lattice towers shall be set back a minimum of 110% of the height of the monopole from any residential lot line, measured from the base of the monopole to the nearest residential lot line.
Monopole or lattice towers, antennas, and related support structures may be required to be painted a neutral color, or a color to match the background against which they are most commonly seen.
Monopoles and lattice towers shall be located at least one half mile from each other. However, a new monopole with co-location space for other future or existing carriers may be permitted closer than a half mile to another legal nonconforming monopole that does not have any collocation space.
Monopoles and lattice towers shall be located as unobtrusively on a parcel as possible, given the location of existing structures, nearby residential areas, and service needs of the applicant. Monopoles or lattice towers shall not be located in a required landscaped area, buffer area or parking area.
Every new monopole or lattice tower shall be designed and constructed to be of sufficient size and capacity to accommodate at least two additional wireless telecommunications provider on the structure in the future unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission.
Lease Agreement: The City has no implied obligation to lease any particular parcel of City-owned property to an applicant. The City shall enter into a standard lease agreement with the applicant for any facility built on City property. The City Manager or designee is hereby authorized to execute the standard lease agreement on behalf of the City. The lease shall contain the condition that the site plan and/or conditional use permit must first be approved by the approving authority before the lease can take effect, and that failure to obtain such approval renders the lease null and void.
Regulation Compliance:
Compliance with FCC and FAA Regulations: All operators of wireless facilities shall demonstrate compliance with applicable Federal Communication Commission (FCC) and Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) regulations, including FCC radio frequency regulations, at the time of application and periodically thereafter as requested by the City. Failure to comply with the applicable regulations shall be grounds for revoking a site plan or conditional use permit approval.
Other Licenses and Permits: The operator of every personal wireless services facility shall submit copies of all licenses and permits required by other agencies and governments with jurisdiction over the design, construction, location and operation of the facility to the City, shall maintain such licenses and permits in good standing, and shall provide evidence of renewal or extension thereof upon request by the City.
Safety:
Protection Against Climbing: Monopoles and lattice towers shall be protected against unauthorized climbing by removing the climbing pegs from the lower 20 feet of the structure.
Fencing: Monopoles and lattice towers may be fully enclosed by a minimum 6-foot tall fence or wall, as directed by the City. The approving authority may determine that a wall or fence is needed or appropriate for a particular site due to conditions specific to the site.
Security Lighting Requirements: Monopoles and lattice towers shall not contain lights on the towers unless mandated by FAA requirements for lighting. As part of the conditional use permit consideration, the City may also require security lighting for the site. If security lighting is used, the lighting impact on surrounding residential areas shall be minimized by using indirect lighting, where appropriate such that no light will be directed at the neighboring properties or into the nighttime sky.
Abandonment: The City may require the removal of all antennas and towers if the facility has been inoperative or out of service for more than twelve (12) consecutive months.
Notice to remove shall be given in writing by personal service, or by certified mail addressed to the operator’s last known address.
Violation: Failure to remove the antennas and monopoles after receiving written notice to remove is a violation of the terms of this Chapter. The City may initiate criminal and/or civil legal proceeding against any person, firm, entity or corporation, whether acting as principal, agent, property owner, lessee, lessor, tenant, landlord, employee, employer or otherwise, for failure to remove antennas and monopoles in accordance with this Chapter. The City may seek a civil injunction requiring the removal of any structures on the site in accordance with this Chapter. The City may also remove such structures itself, and may bill its costs in removing the structures to the operator. Any lease agreement with the City may also stipulate failure to remove the antennas and monopoles after receiving written notice to do so pursuant to this Chapter automatically transfers ownership of the antennas, monopoles, support buildings and all other structures on the site to the City.
Emergency: The City shall have authority to move or alter a wireless facility in case of emergency. Before taking any such action, the City shall first notify the owner of the facility, if feasible.
Additional Requirements:
Storage Areas and Solid Waste Receptacles: No outside storage or solid waste receptacles shall be permitted on the site unless in an enclosed area to provide visual screening.
Equipment Enclosures: All electronic and other related equipment and appurtenances necessary for the operation of any wireless facility shall, whenever possible, be located within a lawfully pre-existing structure. When a new structure is required to house such equipment, the structure shall be harmonious with, and blend with, the natural features, buildings and structures surrounding such structure.
Accessory Buildings: No more than three accessory structures are permitted for each wireless facility’s support equipment. A freestanding accessory buildings used with a wireless facility shall not exceed 240 square feet and shall comply with the setback requirements for structures in the zone in which the facility is located.
Parking: The City may require a minimum of one (1) parking stall for sites containing a monopole, tower, and/or accessory buildings, if there is insufficient parking available on the site.
Maintenance Requirements: All wireless facilities shall be maintained in a safe, neat and attractive manner.
Landscaping: Freestanding wireless facilities that are not stealthed shall be landscaped on all sides visible from the street and from neighboring properties.
Accessory Buildings are to be landscaped on all sides visible from the street and from neighboring properties with a row of evergreen trees at least 6 feet in height spaced to create a continuous screen and spaced as per approval of the Planning Commission. Additionally a row of shrubs must be added around the structure in front of the trees at five (5) per twenty (20) linear feet and shall reach a height of 3 feet within three years of planting.
All other freestanding facilities and support structures are, at a minimum, to be enclosed with an architecturally solid fence six (6) feet in height, unless approved otherwise by the Planning Commission, due to specific conditions on the property. Additionally a row of shrubs must be added around the structure in front of the fence at five (5) per linear twenty (20) feet and shall reach a height of 3 feet within three years of planting.
Exception: The landscaping and improvement requirements above may be waived or modified by the Planning Commission if water services are not reasonably available to maintain the landscaping, or if the above requirements are not compatible with the surrounding uses.
10.12.090 Storm Water And Flood Damage Prevention
Definitions: 

ALLUVIAL FAN FLOODING: Flooding occurring on the surface of an alluvial fan or similar landform, which originates at the apex and is characterized by high-velocity flows; active processes of erosion, sediment transport, and deposition; and unpredictable flow paths.

APEX: A point on an alluvial fan or similar landform below which the flow path of the major stream that formed the fan becomes unpredictable and alluvial fan flooding can occur.

AREA OF SHALLOW FLOODING: A designated AO, AH, or VO zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with a one percent chance or greater annual chance of flooding to an average depth of one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and where velocity flow may be evident. Such flooding is characterized by ponding or sheet flow.

AREA OF SPECIAL FLOOD HAZARD: Is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. The area may be designated as Zone A on the Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). After detailed ratemaking has been completed in preparation for publication of the FIRM, Zone A usually is refined into Zones A, AE, AH, AO, A1-99, VO, V1-30, VE or V.

BASE FLOOD: The flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.

BASEMENT: Any area of the building having its floor sub-grade (below ground level) on all sides.

CRITICAL FEATURE: An integral and readily identifiable part of a flood protection system, without which the flood protection provided by the entire system would be compromised.

DEVELOPMENT: Any man-made change in improved and unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations or storage of equipment or materials.

ELEVATED BUILDING: A non-basement building (i) built, in the case of a building in Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, to have the top of the elevated floor, or in the case of a building in Zones V1-30, VE, or V, to have the bottom of the lowest horizontal structure member of the elevated floor elevated above the ground level by means of pilings, columns (posts and piers), or shear walls parallel to the flow of the water and (ii) adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a flood of up to the magnitude of the base flood. In the case of Zones A1-30, AE, A, A99, AO, AH, B, C, X, and D, "elevated building" also includes a building elevated by means of fill or solid foundation perimeter walls with openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movement of flood waters. In the case of Zones V1-30, VE, or V, "elevated building" also includes a building otherwise meeting the definition of "elevated building," even though the lower area is enclosed by means of breakaway walls if the breakaway walls met the standards of Section 60.3(e)(5) of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations. 

EXISTING CONSTRUCTION: For the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before the effective date of the FIRM or before January 1, 1975, for FIRMs effective before that date. "Existing construction" may also be referred to as "existing structures."

EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 

EXPANSION TO AN EXISTING MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads).

FLOOD OR FLOODING: A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from:
The overflow of inland or tidal waters.
The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
FLOOD INSURANCE RATE MAP (Firm): An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazards and the risk premium zones applicable to the community.

FLOOD INSURANCE STUDY: Is the official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, water surface elevation of the base flood, as well as the Flood Boundary-Floodway Map.

FLOODPLAIN OR FLOOD-PRONE AREA: Any land area susceptible to being inundated by water from any source (see definition of flooding). 

FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT: The operation of an overall program of corrective and preventive measures for reducing flood damage, including but not limited to emergency preparedness plans, flood control works and floodplain management regulations.

FLOODPLAIN MANAGEMENT REGULATIONS: Zoning ordinances, subdivision regulations, building codes, health regulations, special purpose ordinances (such as a floodplain ordinance, grading ordinance and erosion control ordinance) and other applications of police power. The term describes such state or local regulations, in any combination thereof, which provide standards for the purpose of flood damage prevention and reduction.

FLOOD PROTECTION SYSTEM: Those physical structural works for which funds have been authorized, appropriated, and expended and which have been constructed specifically to modify flooding in order to reduce the extent of the areas within a community subject to a "special flood hazard" and the extent of the depths of associated flooding. Such a system typically includes hurricane tidal barriers, dams, reservoirs, levees or dikes. These specialized flood modifying works are those constructed in conformance with sound engineering standards.

FLOOD PROOFING: Any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 

FLOODWAY (Regulatory Floodway): The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 

FUNCTIONALLY DEPENDENT USE: A use which cannot perform its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water. The term includes only docking facilities, port facilities that are necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, and ship building and ship repair facilities, but does not include long-term storage or related manufacturing facilities.

HIGHEST ADJACENT GRADE: The highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction next to the proposed walls of a structure.

HISTORIC STRUCTURE: Any structure that is:
Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register
Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district;
Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of Interior; or
Individually listed on a local inventory or historic places in communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either:
by an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior or;
directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs.
LEVEE: A man-made structure, usually an earthen embankment, designed and constructed in accordance with sound engineering practices to contain, control, or divert the flow of water so as to provide protection from temporary flooding.

LEVEE SYSTEM: A flood protection system which consists of a levee, or levees, and associated structures, such as closure and drainage devices, which are constructed and operated in accordance with sound engineering practices.

LOWEST FLOOR: The lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking or vehicles, building access or storage in an area other than a basement area is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirement of Section 60.3 of the National Flood insurance Program regulations.

MANUFACTURED HOME: A structure transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" does not include a "recreational vehicle".

MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.

MEAN SEA LEVEL: For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced.

NEW CONSTRUCTION: For the purpose of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of an initial FIRM or after December 31, 1974, whichever is later, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of a floodplain management regulation adopted by a community and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures.

NEW MANUFACTURED HOME PARK OR SUBDIVISION: A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 

RECREATIONAL VEHICLE: A vehicle which is:
built on a single chassis;
400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projections;
designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and
designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living Quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use.
START OF CONSTRUCTION: (For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (Pub. L. 97-348)), Includes substantial improvement and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, placement, or other improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means either the first placement of permanent construction of a structure on a site, such as the pouring of slab or footings, the installation of piles, the construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation; or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main structure. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building.

STRUCTURE: A walled and roofed building, including a gas or liquid storage tank, that is principally above ground, as well as a manufactured home.

SUBSTANTIAL DAMAGE: Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred.

SUBSTANTIAL IMPROVEMENT: Any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before "start of construction" of the improvement. This includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either:
Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or Local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications, which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary conditions or,
Any alteration of a "historic structure", provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure."
VARIACE: A grant of relief to a person from the requirement of this ordinance when specific enforcement would result in unnecessary hardship. A variance, therefore, permits construction or development in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. (For full requirements see Section 60.6 of the National Flood Insurance Program regulations.)

VIOLATION: The failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required in Section 60.3(b)(5), (c)(4), (c)(10), (d)(3), (e)(2), (e)(4), or (e)(5) is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided.

WATER SURFACE ELEVATION: The height, in relation to the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 (or other datum, where specified), of floods of various magnitudes and frequencies in the floodplains of coastal or riverine areas.
Special Flood Hazard Provisions:
Lands To Which This Ordinance Applies: The ordinance shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of Ephraim City.
Basis For Establishing The Areas Of Special Flood Hazard: The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in a scientific and engineering report entitled, "The Flood Insurance Study for Ephraim City dated May 2, 2012, with accompanying Flood Insurance Rate Maps and Flood Boundary-Floodway Maps (FIRM and FBFM) and any revisions thereto are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this ordinance.
Establishment Of Development Permit: Development Permit shall be required to ensure conformance with the provisions of this ordinance.
Compliance: No structure or land shall hereafter be located, altered, or have its use changed without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations.
Abrogation And Greater Restrictions: This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail.
Interpretation: In the interpretation and application of this ordinance, all provisions shall be:
considered as minimum requirements;
liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under State statutes.
Warning And Disclaimer Or Liability: The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. On rare occasions greater floods can and will occur and flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the community or any official or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder.
Administration:
Designation Of The Floodplain Administrator: The Planning Director or his Designee is hereby appointed the Floodplain Administrator to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance and other appropriate sections of 44 CFR (National Flood Insurance Program Regulations) pertaining to floodplain management.
Duties & Responsibilities Of The Floodplain Administrator: Duties and responsibilities of the Floodplain Administrator shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
Maintain and hold open for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance.
Review permit application to determine whether proposed building site, including the placement of manufactured homes, will be reasonably safe from flooding.
Review, approve or deny all applications for development permits required by adoption of this ordinance.
Review permits for proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been obtained from those Federal, State or local governmental agencies (including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334) from which prior approval is required.
Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Administrator shall make the necessary interpretation.
Notify, in riverine situations, adjacent communities and the State Coordinating Agency which is the State NFIP Coordinator, prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency.
Assure that the flood carrying capacity within the altered or relocated portion of any watercourse is maintained.
When base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with paragraph C,2, the Floodplain Administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article 5.
Permit Procedures: Application for a Development Permit shall be presented to the Floodplain Administrator on forms furnished by him/her and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the location, dimensions, and elevation of proposed landscape alterations, existing and proposed structures, including the placement of manufactured homes, and the location of the foregoing in relation to areas of special flood hazard. Additionally, the following information is required:
Elevation (in relation to mean sea level), of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new and substantially improved structures;
Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure shall be flood proofed;
A certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that the nonresidential Flood proofed structure shall meet the flood proofing criteria of Article 5, Section B,2;
Description of the extent to which any watercourse or natural drainage will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development.
Maintain a record of all such information in accordance with paragraph D,2,a.
Approval or denial of a Development Permit by the Floodplain Administrator shall be based on all of the provisions of this ordinance and the following relevant factors:
The danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage
the susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner;
The danger that materials may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others;
The compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; The safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles;
The costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of streets and bridges, and public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems;
The expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the flood waters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site;
The necessity to the facility of a waterfront location, where applicable; The availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use;
The relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan for that area.
Variance Procedures:
The appeal authority as established by the legislative body shall hear and render judgment on requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance.
The Appeal Authority shall hear and render judgment on an appeal only when it is alleged there is an error in any requirement, decision, or determination made by the floodplain Administrator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance.
Any person or persons aggrieved by the decision of the Appeal Authority may appeal such decision in the courts of competent jurisdiction.
The Floodplain Administrator shall maintain a record of all actions involving an Appeal and shall report variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request.
Variances may be issued for the reconstruction, rehabilitation or restoration of Structures listed on the National Register of Historic Places or the State Inventory of Historic Places, without regard to the procedures set forth in the remainder of this ordinance.
Variances may be issued for new construction and substantial improvements to be Erected on a lot of one-half acre or less in size contiguous to and surrounded by lots with existing structures constructed below the base flood level, providing the relevant factors in paragraph C,3,b have been fully considered. As the lot size increases beyond the one-half acre, the technical justification required for issuing the variance increases.
Upon consideration of the factors noted above and the intent of this ordinance, the Appeal Authority may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purpose and objectives of this ordinance (paragraph A,3).
Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result.
Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum necessary to preserve the historic character and design of the structure.
Prerequisites for granting variances:
Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief.
Variances shall only be issued upon:
showing a good and sufficient cause;
a determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship to the applicant, and
a determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisances, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances.
Any application to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice that the structure will be permitted to be built with the lowest floor elevation below the base flood elevation, and that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation.
Variances may be issued by a community for new construction and substantial improvements and for other development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use provided that:
the criteria outlined in paragraphs D,4,a-i are met, and
the structure or other development is protected by methods that minimize flood damages during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety.
Provisions For Flood Hazard Reduction:
General Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards the following provisions are required for all new construction and substantial improvements:
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be designed (or modified) And adequately anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the Structure resulting from hydrodynamic and hydrostatic loads, including the effects of buoyancy;
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage;
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with Materials resistant to flood damage;
All new construction or substantial improvements shall be constructed with electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air conditioning equipment and other service facilities that are designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding.
All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system;
New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system and discharge from the systems into flood waters; and,
On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding.
Specific Standards: In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in (i) paragraph C,2, (ii) paragraph D,2,h,, or (iii) Article 5, Section C,3, the following provisions are required:
Residential Construction: New construction and substantial improvement of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor (including basement), elevated to or above the base flood elevation. A registered professional engineer, architect, or land surveyor shall submit a certification to the Floodplain Administrator that the standard of this paragraph as proposed in paragraph D,3,a, is satisfied.
Nonresidential Construction: New construction and substantial improvements of Any commercial, industrial or other nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor (including basement) elevated to or above the base flood level or together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, be designed so that below the base flood level the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and with structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall develop and/or review structural design, specifications, and plans for the construction,and shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice as outlined in this paragraph. A record of such certification which includes the specific elevation (in relation to mean sea level) to which such structures are flood proofed shall be maintained by the Floodplain Administrator.
Manufactured Homes: Require that all manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on a community's FHBM or FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces.
Standards For Subdivision Proposals:
All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall be consistent with paragraphs A,2, 3, and 4.
All proposals for the development of subdivisions including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall meet Development Permit requirements of paragraph C,3; paragraph D,3; and the provisions of Article 5 of this ordinance.
Base flood elevation data shall be generated for subdivision proposals and other Proposed development including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions which is greater than 50 lots or 5 acres, whichever is lesser, if not otherwise provided pursuant to paragraph C,2 or paragraph D,2,h.
All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards.
All subdivision proposals including the placement of manufactured home parks and subdivisions shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize or eliminate flood damage.
10.12.100 Center Of Block Development Standards
Single-Family Dwellings – Flag Lots: For single-family dwellings, flag lots shall be allowed provided: 
Flag lots must be accessed by a paved driveway of at least 12 feet in width, whether in separate ownership from the parent lot or by recorded easement. 
The parent lot must maintain at least an 8 foot setback between the existing house on the parent lot and the resulting property line. For shared drives and drives accessed by easement, driveways shall be spaced no closer than 4 feet to the existing house on the parent lot to allow space for pedestrian access, unless exempted by the planning commission after consideration of pedestrian and vehicular access, emergency vehicle access, and other applicable safety concerns.
Minimum lot size is met for both the parent lot and the flag lot, according to zoning requirements. Minimum lot size may be exempted by the planning commission if the maximum density is met for the original undivided property in the underlying zone. 
Minimum set backs are met for the parent lot. Minimum setbacks must also be met for the child flag lot unless waived by the Planning Commission after consideration for future roads, access, fire codes, safety, etc. In no case shall any setback be reduced to less than 8 feet on the child lot. 
Shared drives for flag lots are allowed for driveways at least sixteen (16) feet wide or as otherwise required by applicable Fire Code.
If more than one flag lot is desired to be created from the same parent lot, whether at the same time or at any time after the initial flag lot is created, the applicant shall apply under a Planned Unit Development application.

Figure 10.12.100-A-1: Flag Lot
Other Uses: For all uses other than single-family dwellings, center of block development shall be done as part of a Planned Unit Development (P.U.D.) application according to Ephraim City Subdivision Regulations. Regulations specific to each development shall be reviewed and approved as part of the planned development process.
10.12.110 Condominium Conversion Projects
Purpose: The purpose of this Section is to establish guidelines and minimum requirements relating to the conversion of existing structures to condominium ownership and the maintenance and operation of such projects. These provisions shall be supplemental and in addition to the general requirements for developments contained under other chapters of this ordinance, and also the requirements of the Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended.
Permitted Uses: Uses permitted within a condominium project shall be limited to those uses specifically permitted within the zone which underlies the area of the project and shall be subject to all conditions and restrictions required within the zone for the use.
Layout and Improvement: Each proposed condominium conversion project shall conform to the following minimum standards:
Residential Conversion Projects: 
Off Street Parking: Not less than two (2) off street parking spaces shall be provided for each dwelling unit, and at least one of the required spaces shall be covered, unless waived by the Planning Commission. All driveways and off street parking areas shall be hard-surfaced. 
Common Vehicle Storage Area: In addition to any other parking requirements, at least one (1) space per five (5) dwelling units for recreational vehicles and boat storage, and an additional one (1) space per five (5) dwelling units for guest parking shall be provided. These spaces may be owned in common or by the homeowner’s association. If conditions within a condominium conversion preclude compliance with this requirement, a provision shall be placed in the bylaws or declaration precluding the parking of recreational vehicles and boats within the condominium development, and such preclusion shall be strictly enforced by the management. (Ord ECO 09-05, 8/19/09)
Common Open Space: Common space shall be provided and shall not be less than twenty (20) percent of the total site area. The required open space shall be landscaped areas that are not occupied by buildings, structures, parking areas, streets, or alleys. Said open space shall be devoted to landscaping, preservation of natural features, patios, and recreational areas and facilities. 
Commercial and Industrial Conversion Projects: Each project shall conform to the minimum City standards with regard to location, parking, landscaping, access and similar issues which existed at the time the structure was established.
Utility and Facility Requirements:
All units shall be separately metered for water, gas, and electricity unless the covenants, conditions and restrictions provide for the Association to pay the costs of services. 
Each unit shall be provided with readily accessible individual shut-off valves. 
All storage and solid waste receptacles outside of units must be housed in a closed structure compatible with the design of the development.
Approval Procedure: If no new buildings will be constructed, and the existing apartments to be converted to condominiums are currently permitted in underlying zone of the property, the Planning Commission may approve the application after receiving preliminary review from the Development Review Committee (DRC) and after ensuring that all applicable provisions of this title have been met by the applicant. In all other cases where buildings are to be constructed, in addition to meeting the applicable requirements of this ordinance, the applicant must receive approval for a planned unit development (PUD) in accordance with the requirements for subdivisions found in ECC 11. 
Required Documents: 
The following documents shall be prepared and submitted by the developer for each condominium conversion project: 
Articles of Incorporation 
Corporation By-Laws 
Declaration of Covenants, Conditions, Restrictions and
Management Policies/Declaration of Condominium
Management Agreement
Open Space Easement
Title Report 
Record of Survey Map (Prepared by a Licensed Surveyor registered in the State of Utah) 
Property Report (see special provisions below)
Where, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, a particular document required under this Section is inapplicable for the particular project proposed, the Planning Commission may waive the requirement for submitting said document.
Special Provisions:
Property Report (as required under paragraph F,1,i): The developer shall submit two copies of a property report describing the condition, useful life and capacity of the roof, foundations, mechanical, electrical, plumbing and structural elements of all existing buildings and structures or uses, and identifying existing or latent deficiencies, and estimated costs of any proposed repairs and/or renovations. Said report shall be prepared by a qualified licensed architect, engineer, or building inspector acceptable to the City. The report shall also contain a statement of disclosure identifying those aspects of the building and site area which do not meet the requirements of the zoning ordinance and the life safety provisions of the International Building Code as they currently exist. 
Notification of Tenants: Developers of a condominium conversion project shall, at the time of submission for final approval, submit to the County the following: 
Certification that the present tenants of the project have been notified of the proposed conversion. All tenants who want to move into the property after an application for conversion has been filed with the City shall be notified by the developer of his plans to convert the premises to condominiums, prior to occupancy by such tenant. 
The present tenant or tenants of any unit to be converted shall be given a nontransferable right of first refusal to purchase the unit occupied upon at least the same terms and conditions offered to the general public or other individuals. The right shall extend for at least sixty (60) days after beginning sales, providing that the tenant may cancel the purchase agreement if the unit is not conveyed to the tenant within six (6) months, or unless the tenant gives prior written notice of his/her intention not to exercise such right.
Fees: The fees for such a project shall be the same as is constituted for a Multi-family land use permit.
Enforcement: The Planning Director or his delegate shall have the authority to enforce this chapter against violations thereof by any of the following actions:
To serve notice requiring the cessation or correction of any action in violation of this chapter upon any person who commits or assists in such violation. 
To deny the conversion application. 
To call upon the City Attorney to initiate an action to restrain or abate or correct the violation. 
To see any other remedy available at law or in equity to correct such violation. 
Declaration Of Covenants: Conditions And Restrictions And Project Elements. To achieve the purpose of this section, the Planning Director or his delegate shall review and approve the Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions and project elements relating to the management of the common area and facilities be approved prior to final approval. In addition to such covenants, conditions and restrictions that may be required pursuant to the Utah Condominium Ownership Act or other state laws or policies, such declaration shall be subject to recording and shall provide for the following, none of which when approved by the Planning Commission, shall be amended, modified, or changed without first obtaining written consent. The minimum criteria and conditions which are described in this section and any other conditions to be placed in the covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be distributed to the developer at the time of application for preliminary approval.
Maintenance: The developer shall retain responsibility for maintenance of the common areas and facilities until at least 75% of the units have been sold and the Planning Director or his designee has determined that the Homeowner's Association has assumed control of the maintenance functions. 
Enforcement: Techniques to be used in security compliance with the duties and provisions of the covenants, conditions and restrictions shall be specified. 
Utility Easements Over Private Streets and Other Areas: If the condominium project contains private streets, paths, or roadways, provision shall be made for public utility easements over the entire private street, path or roadway network. The Planning Director or his delegate may also require public utility easements over other portions of the project to accommodate fire hydrants, water meters, street furniture, storm drainage, sanitary sewers, water and gas mains, electrical lines, irrigation systems, and similar public improvements and utilities. The Planning Director or his delegate may also require access routes necessary to assure that firefighting equipment can reach and operate efficiently in all areas of the project. Each owner and the Association shall have an easement for entry upon any privately-owned unit, where necessary, in connection with construction, maintenance or repair for the benefit of the common area. 
Improvement Performance Bonds: Performance bonds or other assurances of performance for the installation of required improvements in a condominium project may be posted in accordance with City bonding standards if weather conditions, acts of God, or other circumstances beyond the control of the developer make it infeasible or impractical to complete the improvements prior to certification or recording. Posting of bonds or other assurances may not be used to guarantee completion of required fire separation or correction of code violations which are deemed to be hazardous to the life or safety of occupants. 
Unlawful to Sell or Lease: It shall be unlawful to record any record of survey map or declaration of a condominium project in the office of the County Recorder, unless the same shall bear thereon final approval of the Planning Commission as required by the terms of this Code, and any record of survey map or declaration so recorded without such approval shall be null and void. Any owner, or agent of any owner, of land or units located within a purported condominium conversion project, who transfers or sells any land, structure, or condominium unit in such purported project, before obtaining the final approval by the Planning Commission and City Council on the record of survey map and declaration, and recording the same in the Office of the County Recorder, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor for each lot, parcel of land, structure or condominium unit so transferred or sold.
10.12.120 Sexually Oriented Businesses
Purpose: The purpose and objective of this section is to establish reasonable and uniform regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses or their location in areas deleterious to the City, regulate the signage of such businesses, control the adverse affects of such signage and prevent inappropriate exposure of such businesses to the community. This Ordinance is to be construed as a regulation of time, place and manner of the operation of these businesses, consistent with the United States and Utah Constitutions. See also ECC 10.12.070 Paragraph C. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
Definitions: Terms involving sexually oriented businesses which are not defined in this Ordinance shall have the meanings set forth elsewhere in this ordinance. (Ord., 11-19-1997)
Location of Businesses, Restrictions: 
Outcall Services: Outcall services shall only be permitted in areas zoned I (Industrial). 
Sexually Oriented Businesses: Sexually oriented businesses shall only be permitted in areas zoned I (Industrial) under this Ordinance, subject to the following additional restrictions: 
No sexually oriented business shall be located: 
Within one thousand feet (1,000') of any school, public park, library or religious institution. 
Within six hundred feet (600') of any residential use or any agricultural or residential zoning boundary. 
Within six hundred feet (600') of any other sexually oriented business, except outcall services. 
Within three hundred fifty feet (350') of any gateway corridor. The distance shall be measured from the right of way boundary. 
Measuring Distance Requirements: 
Distance requirements between structures and uses specified in this Section shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or zoning districts, from the property boundaries of the school, public park, religious or cultural activity, residential use or other sexually oriented business, or from the right of way line of a gateway to the structure of the sexually oriented business. 
Distance requirements from zoning districts for this section shall be measured in a straight line, without regard to intervening structures or zoning districts, from the closest zoning boundary of a residential or agricultural district to the sexually oriented business structure. (Ord., 11-19-1997) 
Effect on Non-conforming Businesses: All existing legal, nonconforming sexually oriented businesses, as of the effective date hereof, or any amendment hereto, shall comply with the provisions of this section within nine months from the effective date hereof. (Ord., 11-19-1997) 
Signs: Notwithstanding anything other provision of this ordinance, the more restrictive requirements for signs shall prevail. Signs for sexually oriented businesses shall be limited as follows: 
No more than one exterior sign shall be allowed. 
No sign shall be allowed to exceed eighteen (18) square feet.
No animation shall be permitted on or around any sign or on the exterior walls or roof of such premises. 
No descriptive art or designs depicting any activity related to or inferring the nature of the business shall be allowed on any sign. Said signs shall contain alphanumeric copy only. 
Only flat wall signs and/or awning signs shall be permitted. 
Painted wall advertising shall not be allowed. 
Other than the signs specifically allowed by this section, the sexually oriented business shall not attach, construct or allow to be attached or constructed any temporary sign, banner, light or other device designed to draw attention to the business location.
10.12.130 Nonconforming Uses
These regulations are designed to regulate and protect the rights of legally existing nonconforming buildings and uses. Any lawful use or activity conducted under county zoning regulations at the effective date of annexation or under previous city zoning regulations in effect at the adoption of this ordinance which no longer complies with the regulations of this ordinance shall be considered a legal nonconforming use. The site, building, or use may be encouraged to convert to a conforming use in the future, although limited expansion or enlargement may be allowed subject to the provisions of this section. The property owner has the burden to establish that use is legally nonconforming. The person or entity claiming that a nonconforming use has been abandoned bears the burden to establish the abandonment. (2006)

Non Complying Structure Maintained: A non-complying building or structure may be maintained.
Occupancy: The occupancy of a building or structure by a non-conforming use, existing at the time this ordinance became effective, may be continued.
If a nonconforming use has been discontinued for a period of one year, it shall not thereafter be re-established and all subsequent uses shall conform with the provisions of this ordinance.
A nonconforming use may expand to include the entire floor area of the building in which it is conducted.
Nonconforming Use: The nonconforming use of land may be continued as follows: 
No nonconforming use of land shall in any way be expanded or extended either on the same or on adjoining property; and
if a nonconforming use of land is abandoned for a period of one year or more, any future use of such land shall conform with the provisions of this ordinance.
Repairs and Structural Alterations: Repairs and structural alterations may be made to a non-complying building or to a building housing a non-conforming use. In the event that a non-complying building or structure is damaged or destroyed by involuntary fire, flood, or other calamity, it may be restored and the occupancy or use which existed at the time of the damage or destruction may be maintained, provided that such restoration is started within a period of one year and is diligently pursued to completion. The reestablishment of a non-conforming use or non-complying structure after loss by fire or other casualty, can be denied by the City if abandoned for a period of at least one year or allowed to become uninhabitable or demolished. (2006)
Additions, Enlargements, and Moving: A nonconforming use, building or structure may not be reconstructed, expanded, enlarged or moved to a new location on the same lot if the total of such activities over its life is more than 50% of its fair market value unless the City Council issues a conditional use permit. Before issuing a conditional use, the Planning Commission and City Council shall find:
The addition, enlargement of, or moving of the building will be in harmony with one or more of the purposes of this ordinance. 
That the proposed change does not impose any unreasonable burden upon the lands located in the vicinity of the nonconforming use or structure.
Conditional Use Process for Nonconforming Use: The nonconforming use of a building or structure may not be changed except to a conforming use, unless approval of a conditional use permit is given by the City Council. The approval process for the conditional use permit shall follow the requirements as defined ECC 10.12.070, except that a public hearing must be held and the proposed use need not be listed in ECC 10.20.030 Table B as a permitted or conditional use. In granting a conditional use permit, the approving body shall consider the well-being of the surrounding residents, and may impose reasonable conditionals of approval that will protect the health, safety and property values of the neighboring properties. (Amended May, 2005)
10.12.140 Development Sequence (Reserved)

10.12.150 Enforcement And Responsibility
Ephraim City will not authorize the building inspector, nor will the city land use administrative officer or any administrative official of Ephraim City issue any permit for the proposed erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or use until proof of full compliance with all the provisions of this title has been provided. Any license or permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this title shall be null and void.

10.12.160 Guarantee Of Improvements Required
In lieu of the actual completion and acceptance by the city engineer or designee of the improvements required by this title the developer shall guarantee, by written agreement in a form approved by Ephraim City, and by one or more of the following methods, the installation and construction of the required improvements within one year from the date of approval of the final plat unless granted an extension by the city. Said agreement and guarantee must state "In favor of Ephraim City". In addition the developer shall guarantee by one or more of the following methods that the improvements shall be maintained in a state of good repair free from defective material or workmanship during the one year warranty period.

10.12.170 Option 1; Deposit With City (Preferred)
The developer shall deposit with the city a sum equal to one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the costs of the required improvements not installed, constructed, and accepted by the city. The city shall deposit this amount in a separate interest bearing account. The developer shall have the right to draw against the account with the city all sums to one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of the improvements not installed which shall be paid to the order of persons installing, constructing, or maintaining the improvements. The city shall hold the additional fifteen percent (15%) to guarantee that the improvements are maintained in a state of good repair free from defects of material or workmanship throughout the one year warranty period following approval of the improvements. The city may, at least 30 days after making written demand on the developer, install or cause to be installed, constructed, or repaired the improvements and pay such costs from the developer's account. The city shall refund any sums remaining in the developer's account after the city engineer or appointee accepts the improvements and the one year warranty period expires.

10.12.180 Option 2; Bond
The developer shall furnish and file with the city recorder a bond with corporate surety in an amount equal to one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the cost of the improvements not previously installed and accepted plus fifteen percent (15%) of the cost of previously installed improvements within the one year warranty period immediately following the approval of the subdivision plat by the legislative body and a statement that the improvements shall be maintained in a state of good repair free from defects of material or workmanship for the entire warranty period following the date of final approval for the improvements, which bond shall be approved by the city attorney.
Upon completion of the improvements for which a surety or cash bond has been filed, the developer shall call for inspection by the city engineer. If inspection shows city standards and specifications have been met in completion of such improvements, the portion of the bond corresponding to the completion to the improvements shall be released within seven (7) days from the time of inspection. The portion of the bond corresponding to the warranty improvements will be released following inspection and verification of the condition of the improvements after the warranty period has expired and following final approval.
10.12.190 Option 3; Escrow
The developer shall deposit with a city approved insurance company, bank, or savings and loan institution in an escrow account an amount of money equal to at least one hundred fifteen percent (115%) of the costs of the improvements required by this title not previously accepted by the city and fifteen percent (15%) of the cost of the improvements already installed and approved. The costs of the improvements shall be determined by the city engineer. The escrow agreement shall be subject to approval by the city attorney and shall be signed by the developer, the city, and the escrow holder.

10.12.200 Legal Remedies For Violation
In accordance with Utah Code § 10-9a-803, any applicant that violates this title may be charged with a class C misdemeanor and subject to all fines and imprisonment associated with such penalty.

Because it is impractical to expect that all grading, infrastructure, and other improvements can be adequately inspected by Ephraim City, Ephraim City expects applicants to complete all development improvements in accordance with the approved plans. If an applicant installs improvements that are inconsistent with the development approval granted by the city council, the improvements will be corrected to satisfy the approval granted by the city council at the applicant's expense even if discovery of the inconsistency occurs after an initial acceptance of the development improvements. Failure to correct the inconsistencies may result in any legal action necessary to correct the inconsistencies.
10.12.210 Prohibited Travel Of Heavy Vehicles On City Streets
No heavy vehicle shall be allowed to travel upon City streets posted by Ephraim City indicating that such travel and use is prohibited except for vehicles making deliveries or servicing the posted streets. These vehicles may include, but not be limited to public works, public safety, utility, or other vehicles making deliveries or providing services to or from destinations on said posted streets.
For purposes of this ordinance heavy vehicles shall be defined as any vehicle having a Gross Vehicle Weight Rating (GVWR) of 20,000 pounds or greater. The GVWR shall be measured by the manufactures placard located on the vehicle.
10.16 ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS
10.16.010 Purpose
10.16.020 Boundaries
10.16.030 Area, Size, Width, Height And Yard Requirements
10.16.040 Residential Zones
10.16.050 Agricultural Zones
10.16.060 Commercial Zones
10.16.070 Industrial Zone
10.16.080 Planned Unit Development Zone (PUD)

10.16.010 Purpose
This section establishes zoning districts and corresponding specific regulations that shall be applied as necessary to regulate the use and development of the land in the city.

10.16.020 Boundaries
Boundaries: Where uncertainty exists as to the boundaries of zones as shown on city maps, the following shall apply:
Boundaries as approximately following the center lines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed as moving with the center line. 
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the right of way lines of streets, highways or alleys shall be construed to follow such right of way lines, and in the event of a change in the right of way lines, shall be construed as moving with the right of way line. 
Boundaries indicated as approximately following the center lines of streams, rivers, canals or other bodies of water, or flood control channels, shall be construed to follow such center lines and in the event of the change of the center line, it shall be construed as moving with the center line. 
Boundaries indicated as approximately following platted or lot lines shall be construed to follow such lot lines. 
In case of any further uncertainty exists, the Planning Director shall interpret the map and determine the boundary location. 
Boundaries of each of said zones are hereby established as described herein and shown on the map entitled Zoning Map of Ephraim as amended from time to time, to conform to the actions of the City Council, which Map is on file in the City office, and all boundaries shown thereon are made by the reference as much a part of this Ordinance as fully described and detailed.
10.16.030 Area, Size, Width, Height And Yard Requirements
See ECC 1.20.020 Table A.

10.16.040 Residential Zones
Single-family Residential Zone (R1): Provides appropriate locations where low density residential neighborhoods may be established, maintained and protected. The regulations permit the establishment of public and semi public uses such as churches, schools, libraries, parks, and playgrounds which serve the requirements of families. The regulations are intended to prohibit those uses that would be harmful to single family neighborhoods.
Uses: see ECC 10.20.030 Table B for list of permitted and conditional uses. 
Special regulations concerning accessory apartments: A conditional use permit for an attached accessory apartment (see definition) in the R1 zone may only be approved subject to the following minimum conditions; 
The apartment may be occupied by one family of related persons or not more than two unrelated persons. 
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces each shall be provided for the apartment and the primary residence. 
The use of the accessory apartment is conditional upon the primary residence being owner-occupied; the apartment may not be rented or occupied if the property owner is not living in the home as a primary residence.
So long as above items are met, accessory apartments may be allowed as attached to the main house on lots at least 8.000 square feet in size.
Density Regulations: A minimum lot size of 8,000 square feet shall be required for a single family dwelling. 
Minimum Floor Area: The ground floor area of any one family dwelling shall not be less than 750 square feet exclusive of open porches, garages and carports. 
The Land Use Authority may grant exceptions for studio and accessory apartments smaller than 750 Square feet. Primary dwelling residences smaller than 750 Square feet are allowed by Conditional Use Permit, with special considerations taking into account the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
Animals: Any combination of dogs and cats, up to four (4) total such animals are allowed, and no more than twenty poultry or rabbits on any lot (20 total small animals) may be kept; provided, that: 
the animals must be set back no less than ten feet from all property lines; 
the animals are kept in rear yard areas; and 
the animals are kept within a solid fenced area or building to establish visual and auditory screening.
No pigs may be kept in the R1 Zone.
Minimum Green Space or Landscaping: a minimum of 20 percent of lot area shall be maintained in open green space or landscaped area.
Single-family Residential Zone (R1A): Provides appropriate locations where low density residential neighborhoods may be established, maintained and protected. The regulations permit the establishment, with proper controls, of public and semi public uses such as churches, schools, libraries, parks, and playgrounds which serve the requirements of families. The regulations are intended to prohibit those uses that would be harmful to a single family neighborhood and the historic nature of the area.
Uses: see ECC 10.20.030 Table B for list of permitted and conditional uses. 
Special Regulations Concerning Accessory Apartments: A conditional use permit for an accessory apartment in the R1A zone may only be approved subject to the following minimum conditions; 
The apartment may be occupied by one family of related persons or not more than two unrelated persons. 
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces each shall be provided for the apartment and the primary residence. 
The use of the accessory apartment is conditional upon the primary residence being owner-occupied; the apartment may not be rented or occupied if the property owner is not living in the home as a primary residence. 
So long as above items are met, accessory apartments may be allowed as attached to the main house on lots at least 8.000 square feet in size.
Density Regulations: A minimum lot size of 8,000 square feet shall be required for a single family dwelling. 
Minimum Floor Area: The ground floor area of any one family dwelling shall not be less than 750 square feet exclusive of open porches, garages and carports. 
The Land Use Authority may grant exceptions for studio and accessory apartments smaller than 750 Square feet. Primary dwelling residences smaller than 750 Square feet are allowed by Conditional Use Permit, with special considerations taking into account the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
Animals: Any combination of dogs and cats, up to four (4) total such animals, and no more than twenty poultry or rabbits (on any lot (20 total small animals) may be kept; provided, that: 
the animals must be set back no less than ten feet from all property lines; 
the animals are kept in rear yard areas; and 
the animals are kept within a solid fenced area or building to establish visual and auditory screening. 
No pigs may be kept in the R1A Zone.
Minimum Green Space or Landscaping: a minimum of 20 percent of lot area shall be maintained in open green space or landscaped area.
Two-family Residential Zone (R2): Provides appropriate locations where medium density residential neighborhoods on lots of not less than 8,000 square feet may be established, maintained and protected. The regulations also permit the establishment of, with proper controls, the public and semi public uses such as churches, schools, libraries, parks and playgrounds, etc., which serve the requirements of families. The regulations are intended to prohibit those uses that would be harmful to a medium density residential neighborhood.
Uses: see ECC 10.20.030 Table B for list of permitted and conditional uses.
Special Regulations Concerning Accessory Apartments: A conditional use permit for an attached accessory apartment (see definition) in the R2 zone may only be approved subject to the following minimum conditions; 
The apartment may be occupied by one family of related persons or not more than two unrelated persons. 
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces each shall be provided for the apartment and the primary residence. 
The use of the accessory apartment is conditional upon the primary residence being owner-occupied; the apartment may not be rented or occupied if the property owner is not living in the home as a primary residence.
So long as above items are met, accessory apartments may be allowed as attached to the main house on lots at least 8,000 square feet in size. 	
Density Regulations: A minimum lot size of 8,000 square feet shall be required for a single family dwelling or the first unit of a multiple family dwelling. Additional units may be added according to the following schedule:

Units	Lot size required (in square feet)
First unit	8,000
Second unit	2,000 additional
Additional units	none allowed
Minimum Floor Area: The ground floor area of any one-family dwelling shall not be less than 750 square feet and 650 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.
The Land Use Authority may grant exceptions for studio and accessory apartments smaller than 750 Square feet. Primary dwelling residences smaller than 750 Square feet are allowed by Conditional Use Permit, with special considerations taking into account the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
Animals: Any combination of dogs and cats, up to four (4) total such animals and no more than twenty poultry or rabbits on any lot (20 total small animals) may be kept; provided, that: 
the animals must be set back no less than ten feet from all property lines; 
the animals are kept in rear yard areas; and 
the animals are kept within a solid fenced area or building to establish visual and auditory screening.
No pigs may be kept in the R2 Zone.
Minimum Green Space Or Landscaping: A minimum of 20% of the lot area shall be maintained in open green space or landscaped area. 
Adjoining a Residential Zone Fencing Requirements: where a multi-family or multi-unit development adjoins any lot or parcel of ground in any residential zone, there shall be provided along the adjoining property line a decorative, sight-obscuring fence or any combination of fencing and landscaping which, in the opinion of the Planning Director, adequately protects the adjoining residential property and is properly maintained. (2006) Where no existing trees are present along the boundary of the development, the Planning Commission may require that approved trees and/or other appropriate sight obscuring measures be incorporated into the necessary landscaping. See also fencing requirements, ECC 10.12.040. 
Medium Density Residential Zone (R3): Provides appropriate locations where medium to high density residential neighborhoods on lots of not less than 6,000 square feet may be established, maintained and protected. The regulations also permit the establishment of, with proper controls, the public and semi public uses such as churches, schools, libraries, parks and playgrounds, etc., which serve the requirements of families. The regulations are intended to prohibit those uses that would be harmful to a medium to high density residential neighborhood.
Uses: see ECC 10.20.030 Table B for list of permitted and conditional uses.
Special Regulations Concerning Accessory Apartments: A conditional use permit for an attached accessory apartment (see definition) in the R3 zone may only be approved subject to the following minimum conditions; 
The apartment may be occupied by one family of related persons or not more than two unrelated persons.
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces each shall be provided for the apartment and the primary residence. 
The use of the accessory apartment is conditional upon the primary residence being owner-occupied; the apartment may not be rented or occupied if the property owner is not living in the home as a primary residence.
So long as above items are met, accessory apartments may be allowed as attached to the main house on lots at least 6,000 square feet in size.
Density Regulations: A minimum lot size of 6,000 square feet shall be required for a single family dwelling or the first unit of a multiple family dwelling. Additional units may be added according to the following schedule:

Units 	Lot size required (in square feet) 
First unit 	6,000
Second unit 	2,000 additional
Third unit	2,000 additional
Fourth unit	2,000 additional
Additional units	none allowed
Minimum Floor Area: The ground floor area of any one family dwelling shall not be less than 750 square feet and 650 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.
The Land Use Authority may grant exceptions for studio and accessory apartments smaller than 750 Square feet. Primary dwelling residences smaller than 750 Square feet are allowed by Conditional Use Permit, with special considerations taking into account the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
Animals: Any combination of dogs and cats, up to four (4) total such animals are allowed, and no more than twenty poultry or rabbits on any lot (20 total small animals) may be kept; provided, that:
the animals must be set back no less than ten feet from all property lines;
the animals are kept in rear yard areas; and 
the animals are kept within a solid fenced area or building to establish visual and auditory screening. 
No pigs may be kept in the R3 Zone.
Minimum Green Space Or Landscaping: A minimum of 20% of the lot area shall be maintained in open green space or landscaped area. 
Adjoining a Residential Zone Fencing Requirements: where a multi-family or multi-unit development adjoins any lot or parcel of ground in any residential zone, there shall be provided along the adjoining property line a decorative, sight-obscuring fence, or any combination of fencing and landscaping which, in the opinion of the Planning Director, adequately protects the adjoining residential property and is properly maintained. (2006) Where no existing trees are present along the boundary of the development, the Planning Commission may require that approved trees and/or other appropriate sight obscuring measures be incorporated into the necessary landscaping. See also fencing requirements, ECC 10.12.040.
High Density Residential Zone (R4): Provides appropriate locations where medium to high density residential neighborhoods on lots of not less than 6,000 square feet may be established, maintained and protected. The regulations also permit the establishment of, with proper controls, the public and semi public uses such as churches, schools, libraries, parks and playgrounds, etc., which serve the requirements of families. The regulations are intended to prohibit those uses that would be harmful to a medium to high density residential neighborhood.
Uses: see ECC 10.20.030 Table B for list of permitted and conditional uses.
Special Regulations Concerning Accessory Apartments: A conditional use permit for an attached accessory apartment (see definition) in the R4 zone may only be approved subject to the following minimum conditions;
The apartment may be occupied by one family of related persons or not more than four unrelated persons.
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces each shall be provided for the apartment and the primary residence.
The use of the accessory apartment is conditional upon the primary residence being owner-occupied; the apartment may not be rented or occupied if the property owner is not living in the home as a primary residence.
So long as above items are met, accessory apartments may be allowed as attached to the main house on lots at least 6.000 square feet in size.
Density Regulations: A minimum lot size of six thousand (6,000) square feet shall be required for a single-family dwelling or the first unit of a multiple-family dwelling. Additional units may be added according to the following schedule:

Units 	Lot Size Required (In Square Feet) 
First unit 	6,000
1-8 additional units	2,000 per unit
9+ additional units	1,500 per unit
Minimum Floor Area: The ground floor area of any one family dwelling shall not be less than 750 square feet and 650 square feet for each additional dwelling unit.
The Land Use Authority may grant exceptions for studio and accessory apartments smaller than 750 Square feet. Primary dwelling residences smaller than 750 Square feet are allowed by Conditional Use Permit, with special considerations taking into account the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
Animals: Any combination of dogs and cats, up to four (4) total such animals and no more than twenty poultry or rabbits on any lot (20 total small animals) may be kept; provided, that: 
the animals must be set back no less than ten feet from all property lines; 
the animals are kept in rear yard areas; and 
the animals are kept within a solid fenced area or building to establish visual and auditory screening.
No pigs may be kept in the R4 Zone.
Minimum Green Space Or Landscaping: A minimum of 20% of the lot area shall be maintained in open green space or landscaped area. 
Adjoining a Residential Zone Fencing Requirements: Where a multi-family or multi-unit development adjoins any lot or parcel of ground in any residential zone, there shall be provided along the adjoining property line a decorative, sight-obscuring fence or any combination of fencing and landscaping which, in the opinion of the Planning Director, adequately protects the adjoining residential property and is properly maintained. (2006) Where no existing trees are present along the boundary of the development, the Planning Commission may require that approved trees and/or other appropriate sight obscuring measures be incorporated into the necessary landscaping. See also fencing requirements, ECC 10.12.040.
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 16-01 on 3/30/2016
10.16.050 Agricultural Zones
Agricultural Zone (A): The agricultural zone protects agricultural uses and sensitive lands within the city by controlling density and land coverage and providing for compatible land uses. It is further intended to protect nearby uses from objectionable effects of certain agricultural operations.
Uses: see ECC 10.20.030 Table B for list of permitted and conditional uses. 
Livestock Use: In the A zone, livestock use shall be limited for each acre to the following:
Five large animals which include horses, cattle, goats, sheep or other animals judged by the Planning Commission to be compatible with this category of livestock animal. 
No more than thirty poultry or rabbits or other small animals (20 total small animals) per acre. 
No pigs may be kept in the A Zone. 
No enclosure, pen or structure for raising of poultry, rabbits or livestock shall be located within fifty feet of any dwelling or property line. 
Density regulations: A minimum lot size of twenty acres shall be required for a single family dwelling.
Minimum Floor Area: The ground floor area of any one family dwelling shall not be less than 750 square feet exclusive of open porches, garages and carports.

The Land Use Authority may grant exceptions for studio and accessory apartments smaller than 750 Square feet. Primary dwelling residences smaller than 750 Square feet are allowed by Conditional Use Permit, with special considerations taking into account the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
Residential Agricultural Zone (RA): The residential-agricultural zone allows for and protects certain residential/agricultural use mixes within the city by controlling density and land coverage and providing for compatible land uses. It is further intended to protect nearby uses from objectionable effects of certain agricultural operations.
Uses: see ECC 10.20.030 Table B for list of permitted and conditional uses. 
Special Regulations Concerning Accessory Apartments: A conditional use permit for an attached accessory apartment (see definition) in the RA zone may only be approved subject to the following minimum conditions; 
The apartment may be occupied by one family of related persons or not more than two unrelated persons. 
A minimum of two off-street parking spaces each shall be provided for the apartment and the primary residence. 
The use of the accessory apartment is conditional upon the primary residence being owner-occupied; the apartment may not be rented or occupied if the property owner is not living in the home as a primary residence.
So long as above items are met, accessory apartments may be allowed as attached to the main house on lots at least 0.3 acres in size.
Livestock and Animal Use: In the RA zone, livestock use shall be limited to the following: 
Two large animals which include horses, cattle, goats, sheep or other animals judged by the Planning Commission to be compatible with this category of livestock for the first two-thirds acre and one additional large animal for each one-third acre thereafter. No large animals are allowed on lots less than two-thirds acre.
No more than thirty poultry or rabbits or other small animals on any lot (30 total small animals) provided that: 
the animals must be set back no less than ten feet from all property lines; 
The animals are kept in rear yard areas; and 
The animals are kept within a solid fenced area or building to establish visual and auditory screening.
Any combination of dogs and cats, up to four (4) total such animals are allowed, unless a Kennel License is issued for the property. 
No pigs may be kept in the RA Zone.
Density Regulations: A minimum lot size of one-third acre (0.33 acres) shall be required for a single family dwelling. 
Minimum Floor Area: The ground floor area of any one family dwelling shall not be less than 750 square feet exclusive of open porches, garages and carports.
The Land Use Authority may grant exceptions for studio and accessory apartments smaller than 750 Square feet. Primary dwelling residences smaller than 750 Square feet are allowed by Conditional Use Permit, with special considerations taking into account the character of the surrounding neighborhood.
Minimum Green Space or Landscaping: A minimum of 20 percent of lot area shall be maintained in open green space or landscaped area.
10.16.060 Commercial Zones
Central Business District Commercial Zone (C1): The objective in establishing the C-1 central business district commercial zone is to identify a principal shopping and financial center within the city.
Character: It is characterized by the commingling of commercial uses and dwellings. However, primacy is given to commercial uses within the zone. Existing structures will be allowed to continue with their designed intent such as apartments, homes, student housing, etc.
Uses: see ECC 10.20.030 Table B for list of permitted and conditional uses.
Storage: All materials and merchandise, except vehicles in running order, shall be stored in an enclosed building or within an enclosure surrounded by a solid sight obscuring fence or wall of not less than six feet in height, of a neutral color and no material or merchandise shall be stored to a height of more than the height of the enclosing fence or wall.
Trash And Combustible Materials: No trash, rubbish, weeds or other combustible material shall be allowed to remain on any lot outside of approved containers in any commercial zone. No junk, debris, abandoned or dismantled automobile or automobile parts or similar material shall be stored or allowed to remain on any lot in any commercial zone.
Solid Waste Storage Facilities: All solid waste storage facilities shall be located at the rear of the main building or else behind a sight obscuring fence or wall which will prevent the facility from being seen from a public street.
Adjoining Residential Zone; Fencing Requirements: Where a commercial development adjoins any residential lot or parcel of ground in any residential zone, there shall be provided along the adjoining property line a decorative, sight obscuring fence, or any combination of fencing and landscaping which, in the opinion of the Planning Director, adequately protects the adjoining residential property and is properly maintained.
Landscaping:
In all commercial zones, at least 5% of the lot area shall be maintained as landscaped area. Where feasible, a landscaped area adjacent to the public street shall be provided and planted with trees.
In addition to the 5% landscaping required on the private lot area, all road rights of way not utilized for pavement, curb or sidewalk shall be planted and maintained as landscaped area.
Residences in the C-1 zone shall conform to all requirements under the R-4 designation including rules for the keeping of animals.
Canopies, awnings, and related outdoor eating facilities within the front setback and within the right of way are allowed as long as pedestrian walkways, safety, and visibility are preserved, and upon permission being granted by the City.
Driveways for commercial uses may be at least twenty feet wide, unless approved otherwise by the city engineer.
Commercial Overlay Zone (C1A): The objective in establishing the C1A overlay zone is to establish areas around Snow College in which certain campus-specific or college-related businesses may locate.
All permitted uses under the C1A Zone are limited to a maximum of 1,500 square feet for customer service and a maximum of 1,500 square feet for storage and office space relating to the business.
Uses: see ECC 10.20.030 Table B for list of permitted and conditional uses.
No outside storage of material or merchandise is permitted in the C1A zone.
Trash And Combustible Materials: No trash, rubbish, weeds or other combustible material shall be allowed to remain on any lot outside of approved containers in any commercial zone. No junk, debris, abandoned or dismantled automobile or automobile parts or similar material shall be stored or allowed to remain on any lot in any commercial zone.
Solid Waste Storage Facilities: All solid waste storage facilities shall be located at the rear of the main building or else behind a sight obscuring fence or wall which will prevent the facility from being seen from a public street.
Fencing Requirements: Commercial uses in the C1A zone shall provide a decorative, sight obscuring fence, or any combination of fencing and landscaping which, in the opinion of the Planning Director, adequately protects the adjoining residential property and is properly maintained.
Landscaping:
In all commercial zones, at least 5% of the lot area shall be maintained as landscaped area. Where feasible, a landscaped area adjacent to the public street shall be provided and planted with trees.
In addition to the 5% landscaping required on the private lot area, all road rights of way not utilized for pavement, curb or sidewalk shall be planted and maintained as landscaped area.
Canopies, awnings, and related outdoor eating facilities within the front setback and within the right of way are allowed as long as pedestrian walkways, safety, and visibility are preserved, and upon permission being granted by the City.
Driveways within the C1A zone may be treated as residential uses.
General Commercial Zone (C2): The objective in establishing the C2 zone is to provide areas wherein the general commercial activity of the city may take place.
Character: It is characterized by the commingling of commercial uses and dwellings. However, primacy is given to commercial uses within the zone. Existing structures will be allowed to continue with their designed intent such as apartments, homes, student housing, etc.
Uses: see ECC 10.20.030 Table B for list of permitted and conditional uses.
Storage: All materials and merchandise, except vehicles in running order, shall be stored in an enclosed building or within an enclosure surrounded by a solid sight obscuring fence or wall of not less than six feet in height, of a neutral color and no material or merchandise shall be stored to a height of more than the height of the enclosing fence or wall.
Trash And Combustible Materials: No trash, rubbish, weeds or other combustible material shall be allowed to remain on any lot outside of approved containers in any commercial zone. No junk, debris, abandoned or dismantled automobile or automobile parts or similar material shall be stored or allowed to remain on any lot in any commercial zone.
Solid Waste Storage Facilities: All solid waste storage facilities shall be located at the rear of the main building or else behind a sight obscuring fence or wall which will prevent the facility from being seen from a public street.
Adjoining Residential lots; Fencing Requirements: Where a commercial development adjoins any residential lot or parcel of ground in any residential zone, there shall be provided along the adjoining property line a decorative, sight obscuring fence, or any combination of fencing and landscaping which, in the opinion of the Planning Director, adequately protects the adjoining residential property and is properly maintained.
Landscaping:
In all commercial zones, at least 5% of the lot area shall be maintained as landscaped area. Where feasible, a landscaped area adjacent to the public street shall be provided and planted with trees.
In addition to the 5% landscaping required on the private lot area, all road rights of way not utilized for pavement, curb or sidewalk shall be planted and maintained as landscaped area.
Residences in the C2 zone shall conform to all requirements under the R-4 designation including rules for the keeping of animals.
In the case of mixed use containing both multiple residential units and commercial elements in a given development, the following standards shall apply:
Parking: the total combined parking shall be calculated in accordance with ECC 10.20.050 Table D: Parking Requirements. The total combined parking may then be reduced by up to 25% if it can be shown that the parking demand for the commercial portion of the development will be significantly reduced after normal business hours.
Landscaping: the amount of required landscaping shall be based on a weighted average of commercial to residential ratios which shall vary between 5% (for a completely commercial development) to 20% (for a completely residential development) of the total land area of the development. This prorated percentage of landscaping shall be calculated by multiplying 5% (0.05) by the total commercial floor space and 20% (0.2) by the total residential floor space, then summing the two figures and dividing by the total floor space. This prorated percentage of landscaping shall then be multiplied by the total lot size to give the needed landscaping for the lot.
Canopies, awnings, and related outdoor eating facilities within the front setback in all commercial zones and within the right of way as long as pedestrian walkways are allowed as long as safety, and visibility are preserved, and permission granted by the City.
Driveways for commercial uses in the C2 Zone may be at least twenty feet wide, unless approved otherwise by the city engineer.
10.16.070 Industrial Zone
Industrial Zone (I-1): The objective in establishing the I-1 Industrial Zone is to provide areas in appropriate locations where light manufacturing, industrial processes and warehousing not producing objectionable effects may be established, maintained and protected. Associated office and support commercial uses are allowed. The regulations of this district are designed to protect environmental quality of the district and adjacent areas. To provide areas for the promotion of new industry for the city and to accommodate basic industries which tend to increase the employment and economic base and which may market their products primarily outside of the local economy. 
Uses: see ECC 10.20.030 Table B for list of permitted and conditional uses.
Excluded Uses: animal by-products plants; blast furnaces, garbage, offal and animal reduction, incineration or processing refuse dumps, hog farm, compounding or processing of chlorine gas, acid, cement, lime, gypsum, plaster of paris, creosote, fertilizer from animal by products, propylene, rubber reduction; processing or treatment of fish; smelters and ore reduction; and similar uses which give rise to excessive or offensive odor, noise, fumes, dust, radiation or danger of explosion. 
Livestock Use: In the Industrial zone, livestock use shall be limited to the following:
Two large animals which include horses, cattle, goats, sheep or other animals judged by the Planning Commission to be compatible with this category of livestock for the first two-thirds acre and one additional large animal for each one-third acre thereafter. No large animals are allowed on lots less than two-thirds acre. 
No more than thirty poultry or rabbits or other small animals on any lot (30 total small animals). 
No pigs may be kept in the Industrial Zone.
Any combination of dogs and cats, up to four (4) total such animals are allowed. 
No enclosure, pen or structure for raising of poultry, rabbits or livestock shall be located within ten feet of any dwelling or property line. (2008)
Adjoining Residential Zone; Fencing Requirements: Where any industrial zone adjoins any residential lot in a residential zone, there shall be provided and maintained along such property line a six foot or ornamental masonry or other decorative solid fence or wall of a neutral color, and/or landscaping which, in the opinion of the City, will adequately protect the adjoining residential property. 
Outside Parking Area; Lighting: All outside parking area shall be lighted during the evening business hours. All lights shall be directed away from adjacent residential areas.
10.16.080 Planned Unit Development Zone (PUD)
Planned Unit Development Zone (PUD): The PUD zone is a designation applied to land that has been developed according to the Ephraim City Subdivision Ordinance. A planned unit development is a distinct category of conditional use. As such, it is intended to encourage the efficient use of land and resources, promote greater efficiency in public and utility services, preservation of open space, efficient use of alternative transportation and encouraging innovation in the planning and building of all types of development.
Uses and Other Regulations: Use and other regulations governing Planned Developments are established on a case-by-case basis by the Planning Commission’s review and the City Council’s approval of planned development applications. Copies of such regulations should be appended to this ordinance or kept on file with the Planning Director for reference. 
Residential parks dedicated exclusively to manufactured homes and recreational vehicle parks shall be developed as planned developments.
Flag lots for uses other than single family dwellings shall be developed as planned development.
10.20 TABLES
10.20.010 Use And Interpretation
10.20.020 Table A: Setbacks
10.20.030 Table B: Land Use Matrix
10.20.040 Table C: Sign Regulations
10.20.050 Table D: Off-Street Parking Requirements
10.20.060 Table E: Notice Matrix For Land Use Decisions And Appeal Process
10.20.070 Figure 1: Ephraim City Land Use (Zoning) Map

10.20.010 Use And Interpretation
These tables are to make reference to the standards and regulations of this ordinance as user-friendly as possible. The official interpretation of these tables shall be given by the Planning Director as provided in this ordinance.

10.20.020 Table A: Setbacks
This table provides setback and other development standards governing lots in the city in an easy to read format. It is not the complete set of regulations governing property development and should not be used except in conjunction with the rest of this ordinance.

Table A: Setbacks and Density

Zone	Min. Lot Size	Max. Density	Min. Width	Front Yard	Side Yards	Rear Yard	Maximum Height of Main Bldgs.
R1	8,000 sq. ft. 
(0.184 acres)	1 unit per parcel	75'	20'	8'	20'	two and one-half stories or 35'
R1A	8,000 sq. ft. 
(0.184 acres)
1 unit per parcel	75'	20' *	8'	20'	two and one-half stories or 35'
R2	8,000 sq. ft. 
(0.184 acres)
17.8	70'	20'	8'	20'	two and one-half stories or 35'
R3	6,000 sq. ft. 
(0.138 acres)
18.8	70'	20'	8'	20'	45'
R4	6,000 sq. ft. 
(0.138 acres)
18.8	70'	20'	8'	20'	45'
A	20 acres	0.05	120'	20'	8'	20'	two and one-half stories or 35'
RA	0.33 acres	3.0	75'	20'	8'	20'	two and one-half stories or 35'
C1	none	18.8	none	10' **	0'	0'	45' (8' minimum)
C1A	none	18.8	none	20' *	0'	0'	45' (8' minimum)
C2	none	18.8	none	20'	0'	0'	45' (8' minimum)
C3	none	0	none	20'	0'	0'	45' (8' minimum)
I	none	0	none	20'	10' ***	0'	35' unless waived by city council
* May be less if adjacent property is less, but never less than fifteen feet.
** For property located in the C1 Zone between 100 South and 100 North, a five foot setback may be applied to the front setback. (2010)*** May be 0' if a 4-hour firewall.

10.20.030 Table B: Land Use Matrix
This table provides a listing of permitted and conditionally permitted uses for all zones within the city. The list is not comprehensive and, in the event a sought-after use is not listed, the Planning Director is empowered to interpret the list and determine if the unlisted use is materially like a listed use. In making this determination, the Planning Director may, at his sole discretion, ask the planning commission for its review and interpretation.

Table B: Land Use Matrix

P= Permitted, C= Permitted by Conditional Use, Blank=Not Allowed

Use	Residential	Agricultural	Commercial	Industrial
 	R1	R1A	R2	R3	R4	A	RA	C1	C1A	C2	I
Accessory uses buildings customarily incidental to permitted uses
P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
Accessory buildings and uses customarily incidental to conditional uses	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C
Agricultural industry or related business



 	 	C	C	

P	C
Animal hospital



 	 	 	C	


C
Apiary - beehives (Up to 5 beehives)
P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
Apiary-beehives (More than 5 beehives)



 	 	P	C	


C
Art needlework shop; art shop; art supply



 	 	 	
P	C	P	
Automatic car wash



 	 	 	
P	
P	P
Automobile or recreation vehicle sales, service, lease, rental and repair, new or used



 	 	 	
C	
P	P
Automobile service station	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	P
Awning sales/repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Bakery, retail sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P
Bank	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	 
Barber shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P
Bath and massage (not part of medical or health spa)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	P
Beauty shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P
Beauty shop for pets, dog grooming	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Bed and Breakfast (2006)	 	 	C	C	C	 	C	P	P	P	 
Beer outlet, Class A, Class B	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 
Blacksmith shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P
Body and fender shop; tire recapping; motor vehicle, bicycle, and recreation vehicle assembling, painting, upholstering and rebuilding	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	C	P
Boiler works	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P
Bookbinding	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P
Bookstore	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P
Bottling works	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P
Breweries	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C
Building material sales yard, outside, with sale of rock, sand, gravel and the like as an incidental part of the main business, but excluding concrete mixing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P
Building material sales in an enclosed building	 	 	 	 	 	 	
P	
P	P
Buildings and structures on slopes greater than 20%	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C
Café, cafeteria, catering establishment, restaurant (not a drive-thru)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	C
Candy, confectionery, nut shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P
Carbonated and purified water sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P
Carpet and/or rug cleaning	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P
Cell Phone Towers – see Radio, TV and Cell Towers	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	P
Cemetery	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	
P	 
Central mixing plant, related to construction industry for cement, mortar, plaster, or paving materials	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C
Child day care or nursery	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	P	 	P	 
China and/or silver shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Church	C	C	C	P	P	C	C	P	 	P	 
Clothes cleaning, dyeing, pressing, dry cleaners	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	P
Clothing store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P
Coal/fuel sales office	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P
Construction of buildings to be sold and moved off the premise	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P
Convenience store with gasoline sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Copy store, blueprinting, Photostatting, duplicating	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P
Costume rental	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	 
Dairy	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	 	 	 	P
Dams and reservoirs	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	C
Dance Clubs/Hall (2006)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	C
Dance Studio (2006)	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	P	P	P	P
Delicatessen	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P
Department store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P
Dramatics school	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	P	 	P	P
Drapery-curtain store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Dressmaking	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Drive-ins; refreshment stand, eating place	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P
Drugstore	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P
Dry goods store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P
Dude ranch, family vacation ranch	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	 	 	 	 
Dwelling, Accessory Apartment (see definition)	C	C	P	P	P	 	C	P	P	P	 
Dwelling, Congregate Residence. Multiple tenant dwelling (more than four individuals) in an existing structure, subject to current parking requirements; ECC 10.20.050 Table D, with an occupancy of up to the lesser of two people per bedroom or 10 people per building (see definitions.) (2006)	 	 	C	P	P	 	 	P	P	P	 
Dwelling, two-family (duplex)	 	 	C	C	C	 	 	C	C	C	 
Dwelling, multiple-family (more than 4 units)	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	C	C	C	 
Dwelling, four-family (fourplex)	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	C	C	C	 
Dwelling, single-family	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	C	 
Dwelling, three-family (triplex)	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	C	C	C	 
Egg candling, sales, or processing	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	 	 	 	P
Elderly Facilities as defined and articulated by Utah Code §§ 10-9a-103, 10-9a-516, 10-9a-517, 10-9a-518, 10-9a-519	P	P	P	P	P	 	 	P	P	P	 
Electrical, appliances and fixtures, electronic instruments sales, repair and/or service	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Employment agency or employment office	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P
Farm or ranch housing	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	 	 	 	C
Farms devoted to raising and marketing of livestock, chickens, turkeys or other fowl or poultry, fish or frogs; including wholesale and retail sales; pigs and hogs excluded	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	 	 	 	C
Fix-it shop, repair shop, for household items	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Flooring, carpet repair and sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Florist shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P	P	P	P
Food processing or packaging	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P
Forest industry, such as a saw mill, wood products plant, etc.	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	C	P
Forestry, except forest industry	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
Foundry	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P
Frozen food lockers	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P
Fruit or vegetable stand	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P	P	P
Fruit/fruit juice store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P
Furniture sales, and/or repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Garage Repair Shops (see definition)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	P
Gift shop; hobby or crafts shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P
Golf Course	C	C	C	C	C	P	P	 	 	C	 
Greenhouse, nursery; plant materials; soil & lawn service	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	 	P	P
Grocery; meat sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Group Homes, to include youth care facilities, rehabilitation and treatment centers. (as per state and federal laws)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	C	C	C	 
Gunsmith	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Hardware store, not including the sale of lumber	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Hatchery	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	 	 	 	P
Health Club/Spa/Gym	 	 	 	 	C	 	 	P	C	P	P
Heating, ventilating, air conditioning; equipment (HVAC), sales/repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	P
Home occupations (Uncontested -see definition and ECC 10.12.020 Paragraph G)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	 	P	P
Honey extraction	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	 	 	P	P
Hospital supplies	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	P
Hospital; medical or dental clinic	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	C
Hotel, motel, inn	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	C
Household cleaning/repair, house equipment displays	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Ice cream shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	C
Ice manufacture, storage, and sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	P
Ice cream making, and/or candy making	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	C	P
Incinerator, excluding hazardous materials	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C
Indoor auto parts sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Insulation sales, manufacturing, installation and service	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	P
Interior decorating store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Jewelry store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Kennel	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	C	 	C	P
Knitting mill	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P
Laboratories	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P
Laundry, automatic self-help	 	 	C	C	C	 	 	P	P	P	P
Laundry agency	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P
Leather goods	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Linen shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Liquor and beer sales; places for drinking liquor or beer	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	C
Lithographing, including engraving, photo engraving	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Luggage sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Machine shop/Manufacturing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	C	P
Manufactured home sales and storage	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P
Manufacturing (Heavy)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C
Manufacturing (Light)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P
Medical/dental clinic, and related laboratories	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Milk distributing station; sale of dairy products, excluding processing/bottling	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	 	P	P
Mobile lunch service	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Monument sales, retail	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Mortuary	C	C	C	C	C	 	 	P	 	P	C
Motion picture studio	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	C	P
Motorboat sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Music store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P
Notions, variety store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	 
Novelty shop, variety store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	 
Office, business or professional	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Office, Low Impact Business or Professional (see definition)	

C	C	C	

P	
P	P
Office, supply; office machines sales, repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Oil burner shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C
Optometrist; oculist	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	 
Ornamental iron manufacturing and sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P
Package agency	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Painter/paint store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Parking lot	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
Personal agriculture, gardening, tilling of the soil; for personal consumption or resale	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
Personal agriculture, including grazing and pasturing of animals	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	 	 	 	P
Pest extermination and control office	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Pet shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Photographer or photography shop, sales and service	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P
Planeing mill	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P
Plumbing shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Popcorn and/or nut shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	P	P
Printing, including engraving, photo engraving	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	P
Private educational institution having a curriculum similar to that ordinarily given in public schools	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	 	C	P
Privately owned utility transmission lines which serve inter-regional areas	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	 	C	C
Public owned parks and recreational facilities	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	C
Public stable, riding academy or riding ring, horse show barns or facilities	 	 	 	 	 	P	P	C	 	C	P
Public use, essential services	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
Radio and television station	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P
Radio, Television, and Cell phone towers (2006)	 	 	 	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	P
Radio and television sales and repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Reception center and/or wedding chapel	 	C	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P
Recreation vehicles, rentals, leases, sales and service, outdoor and indoor	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Residences for persons with a disability (see Utah Code § 10-9a-5120)	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	C	C	C	 
Restaurant supply	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Retail buildings: less than 20,000 square feet in total floor space	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Retail Buildings: floor space greater than or equal to 20,000 square feet	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	C	C
Roofing sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P
Sandblasting	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P
Saw mill	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P
Second-hand shop, antiques, conducted within a building or enclosure	 	C	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P
Seed/feed store	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	 	P	P
Sewing machine shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Sexually oriented businesses	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C
Shoe shop; shoeshine; shoe repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Sign shop, sign painting shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Solar Panels: Single Family Consumption	P	C	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P	P
Solar Panel: All other uses besides single family use	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	C	C
State store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C
Stationary and greeting card sales	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	P	P
Storage, placement, keeping, locating, parking, maintaining, and keeping of agricultural equipment	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	 	 	C	P
Storage, placement, keeping, locating, parking, maintaining, keeping of commercial, construction, military surplus, or specialized equipment	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	
 	C	P
Storage rental units	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	P
Tailor shop	 	 	 	 	 	

P	 	P	P
Taxidermist	 	 	 	 	 	C	C	P	 	P	P
Temporary buildings for uses incidental to construction work, including living quarters for a guard or night watchman, which buildings must be removed upon completion or abandonment of the construction work	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	C	P
Tire shop, sales and repair	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	P
Tire, recycling into fuels and useable products	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C
Tire retreading, or vulcanizing	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C
Tobacco shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	C
Towel and linen supply service	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	 	P	P
Travel bureau	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Treatment of materials from sand and grease interceptors, resulting in inert materials	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C
Truck wash	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P
Truck and heavy equipment service station and repair facility	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P
Upholstering, including mattress manufacture rebuilding or renovating	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P
Upholstery shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Veterinary	 	 	 	 	 	P	C	C	 	P	P
Wallpaper store	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	 	P	P
Weaving	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	P	P
Welding shop	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P
Wholesale business	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P
Windmills (self standing towers) (not including windmills integrated into typical building equipment and/or accessories)	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	 	C	P
HISTORY
Amended by Ord. 16-01 on 3/30/2016
10.20.040 Table C: Sign Regulations
This table lists the standards for signs and is in two parts:

Part 1: Lists standards for primary signs.

Location	Total allowable sign area	Maximum size	Heights limits
Fronting Highway 89
1 sq. ft. per 2' of property frontage
240 sq. ft. per lot, 120 sq. ft. per sign face
20'
Commercial and Industrial not fronting Hwy. 89
1 sq. ft. per 2' of property frontage
120 sq. ft. per lot, 60 sq. ft per sign face
20'
Residential and C1A not fronting Hwy. 89
1 sq. ft. per 5' of property frontage
64 sq. ft. per lot, 32 sq. ft. per sign face
12'
Part 2: Lists standards for secondary signs.

Location	Total allowable sign area	Maximum size	Height limits
Directional, instructional and ingress/egress signs
1 sq. ft. per 500 sq. ft. of property. 32 sq. ft. max.
8 sq. ft.
4'
restaurant menu boards
two per lot, 48 sq. ft. max.
24 sq. ft.
8'
safety signs
as needed, with Planning Director approval
4 sq. ft. 	as approved
Please refer to ECC 10.12.050 for further information and regulations concerning signs in Ephraim City.

10.20.050 Table D: Off-Street Parking Requirements
This table lists the off-street parking requirements for different uses.

Table D: Parking Requirements

Use	Minimum # of spaces
One and two family dwellings
2/unit
Condominiums (New construction and conversions)
2 spaces per unit, (1 of which shall be covered) plus 1 space per 5 units for guests, plus 1 space per 5 units for RV and boat storage unless otherwise approved. (see ECC 10.12.110 Paragraph C,2)
All other dwellings *
1.5 spaces per bedroom (2006)
Offices
1/300 sq. ft.: 3 minimum
Mixed Use Commercial and Residential
Total of office and residential. May be reduced by up to 25% if commercial use will be significantly reduced after normal business hours.
Assembly hall
1/4 persons allowed at maximum occupancy.
Church
1/4 permanent seats + 1/40 sq. ft. without permanent seats in the largest seating area.
Stadium, arena, rodeo, etc.
1/4 seats + 1/75 sq. ft. seating area without permanent seats.
Stores, supermarkets, etc.
1/250 sq. ft. sales area.
Clinic
1/300 sq. ft.: 3 minimum
Hospital
1/2 beds + 1/doctor and nurse on staff + 2/3 other employees on maximum shift
Nursing home
1/4 beds + 2/3 employees on maximum shift
Hotel, motel, inn, etc.
1/unit + 2 additional spaces
Mortuary, funeral home
1/250 sq. ft. + 1/3 seats
Auto repair
4/bay
Bowling alley
5/alley
Billiard halls
1/table
Golf driving range
1/tee
Golf course
1/2 holes
Library **
3/1000 sq. ft. public area
Restaurant, tavern, eatery, etc.
1/3 seats: 3 spaces minimum
Child care
1/10 children + 2/3 employees on maximum shift + 1 loading space
Skating rink
1/250 sq. ft. useable area
Swimming pool
1/3 persons at maximum occupancy
Recreational facility
1/5 persons at maximum occupancy
Tennis, handball, racquetball, etc.
2/court; 5 minimum
Health club, spa, gym, etc.
1/400 sq. ft.: 10 spaces minimum
Elementary school
1/classroom + 1/teacher + 2/3 other employees on maximum shift
Junior and senior high schools
1/4 students + 1/teacher + 2/3 other employees on maximum shift
College, university, trade school, etc. ***
5/classroom + 2/3 employees on maximum shift + 1/3 seats in largest auditorium
Veterinary hospitals
1/300 sq. ft.
Manufacturing plant
Greater of 1/employee for sum of two largest consecutive shifts, plus 1 space per vehicle used in the conduct of business, or 1/600 sq. ft. of floor area (2006)
Service commercial (cabinet shop, printing shop, etc.)
3/1000 sq. ft.
Outdoor sales lots
1/2500 sq. ft.
* 10% reduction in required parking is allowed if 1 bicycle parking space per unit is provided.
** 10% reduction in required parking is allowed if 1 bicycle parking space per 500 square feet of public area is provided.
*** 10 % reduction in required parking is allowed if bicycle parking spaces equal to 30% of the required number of automobile spaces are provided.

10.20.060 Table E: Notice Matrix For Land Use Decisions And Appeal Process
This table lists the notification requirements for the different types of land use applications.

TABLE E: NOTICE MATRIX FOR LAND USE DECISIONS AND APPEAL PROCESS

* Land Use Action
* Timeline for Notice
* Method and Content Required for Notice

Preparation, Adoption, or Amendments of General Plan
Utah Code § 10-9a-203
10 Calendar Days before preparation or amendment
Provide date, time, and place of the first public hearing
Notice of each public meeting
Mailed to each affected entity
Posted in three locations within the city or on the city website
Published in a newspaper and on Utah Public Notice Website 10 calendar days before the hearing

Or mailed 10 days before to each property owner who is directly affected and the each adjacent property owner
Adoption or Modification of Land Use Ordinance
Utah Code § 10-9a-205
(See Utah Code § 10-9a-205(4) for additional notice requirements regarding zoning map adoption or amendments.)
10 Calendar days before the public hearing with Planning Commission
24 Hours before public meeting
Provide date, time, and place of the first public hearing
Notice of each public meeting
Mailed to each affected entity
Posted in three locations within the city or on the city website
Published in a newspaper and on Utah Public Notice Website 10 calendar days before the hearing

Or mailed 10 days before to each property owner who is directly affected and the each adjacent property owner
Posted in three locations within the city or on the city website
Published in a newspaper and on Utah Public Notice Website 10 calendar days before the hearing

Or mailed 10 days before to each property owner who is directly affected and the each adjacent property owner
Annexation Policy Plan
Utah Code § 10-2-401.5
14 Days before public meeting
14 Days before public hearing w/ planning commission
14 Days before public hearing w/ city council
Reasonable Notice
Notice provided to each affected entity
Allow 10 Days for comments from affected entities after public meeting
Appeal of Permit Decision
Utah Code § 10-9a-704
Allow 10 Days to appeal

Acquisition/Disposition of Public Property
Utah Code § 10-8-2
14 Days before public hearing with Legislative Body
Acquiring Property:

Published in a newspaper
Published on the Utah Public Notice Website
Make pre-hearing study available for review by interested parties
Disposing of Property:

Reasonable notice
Conditional Use Permit
Utah Code § 10-9a-507
Set by Municipality
Set by Municipality
Land Use Applicant
Utah Code § 10-9a-202
Notify Applicant 3 Business Days prior to public meeting
Date, time, and place of each public hearing and public meeting to consider the application.
Provide Staff Report
Notify of any final action on a pending application
Applicant may waive these requirements if they are not met by the city so that application may remain on the agenda

Nonconforming Uses/Noncomplying Structures
Utah Code § 10-9a-511
6 months
Written notice
States that the structure is uninhabitable
States that the noncomplying structure or nonconforming use will be lost if the structure is not restored or repaired within 6 months
Subdivision Plat Amendment
Utah Code § 10-9a-207
10 Calendar Days before Public Meeting 
Mailed and addressed to the record owner of each parcel within specified parameters; or 
Posted on the property proposed for subdivision
Vacation, Alteration or Amendment to Platted Street
Utah Code § 10-9a-208
10 Days before the public hearing with Legislative Body
Provide the date, place, and time of the hearing
Mailed to the record owner of each parcel that is accessed by the right-of-way
Mailed to each affected entity
Posted on or near the right-of-way in a manner that is calculated to alert the public; and
Published in a newspaper and on the Utah Public Notice Website
* Or as superseded by State Law

Notes: Challenge to proper notice must be taken within 30 days of the meeting or action, otherwise notice is considered adequate and proper.

The Planning Commission may increase the notification area required if they feel it is warranted by a particular application.
If Ephraim City fails to provide a copy of the staff report/recommendation to the applicant within the required time frame listed here, an applicant may waive this requirement so that the application may stay on the public hearing or public meeting agenda and be considered as if the requirements had been met. 
Subdivision plat amendments which adjust common lot lines between lots by metes and bounds may be approved by the Planning Director in accordance with the provisions of ECC 10.04.060 Paragraph E and Utah Code § 9a-606-5a
10.20.070 Figure 1: Ephraim City Land Use (Zoning) Map

11 SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
11.04 INTRODUCTION
11.08 DEFINITIONS - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
11.12 SUBDIVIDER AGREEMENT
11.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS
11.20 SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
11.24 SUBMITTAL AND APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS
11.28 DEVELOPMENT SEQUENCE
11.32 GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS

11.04 INTRODUCTION
11.04.010 Short Title
11.04.020 Purpose
11.04.030 Burden Of Proof
11.04.040 Funding Public Facilities
11.04.050 Assumption Of Validity
11.04.060 Interpretation
11.04.070 Conflict
11.04.080 Severability
11.04.090 Third Party Review

11.04.010 Short Title
This Title is known as the “Subdivision Ordinance Of Ephraim City, Utah.”

11.04.020 Purpose
The purpose of this Title is to provide policies, standards, requirements and procedures to regulate and control the design and improvement of all subdivisions; ensure that all proposed subdivisions are consistent with the General Plan and applicable specific plans; and to ensure that land is subdivided in a manner that will promote public health, safety, convenience, general welfare and the physical, social and economic development of the area.

11.04.030 Burden Of Proof
For all proceedings in regard to development approval under this Title or amendments to this Title, the burden of proof showing satisfaction of all requirements shall rest with the applicant or authorized agent of the proposed development or amendment.

11.04.040 Funding Public Facilities
The developer is responsible to fund and construct those public facilities which are necessary to service the proposed development to the extent those public facilities are related and roughly proportional to the need created by the proposed development regardless of whether the facilities are on-site or off-site.

11.04.050 Assumption Of Validity
The City will assume that all information provided is accurate and valid. If any information provided to the City is found to be outdated, false, or in any way misleading, the application for development approval may be denied or revoked by the City Council regardless of previous approvals.

11.04.060 Interpretation
In interpreting and applying the provision of this section, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum acceptable standards for development within Ephraim City.

11.04.070 Conflict
This chapter shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of covenants, agreements, other ordinances, or laws, but shall prevail notwithstanding such provisions which are less restrictive.

11.04.080 Severability
Should any article, section, clause or provision of this ordinance be declared by the courts to be invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of the ordinance or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be invalid.

11.04.090 Third Party Review
If the design or engineering review of any application or proposed development is beyond the expertise of the City Staff, the City may require third party review by an engineer selected or approved by the City prior to the preliminary approval of the application. The applicant shall pay all costs associated with the third party review.

11.08 DEFINITIONS - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS
11.08.010 Definitions - Subdivision Regulations

11.08.010 Definitions - Subdivision Regulations
The words and terms defined in this ordinance shall have the meanings indicated. The particular controls the general. The word “shall” is always mandatory and not directory; the word “may” is permissive. Words used in the present tense include the future unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. Words used in the singular number include the plural, and words used in the plural number include the singular unless the context clearly indicates the contrary. 

CITY: Ephraim City Corporation; also refers to the geographic area that falls within the incorporated bounds thereof. 

CITY ENGINEER: The Engineer of Ephraim City or any individual or firm retained or designated by Ephraim City for the purpose of performing engineering duties. 

COLLECTOR STREET: A street which carries traffic from minor streets to the major street system, including the principal entrance streets of residential development and the primary circulating streets within such a development.

CONCEPT PLAT: A map, chart, or drawing showing proposed lots and streets within a potential subdivision including the relationship to existing land and streets in the surrounding area containing all the information in the Concept Plat section of this ordinance.

COUNTY: Sanpete County; also refers to the geographic area that falls within the bounds thereof; sometimes specifically refers to the unincorporated lands within Sanpete County.

CUL-DE-SAC: A minor or local street having one end open and the other end terminated by a vehicular turnabout.

DEVELOPER: Any person, including a corporate person, who undertakes to develop land, including subdividers. 

DEVELOPMENT REVIEW COMMITTEE: A committee consisting of the City Manager, City Planning Director, Public Works Director, Fire Chief, Power Superintendent, and others as deemed appropriate. 

DEVELOPMENT: The division of a parcel of land into two or more parcels; the construction, reconstruction, conversion, structural alteration, relocation, or enlargement of any structure; any mining, excavation, landfill, or land disturbance; and any use or extension of the use of land. 

EASEMENTS: That portion of a lot or lots reserved or granted for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal owner or owners of said property or properties. The easement may be for use under, on the surface, or above said lot or lots. 

EXACTIONS: Contributions or payments required as an authorized precondition for receiving a development permit. Exactions may be in the form of physical infrastructure and/or property required as part of the development, and/or as monetary payments (cash in lieu) to the City.

FINAL PLAT: A final map or plat of the land division prepared for filing with the Sanpete County Recorder and in compliance with all the requirements set forth in this ordinance and the Ephraim City Land Use Ordinance. This plat shall have been accurately surveyed and such survey marked on the ground so that streets, alleys, blocks, lots, and other divisions thereof can be identified.

FRONT, OR FRONTAGE: The boundary of a subdivision which abuts an existing City street or one identified in the General Plan, and where individual lots exit directly onto the City street or where internal streets either enter or exit onto the City street.

GENERAL PLAN: An official City document that sets forth general guidelines for proposed future development of the land within the City, as set forth in Utah Code §§ 10-9-301 and 10-9-302. “General Plan” includes what is also commonly referred to as a “Master Plan.” 

INTERVENING PROPERTY: Property that is located between the proposed development and existing City infrastructure.

INFRASTRUCTURE: Services needed to sustain industry, residential, commercial, and all other land use activities. Infrastructure includes water lines, sewer lines, curb, gutter, sidewalks, storm drain, power, pressurized irrigation, streets and roads, communications, and other miscellaneous public facilities.

LAND USE AUTHORITY: A person, board, commission, agency, or other body designated by the legislative body to act upon a land use application. (2006)

LEGISLATIVE BODY: The Ephraim City Council.

LOT: A parcel of real property with a separate and distinct number or other designation shown on a plat or a parcel of real property delineated on an approved plat as filed in the office of the County Recorder and intended as a unit for building development or transfer of ownership.

LOT LINE ADJUSTMENT: The relocation of the property boundary line between two adjoining lots, resulting in no new lot, with the consent of the owners of record and in compliance with the Land Use Ordinance.

MAJOR STREET OR MINOR ARTERIAL: A street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended to serve as a major traffic way and which is designated as such in the General Plan.

MINOR OR LOCAL STREET: A street intended to provide direct access to abutting property, which carries only local residential traffic. Through traffic access to other neighborhoods or areas may be possible but is generally discouraged.

OFF-SITE: Property outside of the boundaries of the subdivision.

ON-SITE: Within or on the perimeter of the subdivision.

PHASE: A portion of a subdivision, drawn as one plat, wherein the number of lots shown is fewer than the total number of lots contained in the complete subdivision.

PLANNING DIRECTOR: The Planner of Ephraim City or any individual or firm retained or designated by Ephraim City for the purpose of performing planning duties.

PRELIMINARY PLAT: A drawing prepared by a licensed engineer or licensed land surveyor, to scale, representing a proposal to subdivide a tract, lot, or parcel of land and meeting the preliminary plat requirements of this ordinance, including acreage.

PUBLIC WORKS DIRECTOR: The director of Public Works for the City of Ephraim, who in conjunction with his/her other responsibilities carries the responsibility to review and approve the feasibility of sanitary sewer services, culinary water, streets, storm drainage and other utilities as assigned. (2006)

STREET: Public or private rights-of-way, including highways, avenues, boulevards, parkways, roads, lanes, walks, trails, alleys, viaducts, subways, tunnels, bridges, public easements, and other ways. 

SUBDIVIDER: See developer.

SUBDIVISION: Any land that is divided, re-subdivided or proposed to be divided into two or more lots, parcels, sites, units, plots, or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, for offer, sale, lease, or development either on the installment plan or upon any and all other plans, terms, and conditions.

“Subdivision" includes the division or development of land whether by deed, metes and bounds description, devise and testacy, lease, map, plat, or other recorded instrument.
"Subdivision" does not include:
bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for the purpose of joining one of the resulting separate parcels to a contiguous parcel of unsubdivided agricultural land, if neither the resulting combined parcel nor the parcel remaining from the division or partition violates an applicable Land Use Ordinance.
A recorded agreement between owners of adjoining properties adjusting their mutual boundary if:
No new lot is created and the adjustment does not result in a violation of applicable Land Use ordinances; or
A recorded document, executed by the owner of record, revising the legal description of more than one contiguous parcel of property into one legal description encompassing all such parcels of property.
The joining of a subdivided parcel of property to another parcel of property that has not been subdivided does not constitute a "subdivision".
11.12 SUBDIVIDER AGREEMENT
11.12.010 Subdivider Agreement

11.12.010 Subdivider Agreement
AGREEMENT

This Agreement is made by and between _____________________, hereafter called “Subdivider” and Ephraim City, a municipal corporation of the State of Utah.

Subdivider hereby acknowledges receipt of a copy of the Ephraim City Subdivision Ordinance, Construction Standards, and General Plan. Subdivider hereby acknowledges that he or she has read the Subdivision Ordinance (or that an agent of subdivider has), and that he or she understands the provisions of the subdivision ordinance, the Construction Standards, and that he or she will fully and completely comply with the provisions and requirements therein contained.

The form of a corporate or partnership signature shall include a provision for a notary in which the subdivider represents that the person signing for the corporation or partnership has the authority to execute the agreement for the corporation or partnership.

Dated this ______ day of __________________, _________.

Name

Signed:___________________________________________

11.16 GENERAL PROVISIONS
11.16.010 Exceptions
11.16.020 Subdivision Types
11.16.030 Planned Unit Development
11.16.040 Phased Development

11.16.010 Exceptions
The following subdivisions may be exempted from the provisions of this ordinance.

The division, re-subdivision, or proposed division of a parcel into two and only two parcels shall be exempted from the provisions of this ordinance if it can be demonstrated that such division, re-subdivision, or proposed division cannot subsequently be re-divided to create additional residential building lot(s) and when no off-site infrastructure or improvements are required.
A subdivision which is located entirely within the established block system of Ephraim City, not requiring any dedication of property for public use, not requiring off-site infrastructure or improvements and having no more than 4 lots or more than 400 feet of undeveloped lot frontage may be exempted from the provisions of this ordinance. The established block system is loosely bound as extending from 400 East to 200 West and from 300 North to 700 South. Extension of the block system area may be granted by recommendation of the Planning Commission and approval of the City Council.
Subject to paragraph A.
A lot or parcel resulting from a division of agricultural land is exempt from the provisions of this ordinance; if the lot or parcel
qualifies as land in agricultural use as defined by Utah Code 59-2 Part 5, Farmland Assessment Act;
meets the minimum size requirement of applicable land use ordinances; and
is not used and will not be used for any nonagricultural purpose.
If a lot or parcel exempted is used for nonagricultural purposes, Ephraim City may require the lot or parcel to comply with the normal subdivision requirements. (2006)
To qualify for these exemptions under paragraphs A or B, the following must apply:
The Planning Director or his designee must certify in writing that: the municipality has provided notice as required (see notice matrix) and
the proposed subdivision:
is not traversed by the mapped lines of a proposed street as shown in the general plan and does not require the dedication of any land for street or other public purposes;
has been approved by the Ephraim City Public Works Department with regard to water and sewer;
is located in a zoned area; and
conforms to all applicable land use ordinances or has properly received a variance from the requirements of an otherwise conflicting and applicable land use ordinance.
Comply with provisions of the General Plan, and
The developer shall provide proof of ownership and clear title to the property, and submit three (3) copies of a scaled drawing showing the proposed lots to The Planning Director at least 10 business days prior to the Planning commission meeting. The drawing shall include ownership information and a metes and bounds description, prepared by a licensed professional, for the original property and for the newly created lots. All lots shall meet the land use requirements wherein they are located.
The developer must financially guarantee and install curb/gutter, sidewalk, and asphalt (at least 24’ of asphalt if none present) along all frontage, even if adjoining properties are lacking same, in accordance with sidewalk policy of Ephraim City.
All Utility Companies, including natural gas, telephone and any other Utility Companies in the area of the proposed subdivision must sign off on the plat or official document stating that they have reviewed the subdivision and find it to be acceptable as proposed, in relation to their specific utilities. (2006)
Once a recommendation for approval by the Planning Commission is received, a certificate of approval will be prepared by the Planning Director and presented to the City Council for approval and subsequent recording.
A document recorded in the County Recorder’s office that divides property by a metes and bounds description does not create an approved subdivision allowed by this part unless accompanied by written proof of approval by Ephraim City. (2006)
11.16.020 Subdivision Types
Standard Subdivision: All subdivisions not qualifying for an exemption and not meeting the requirements of a Large Lot Subdivision or a Planned Development.
Large Lot Subdivision (2012):
Definitions:

LARGE LOT: any lot that meets or exceeds one and a-half acres in size.

LARGE LOT SUBDIVISION: Any subdivision where the subdivided lots are at least one and a-half acres in size.

LAYERED ZONE: a predetermined geographical outline covering a certain area and allowing for alternative developments.

PRIVATE ROAD: any road within the City that is not publicly owned by the City or that the City does not have a prescriptive easement to use.

NORTH, SOUTH, EAST, WEST STREETS: When a street identified as a North, South, East, or West street is used to describe the layered zones it shall refer to the middle of the specific road and not include both sides of that road.
Layered Zone Boundaries:
Inner Layer (Urban):
Any real property located within the following describe geographic area:
700 South heading east to 500 East heading north to 500 North heading west to 200 West heading south and ending at 600 South.
Middle Layer (Suburban):
Any real property located within the following describe geographic area:
1000 South heading east to 700 East heading north to 800 North heading west to 400 West heading south and ending at 1000 South.
Outer Layer (Rural):
Any real property located within the following describe geographic area:
Any real property located within Ephraim City that lies beyond the “Middle Layer” and any future annexed areas.
Development Requirements: Any item not specifically mentioned in these provisions shall be governed by the existing development code currently in place, including provisions for sewer and other utilities.
Inner Layer: All real property developed within this layer shall comply with the existing development code currently in place.
Middle Layer: All real property developed within this layer shall comply with the existing development code currently in place. However, in the case of a Large Lot development the following frontage improvements shall be required:
Verification submitted to the City Planner that the lot to be developed is in fact at least one and a-half acres in size.
Curb and gutter shall be waived but must provide a swale and provide evidence to the City Planner of adequate storm drainage. Owner may choose to install full improvements.
Must have frontage on an improved asphalt road at least 24 feet in width. However, the Planning Commission and City Council may waive the asphalt requirement if the large lot subdivision frontage is contiguous with other unimproved roads. Improvements apply only to main, existing roads. Does not apply to possible future roads.
Must provide a sidewalk or other acceptable walking trail/path
Must dedicate at least a 40 foot right of way to City
Setbacks sufficient to preserve a 66 foot corridor
Signed Development Agreement providing that any property division making the property in questions less than one and a-half acres in size the owner must provide improvements as required as per the current development code.
Properties over 2 acres may be required to improve frontage if adjacent to existing improvements and justified by pedestrian need as decided by the Planning and Zoning and City Council.
Outer Layer: All real property developed within this layer shall comply with the existing development code currently in place. However, in the case of a Large Lot development the following frontage improvements shall be what is required:
Verification submitted to the City Planner that the lot to be developed is in fact at least one and a-half acres in size.
Curb and gutter shall be waived but must provide a swale and provide evidence to the City Planner of adequate storm drainage. Owner may choose to install full improvements.
Must have frontage on a 24 foot road improved adequately to allow access for emergency vehicles. At a minimum this will require gravel.
Sidewalks may be waived in lieu of a dirt or gravel walking trail.
Must dedicate at least a 40 foot right of way to City.
Setbacks sufficient to preserve a 66 foot corridor
Signed Development Agreement providing that any property division making the property in questions less than one and a-half acres in size the owner must provide improvements as required as per the current development code.
Large Lot Subdivision Approvals and Exceptions:
Must be approved by the Planning and Zoning and the City Council.
The frontage improvements required will be determined by what layered zone the subdivision is within. If the subdivision lies within two or more layered zones then the requirements for the most restrictive layer shall be applied to the subdivision. (i.e. If a subdivision crosses from the middle zone into the outer zone then the entire subdivision must comply with the requirements of the middle zone.)
Exceptions may be given for outer two layers. Those with large lots in middle zones may be required to improve their frontage. Those with small lots in outer zones may be allowed to waive frontage improvements in exchange for a bond for improvements. (2012)
11.16.030 Planned Unit Development
A Planned Development is:
Any residential development seeking modification under the usual applicable standards.
A master planned community being presented with mixed uses; or
Commercial or industrial development or land divisions.
Subdivisions requiring a rezone may file one application for both a rezone and the subdivision approval by applying as a Planned Development. Rezone recommendations shall be forwarded to the City Council at completion of the concept phase.
A Planned Development is a distinct category of conditional use. As efficient use of land and resources, promote greater efficiency in public and utility services, preservation of open space, efficient use of alternative transportation and encouraging innovation in the planning and building of all types of development. Through the flexibility of the Planned Development application, the City seeks to achieve the following specific objectives.
Creation of a more desirable environment than would be possible through strict application of other City land use ordinances and regulations;
Promotion of a creative approach to the use of land and related physical facilities resulting in better design and development, including aesthetic amenities;
Coordination of architectural styles, building forms and building relationships;
Creation, landscaping and preservation of open space and recreational facilities;
Preservation and enhancement of desirable site characteristics such as natural topography, vegetation and geologic features, and the prevention of soil erosion.
Use of design, landscape or architectural features to create a pleasing environment;
Preservation of buildings which are architecturally or historically significant or otherwise contribute to the character of the City;
Establishment of inter-connecting paths and trails leading to common and popular destinations and interfacing with automobile traffic at few and specific points;
Provide a variety of housing, in accordance with the City’s general or specific plans;
Inclusion of special development features;
Elimination of blighted structures or incompatible uses through redevelopment or rehabilitation, and
Allow for center of block development, or development of property not directly adjoining the street.
Provide some acceptable tangible benefit to Ephraim City or its citizens in exchange for modification to the normal requirements as provided in this ordinance. (2006)
Authority to Modify Regulations:
The Planning Commission shall have the authority in approving any Planned Development to change, alter, modify or waive any provisions of this title as they apply to the proposed Planned Development. No such change, alteration, modification or waiver shall be approved unless the applicant demonstrates by providing substantial evidence to the Planning Commission that the proposed planned unit development:
Will achieve the purposes for which a Planned Development may be approved pursuant to these requirements; or
Will not violate the general purposes, goals and objectives of this Chapter or of any plans adopted by the Planning Commission or the City Council, including the General Plan.
No change, alteration, modification or waiver authorized by this chapter shall authorize a change in the uses permitted in any district, a modification with respect to any standard established by this chapter, or a modification with respect to Planned Developments, unless such regulations expressly authorize such a change, alteration, modification or waiver.
In no case may the total average density of the proposed development exceed 30% of the density of the underlying zone in which the development is located. (2006)
Approval Process: A planned unit development shall be processed in the same stages as a standard subdivision, and in accordance with the Development Sequence and Guarantee of Improvements as outlined in ECC 11.28.010 Paragraph A,3 through ECC 11.32.060 with the following modifications: (2015)
Prior to submitting a concept plan, the applicant shall schedule a pre-application meeting with the Planning Director to present the proposal and to discuss the procedures and standards for Planned Development approvals.
In approving a preliminary plan for a planned unit development, the Planning Commission may:
Approve the preliminary plan;
Approve the preliminary plan with modifications or conditions; or
Deny the preliminary plan.
Planned Developments may be excused from the statutory time limits imposed on standard subdivisions if the Planning Commission agrees to receive progress updates from the developer every six (6) months.
11.16.040 Phased Development
The platting of subdivisions may be done in phases. When off-site improvements are complete and their installation approved by the City Engineer, the developer may submit the next phase for final approval.

Development shall be performed so that the phases will be contiguous and the required improvements will be continuous, with all improvements subject to the Development Sequence and Guarantee of Improvements as outlined in ECC 11.28.010 Paragraph A,3 through ECC 11.32.060.
Where it is prudent to engineer roads, storm drain systems, or utility lines that extend into the next phase, such work may be done when it is shown as such in the design plans of earlier phases.
The subdivision shall be designed to ensure adequate infrastructure for each phase. All infrastructure shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer before final approval may be given for any phase. This infrastructure includes, but is not limited to:
The water system shall be interconnected (looped). When a line dead ends at a phase line, a fire hydrant or other approved means shall be provided to allow flushing of the dead end line.
For any street that dead ends at a phase line, a turn around shall be provided in accordance with ECC 11.16.030 Paragraph C. Turning Area and be shown on the final plat.
A tentative final plat and any accompanying construction documents shall be submitted and a recommendation for approval given by the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council for each phase of the subdivision regardless of any approval given for previous phases.
A financial guarantee meeting the requirements of this ordinance is required for each phase of the subdivision.
The Planning Commission may not give final recommendation for approval for any phase unless the Development Review Committee and City Engineer have reviewed the necessary documents and construction plans for that phase.
11.20 SUBDIVISION STANDARDS
11.20.010 Exactions
11.20.020 Adequate Off-Site Public Improvement Requirements
11.20.030 On-Site Improvements
11.20.040 Streets
11.20.050 Blocks
11.20.060 Lots
11.20.070 Easements

11.20.010 Exactions
The City may impose an exaction or exactions on proposed land use development if:
An essential nexus (or connection) exists between a legitimate governmental interest and each exaction; and
Each exaction is roughly proportionate, both in nature and extent, to the impact of the proposed development. 
If an exaction is required that exceeds the rough proportionality of the impact of the proposed subdivision, the City may compensate the developer by one or more of the following means:
Direct monetary compensation
Density bonus to the subdivision (in accordance with other sections of this ordinance)
Waiving or reducing impact fees or other fees, or
Other equitable means mutually agreeable to both the City and the developer.
11.20.020 Adequate Off-Site Public Improvement Requirements
Approval of a preliminary subdivision plat shall not be granted until such time as the Development Review Committee has established that adequate off site public facilities exist in the areas affected by the development sufficient to accommodate the development.
The public facilities to which the preceding paragraph applies shall include the following:
The City culinary water system, including quantity, quality, treatment, storage capacity, and distribution capacity;
The City sanitary sewer system, including treatment, overall capacity, outfall lines, laterals, and collector lines;
The City electric power system, including generation, transformation, transmission, and distribution;
Streets and roads, including arterial collector, and local roads, sidewalks, curb and gutter, and related transportation facilities and meeting the requirements of the Ephraim City Construction Standards;
The adequacy of public facilities shall be determined by the City Engineer and the Development Review Committee in accordance with the Ephraim City Construction Standards and the various master plans and the General Plan. In the event that it is determined that adequate public facilities are not available and will not be available by the time of final plat approval, the following alternatives may be elected, at the discretion of the City Council:
Allowing the developer to voluntarily construct those public facilities which are necessary to service the proposed development and provide adequate facilities as determined by the City Engineer and by entering into an appropriate form of development agreement, which may include, as deemed appropriate by the City Council, provisions for recoupment of any expenses incurred for extending those off-site public facilities, and the method and conditions upon which recoupment is to be obtained. Any agreement authorized by this paragraph shall be executed within 30 days of the completion and acceptance by City of the improvements.
Requiring the timing sequencing and phasing of the proposed development consistent with the availability of adequate public facilities;
Deferring final plat approval until all necessary public facilities are adequate and available; or
Denying plat approval and allowing the applicant to reapply when adequate public facilities are available.
11.20.030 On-Site Improvements
Costs of Improvements covered under the provisions of this section are to be paid by the developer and are subject to the approval of city.

The owner of any land located in or platted as a subdivision shall install the following improvements in compliance with the specifications contained in the Construction Standards of Ephraim City and to the requirements contained herein:
Sewer
Storm Drainage
Culinary water and fire hydrants
Roads
Power
Street lights and signs
Sidewalk and curb/gutter
Other utilities as needed for the subdivision
Other improvements, such as parks, trails, open space or other amenities, fencing, etc. as may required on a case by case basis for each subdivision.
Sewage collection: The subdivider shall connect to the City sanitary sewer and provide adequate lateral lines to the property line of each lot. Such sewer connections and subdivision sewer systems shall comply with the regulations and specifications of the Construction Standards, and shall be approved, by the City. A lateral shall typically placed 10 feet from the center of the lot frontage (at least 10 feet horizontally) on the downhill side of and at least 18 inches underneath the water lateral. Septic tanks or other means of sewerage collection are not allowed unless exempted by the City Council after recommendation from staff and the Planning Commission due to unusual circumstances or terrain. In no case shall septic tanks be allowed on more than 1 lot per 5 acres. Lateral line locations shall be permanently marked and clearly identified either by marking an “S” on the curb, or by another means approved by the City Engineer. The locations shall be clearly shown on the as-built drawings.
Drainage:
The subdivider shall provide adequate surface drainage for the development, including primary on-site drainage adequate to handle a twenty-four (24) hour, ten (10) year storm event. Design calculations shall be submitted along with the construction plans. Inlets shall be provided so that surface water is not carried across intersections, or for a distance of more than six hundred (600) feet in the gutter. Underground seepage sumps may be approved only after receipt of acceptable engineering calculations. Sumps shall meet the design standards shown in the Ephraim City Construction Standards unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer.
If a storm retention or detention basin is used, it shall meet the requirements as shown in the Ephraim City Construction Standards, or as approved by the City Engineer. The applicant shall completely landscape the facility. A landscaping plan shall be submitted and approved by the Planning Commission. Written approval from Ephraim Irrigation Company is required before altering or tying into a ditch or canal. Drainage in cul-de-sacs shall drain away from the turn-around unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. All storm drainage designs shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer.
Culinary Water:
The subdivider shall install water lines to make the water supply available to each lot within the subdivision, including laterals and meter sets according to the specifications of the City. The City Engineer shall approve the location and size of water mains. Water mains shall be interconnected to provide a loop unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. Lateral line locations shall be clearly identified either by marking on the curb, measuring to a permanent structure, or by another means approved by the City Engineer. The locations shall be clearly shown on the as-built drawings. Water laterals must be at least 3 feet below finished grade, but not more than 5 feet below finished grade.
Meters shall be placed in the middle of the lot along the right of way as close to the property line as possible and shall not be located in the sidewalk or driveway entrances unless specifically permitted by the development review committee. Without such approval, meters may be required to be moved at the developer’s expense if they are found to be in the sidewalk or driveways. Meter boxes will be required to be adjusted to match finished grade once the finished grade is established by the sidewalk and curb elevations. The meters must be set at least 3 feet below finished grade, but not more than 5 feet below finished grade.
Fire Hydrants: Fire hydrants shall be of the type, size, and number as adopted by the City and installed in such locations as approved by the City and shall meet fire flow requirements as established by the International Fire Code latest edition. Fire hydrants will be required to match finished grade as established by the sidewalk and curb elevations. Those hydrants not matching finished grade will be required to be made to match finished grade at the developer’s expense.
Sidewalks: Unless exempted as a Large Lot Subdivision, sidewalks shall be installed by the subdivider on both sides of all streets dedicated for public use as part of the proposed subdivision. Sidewalks shall be installed by the subdivider on the development side of all existing streets upon which the subdivision fronts. Sidewalks shall be installed according to the specifications shown in the Ephraim City Construction Standards. (Note: for curb and gutter requirements see ECC 11.16.030 Paragraph B,3)
Electric Power System:
The subdivider shall pay the cost of electric system extensions and street lights, installed by the City, to service the subdivision. Street lights shall be installed in quantity and spacing according to the specifications in the Ephraim City Construction Standards.
The subdivider shall be responsible to facilitate the extension of electrical distribution lines by:
Planning the installation of utilities to each lot or site to be served to preclude conflict between other utilities and the electrical distribution lines.
Scheduling and coordinating the actual installation of improvements to allow adequate time for construction of electrical distribution lines.
Notifying the Ephraim City Power Superintendent upon completion of adequate site preparation to allow installation of electrical distribution lines.
The subdivider shall prepare the site for electrical distribution line installation before notifying Ephraim City to install said lines. Site preparation shall include but not be limited to:
Markers indicating property lines are in place.
The area extending from property side of sidewalk away from the street for ten (12) feet leveled to final grade.
The subdivider shall provide the trenching and excavations for installation of underground facilities unless waived by the City.
The subdivider shall back-fill, compact, test, and guarantee the back fill of excavations for underground facilities installed unless waived by the City.
The subdivider shall pay the cost of traffic control, street identification, and other street signs, installed by the City, in accordance with City standards. The financial assurance for improvements in the subdivision will not be released until after payment of the costs incurred to install the necessary street signs has been made.
Utilities including but not limited to electrical, gas, telephone, and cable TV shall be located underground when such underground service does not violate safety standards nor impose any additional maintenance burden on City personnel.
Survey stakes shall be placed at both front and back lot corners to completely identify the lot boundaries on the ground. Back lot corners shall be marked with a metal pipe or rod driven into the ground, and front lot corners shall be identified with permanent plugs in the sidewalk or back of the curb or with a metal pipe or rod driven into the ground if sidewalks or curbs have not been provided. All stakes shall be in place prior to the issuance of building permits and after the completion of all subdivision improvements, or in accordance with the Development Sequence and Guarantee of Improvements as outlined in ECC 11.28.010 Paragraph A,3 through ECC 11.32.060. (2012)
All lots will be left free from construction materials and debris and shall create no traffic hazards or other nuisances.
11.20.040 Streets
All existing and proposed roads within, adjacent to, or directly impacted by the proposed development shall meet existing Construction Standards or be upgraded to meet these standards unless otherwise approved by the City Council due to unusual circumstances or terrain.

Major Streets: Arterial, collector, and local streets shall conform to the width designated in the Ephraim City Construction Standards. Half streets along the boundary of land proposed for subdivision or within any part of a subdivision will not be permitted. (See also paragraph B,2)
Grading and Surfacing: All on-site streets dedicated to the public shall be graded and surfaced, from curb to curb, in accordance with the standards and specifications of Ephraim City.
In subdivisions within the established block system of Ephraim City, with previously-surfaced streets, the developer shall surface the area from the existing oiled surface to the curb and gutter with asphalt pavement in accordance with Ephraim City Construction Standards.
For subdivisions where existing streets are not presently surfaced to City standards, the developer shall surface with pavement to the greater of:
the portion from the curb on the subdivision side of the street to and including the traveled portion of the street, or
to a minimum pavement width of 24 feet.(2006)
Curbs and Gutters – Concrete curbs and gutters shall be installed by the subdivider on the development side of all existing streets upon which the subdivision abuts unless waived by the Planning Committee and the City Council due to unusual circumstances or terrain. Concrete curbs and gutters shall be installed by the subdivider on both sides of all streets dedicated to the public use in accordance with the specifications of Ephraim City. (Note: for sidewalk requirements see Chapter 4-2-E)
Turning Area: Where a street longer than one lot is designed to remain, even temporarily, as a dead-end street, an adequate turning area shall be provided as follows:
Where the street dead-ends into a subsequent phase of the same subdivision, a temporary, graveled, 100-foot diameter turnaround and a permanent easement of right-of-way on the subsequent phase property shall be provided. However, if the subsequent subdivision phase is not recorded at the time of roadway paving in the preceding phase, a 100-foot diameter asphalt-surfaced turnaround or other hard surfaced turnaround as approved by the City Engineer shall be placed at the subsequent phase property. If parking is allowed on the street side of the curb within the cul-de-sac the radius shall not be less than 120 feet. Other turn around methods as shown in the Ephraim City Construction Standards may be substituted for that described above.
Where the street dead-ends against property which is not part of a subsequent subdivision phase, an all weather turnaround shall be placed, as approved by the Fire Chief and meeting the diameter requirements for cul-de-sacs below. Other turn around methods as shown in the Ephraim City Construction Standards may be substituted for that described above.
Cul-de-sac Streets:
Cul-de-sacs shall not be longer than six hundred fifty (650) feet from the centerline of the adjoining street to the center of the cul-de-sac, (see also second access requirements, (4.3.0) Any street over 650 feet requires a second access to a different location. (2006)
Each cul-de-sac shall be terminated by a turnaround of not less than 100 feet in diameter. If parking is allowed on the street side of the curb within the cul-de-sac the diameter shall not be less than 120 feet.
Cul-de-sacs should be graded such that storm water will not drain towards the turnaround, where possible. If special conditions make it impractical or impossible to drain water away from the turnaround, the City Engineer may require additional measures to mitigate potential flood water/damage. These may include, but are not limited to: requiring storm drains, additional catch basins, and easements, grading lots such that water will flow to the outside edge of the lot, requiring minimum floor elevations for the house/building, and other measures as deemed necessary by the City Engineer.
If the street slopes towards the turnaround, the maximum slope shall be less than 4% to allow for snow removal. If slopes exceed 4%, space at the bottom of the cul-de-sac shall be provided for piling of snow, and cu-de-sac diameter shall be increased to 130 feet. (2006)
Intersections: The intersection of more than two streets at one point shall not be allowed. Streets shall intersect at a substantially ninety degree (90°) angle. Street intersections shall have a corner radius as shown in the Ephraim City Construction Standards. Survey monuments shall be placed at all intersections in accordance with city construction standards by a licensed surveyor. Coordinates for each monument shall be given in state plane coordinates and shown on the final recorded plat.
Standard Street Sections: All proposed streets to be dedicated to the City shall conform to the City street standards as adopted by the City.
Whenever possible, streets shall bear the names of existing aligned streets. There shall be no duplication of street names. All street names shall be approved by the City.
Street Grades: Street grades, except for cul-de-sacs which are defined above, shall not exceed the following percentages: on arterial streets eight percent (8%): on local and collector streets ten percent (10%). Street grades near intersections shall be designed for adequate stopping and starting by adjusting grade on both sides of the intersection. Street grades, cross slopes and grade changes shall be designed in accordance with Ephraim City Construction Standards. Any difference in curb elevations shall be approved by the City Engineer; however, in no case shall the difference exceed one foot (1’).
Subdivisions on the Canyon Road shall be designed such that individual driveways access internal road networks and not exit directly onto Canyon Road, except as provided in the City Access Management Plan.
Alleys: Alleys may be required in the rear of business lots, but will not be accepted in residential blocks except under unusual conditions where such alleys are considered necessary by the Planning Commission. Alley widths shall be consistent with applicable fire and safety access codes.
Bridges: Design and construction of new bridges, whether essential for the overall circulation plan of the City or required only to serve a subdivision, shall be approved in advance by the City.
Protection Strips: Where subdivision streets parallel contiguous property of other owners, the subdivider may retain a protection strip of not less than one foot (1’) in width between the street and adjacent property. Protection strips will be allowed only at the discretion of the legislative body, after recommendation of the Planning Commission, and in accordance with all City ordinances. An agreement with the City, approved by the City attorney, shall be made by the subdivider, contracting to dedicate the one foot or larger protection strip free of charge to the City for street purposes upon payment by the present owners of the contiguous property to the subdivider of a consideration named in the agreement. Such consideration is to be equal to the cost, at the time of the agreement, of the street improvements properly chargeable to the contiguous property, plus the value of the land from the right-of-way line to the centerline of the street at the time of the agreement, together with interest at a fair rate from the time of agreement until the time of subdivision of such contiguous property. All charges to be associated with the protection strip, as well as the interest rate, shall be recorded as part of the aforementioned agreement. All property owned by the subdivider shall be included on both the preliminary and final plat.
Stubbed Streets: Any road or street to be built or improved as part of the proposed subdivision shall provide for connection to future streets as identified in the General Plan. The connection to the future street shall be provided by the developer at the location of the future street and shall extend to the (developer’s) property line, the street, curb, gutter, sidewalk, and other utilities/improvements as deemed necessary by the City Engineer. Additional stubbed streets may be required to facilitate connectivity between present and possible future developments. (2006)
Relation to Adjoining Street System: The arrangement of streets in new subdivisions shall comply with the General Plan and shall connect the fully improved streets to the adjoining property line along with any other improvements required by the City Engineer. Where appropriate to the design and terrain, proposed streets shall be continuous and in alignment with existing planned or platted streets, or, if offset, streets shall be offset a minimum of 100 feet between center lines of intersecting residential streets and a minimum of 400 feet between center lines of intersecting major streets. The street arrangement shall not landlock or cause unnecessary hardship to owners of adjoining property when they plat their own land and seek to provide for convenient access to it. Half streets along the boundary of land proposed for subdivision or within any part of a subdivision will not be permitted, but 24 foot asphalt improvements shall be required at the outer boundaries along streets which adjoin a subdivision. (2006)
Second Access Requirements: No street, or series of connecting streets shall exceed 650’ in length, as measured from the center line of intersecting streets to the center of a cul-de-sac, without providing a second access. The second access must exit to a different location, providing for traffic circulation and flow. The second access must be at least 24 feet wide, with at least 6 inches of compacted road base to accommodate all weather emergency vehicle access.
Private Road:
All private roads must be at least 24 feet wide.
In no case shall more than 10 homes be allowed on any private road without a second access.
Any non-large lot subdivision on a private road shall be required to follow current road requirements for subdivisions regardless of the zone the subdivision is in.
Homeowners with property on a private road will not be assessed a road impact fee.
In no case will City receive the private road as a public road unless the road meets current City standards.
Must preserve an adequate right of way by using required setbacks, plus a signed agreement recorded with the property that if the property is further divided, the road may be required to be upgraded and deeded to the City.
The road improved adequately to allow access for emergency vehicles.
Easements must be in place to prevent landowners from closing off their portion of the road.
Approved turnaround required for any private road longer than 200 feet which has a dead end. (2012)
11.20.050 Blocks
The maximum length of blocks shall be 1300 feet, as measured from center of street to center of street. Block lengths over 660 feet require a recommendation for approval from the Planning Commission.
The width of blocks shall be sufficient to allow at least two tiers of lots, or as otherwise approved by the Planning Commission because of terrain or other unusual conditions.
Blocks intended for business or industrial use shall be designed specifically for such purposes, with adequate space set aside for off-street parking and delivery facilities.
11.20.060 Lots
All lots shown on the subdivision plat shall conform to the minimum area and width requirements of the Land Use ordinance for the zone in which the subdivision is located. 
Lots fronting on major streets or collector streets shall be designed to allow for driveway spacing requirements as shown in the Ephraim City Access Management Plan.
Corner lots shall be large enough to ensure sufficient buildable space to accommodate sight triangle and building setbacks.
Each lot shall abut a paved street. Interior lots having frontage on two streets shall be prohibited, except on corner lots or where unusual conditions make any other design undesirable.
Wedge shaped lots must have a minimum frontage of thirty (30) feet. (2006)
Whenever the rear of lots abuts a City street, the developer shall install a uniform fence along the entire perimeter of the subdivision where the abutment occurs, except where intersected by streets, trails, or walkways. The fence shall be located inside the property line of the development. The design and style of the fence shall be approved by the Planning Commission. 
Side lines of lots shall be at approximately right angles to the street line, or radial to the street line.
Remnants of lots less than the minimum size required by the Land Use ordinance after the subdividing of a larger tract shall be added to adjacent lots rather than allowed to remain as unusable parcels. In no event shall the subdivision of land create a lot which does not conform to the Ephraim City Land Use Ordinance.
Cluster Lots may be approved by the City in exchange for improvements and/or other elements beneficial to the development and/or surrounding area, which are related to the development but are not normally required as part of the development in accordance with this and other City ordinances. Density may be increased by reducing the normal lot size requirements for minimum lot size and minimum frontage for the underlying zone by up to 20%, so long as sufficient space remains to maintain standard building setbacks and landscaping requirements and still make the property useable as a building lot. In certain cases, the City may approve additional density in the form of additional units per lot, etc, but in such cases the application must be reviewed as a Planned Unit Development.

The monetary benefit or value from cluster lots or additional density must be roughly proportional to the benefit or value derived by the additional improvements, and must be described in detail in the development agreement between the City and the developer.
Where the land included in a subdivision includes two or more parcels in separate ownership, and the lot arrangement is such that a property ownership lines divides one or more lots, the land in each lot so divided shall be transferred by deed to either single or joint ownership before approval of the final plat, and such transfer certified to the Planning Commission by the Sanpete County Recorder.
Lots deemed by the City to be unbuildable due to unusual hazards or terrain shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life, or property, but such land within the plat shall be set aside for such uses as shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions.
11.20.070 Easements
Easements for culinary water, sewer, natural gas, power, irrigation water, storm water drainage, right of way, and other utilities shall be provided by the subdivider and designated on the plat as required to accommodate the utility systems in the subdivision. As a minimum, each lot in a subdivision shall include a twelve (12) foot utility easement adjacent to any public road and maintain a seven (7) foot utility easement around the remaining perimeter of the lot. Additional easements may be required by the City Engineer if warranted by site conditions 
Where natural drainage channels, ditches, interceptor systems, or flood hazard zones cross the subdivision, the subdivider shall obtain the necessary permits to modify such drainage facilities, and preserve and designate the natural channels, ditches, systems, or flood hazard zones, and any associated restrictions, on the plat. In such cases, trails and other open space amenities are encouraged to be incorporated into these areas. 
No utilities or infrastructure may be installed until final plat approval is given by the City council, and after the specific location and construction sequences are approved by Ephraim City in a preconstruction meeting. See also ECC 11.28.010 for Development sequence. This sequence may be exempted by the city engineer if the following items have all been met: 
Preliminary approval has been given for the subdivision and all applicable engineering drawings.
A financial guarantee has been submitted and approved.
An inspection process for inspection during construction has been submitted to the city and approved by the city engineer.
A preconstruction meeting has been completed.
11.24 SUBMITTAL AND APPROVAL REQUIREMENTS
11.24.010 Concept Plan
11.24.020 Preliminary Plat
11.24.030 Final Plat
11.24.040 As-Built Drawings
11.24.050 Dedication Of Streets And Public Improvements

11.24.010 Concept Plan
Prior to any process or procedure for subdividing land as contained in this Title, an owner of the land or an authorized agent shall submit a Concept Plan which includes a graphic representation including all lots, streets, and any future phases within the proposed subdivision and the relationship to existing land and streets in the surrounding area. The Concept Plan is not an application for development review or approval and will not be considered as any type of vesting under an existing development ordinance. The Concept Plan provides an opportunity for the applicant and staff, and if appropriate, the Planning Commission to meet and discuss the proposed project in the conceptual stage.
The Development Review Committee shall consider the Concept Plan within 30 business days of submittal and shall render a report to the applicant. The report shall include discussion of existing infrastructure and the character and extent of required improvements and any staff reservations that may exist. Any known hazards in the area, such as flood potential, susceptibility to flooding, liquefaction, poor soil, landslides, avalanches, excessive slopes, shallow ground water, etc. shall be included in the report. Particular attention shall be given to compliance with the provisions of the General Plan, Zone Map and Streets Master Plan.

There is no approval of a Concept Plan required or given. After reviewing the Concept Plan, the Development Review Committee shall advise the applicant of any reservations and note any changes, additions, studies or reports that will be required to be included with the Preliminary Plat submittal.

The Planning Commission shall not review any Preliminary Plan prior to completion of a Concept Plan review by the Development Review Committee.
Any failure to submit a preliminary plat within one (1) year after review of the Concept Plan by the Development Review Committee shall terminate all proceedings and render the preliminary plat null and void.
11.24.020 Preliminary Plat
After review of a Concept Plat by the Development Review Committee, a preliminary plat may be presented by submitting at least three (3) copies to the Planning Director by at least 10 business days preceding the regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting. The Preliminary Plat shall be drawn to a scale not smaller than 100 feet to the inch and shall be on standard 24” x 36” paper or approved equivalent. The plat and attached documentation shall show:
The proposed name of the subdivision.
It shall be the responsibility of the subdivider to coordinate with the County Recorder to verify the uniqueness of the name.
There shall be no duplicate of or very similar names of subdivisions within Ephraim City or Sanpete County.
The subdivision location as forming a part of a larger tract or parcel, where the plat submitted covers only a part of the subdivider’s tract or only a part of a larger vacant area. In such case, a sketch of the prospective future street system of the part not submitted shall be included. The preliminary plat shall show all property owned or optioned by the subdivider pertaining to the proposed subdivision. This information may be required as a separate drawing.
Sufficient information to locate accurately the property shown on the plat, including a clearly-defined basis of bearing for the survey as well as the date of the survey. The nearest section corner tie(s) shall be shown.
The names and addresses of the subdivider, the engineer, or surveyor of the subdivision, and the names of the owners of the land immediately adjoining the land to be subdivided shall be shown on the preliminary plat.
The boundary lines of the tract to be subdivided, including total acreage proposed for subdivision.
The location, widths, and other dimensions of all existing, platted or proposed streets and other important features such as easements, water courses (including irrigation canals and ditches), exceptional topography, bridges, and buildings within or immediately adjacent to the tract to be subdivided.
Existing power lines, sanitary sewer, storm drains, water supply mains, and culverts within the tract and immediately adjacent thereto.
The locations, widths, and other dimensions of proposed public streets, private streets, utility easements, parks, other open spaces, and lots, with proper labeling of spaces dedicated to the public, or designated as private streets.
North point, scale, and date.
The proposed layout, dimension, and number of each lot.
Proposed utility layout including hydrant locations and street lighting locations.
Proposed construction and permanent fencing along appropriate subdivision boundaries as determined by the Planning Commission and as specified herein.
A statement from the developer indicating conformance with the General Plan, Construction Standards, and Land Use Ordinance.
A preliminary storm drainage study, with schematic solutions and the associated calculations.
Plans or written statements regarding the proposed special improvements such as sidewalks, planting, and parks, and any grading of individual lots.
Written approval from the Irrigation Company for alteration or use of any existing ditches.
Written acknowledgement from other utility providing agencies as appropriate, including but not limited to, gas, telephone, internet, and cable TV, stating that they are willing and able to provide acceptable service to the development. Refusal of service by any or all of the providers may constitute grounds for denial of the subdivision application.
If a state highway is involved, the subdivider shall provide evidence of approval of access, curbs, gutters, and sidewalks, street lights, turning lanes, and acceleration/deceleration lanes, by the Utah Department of Transportation.
A preliminary geotechnical report showing any existing information about soil and groundwater conditions, flood hazards, wetlands, hillside slopes, earthquake potential, and all other hazards in the subdivision. The Development Review Committee, Planning Commission or City Council will determine what additional investigations and reports are required for approval of the final plat and plans.
A preliminary title report, including a tax clearance indicating that all taxes, liens, interest, and penalties owing on the land have been paid.
If the design or engineering review of any application or Proposed development is beyond the expertise of the City Staff, the City may require third party review by an engineer selected or approved by the City prior to the preliminary approval of the application.
The applicant shall pay all costs associated with the third party review.
Upon recommendation for approval of the preliminary plat by the Planning Commission, the preliminary plat shall be presented to the legislative body for its consideration.
11.24.030 Final Plat
After approval of Preliminary Plat by the City Council, a Final Plat may be presented by submitting at least three (3) copies to the Planning Director by at least 10 business days preceding the regularly scheduled Planning Commission meeting, unless mutually waived by the city and the applicant. The Final plat must be filed within six (6) months from the time of preliminary approval by the City Council, unless the applicant can show substantial progress is being made. (2006)
A final plat shall be prepared by a licensed engineer or a licensed land surveyor. At least one copy shall be on a sheet of approved tracing linen with water-proof, black, permanent ink and presented to the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall not act on any final plat prior to final review by the development review committee. The final plat shall include:
Any easements or property to be dedicated to City for roads and other public uses.
Appropriate signature blocks, including owner’s dedication with proper acknowledgment, all utility companies involved in the subdivision, legislative approval, and planning commission chair’s recommendation for approval.
Surveyor’s certificate.
Addresses as approved by Ephraim City, and dimensions for each lot within the subdivision, including buildable space as shown by required setbacks, geologic hazards, or other Land Use restrictions.
Acreage of the subdivision and for each lot.
The following shall not be included on the final plat but shall be submitted with the final plat:
Any additional information required from concept and preliminary plat review.
Detailed cost estimates, prepared by the project engineer, for the improvements to be completed for the proposed phase.
All construction types and specifications. Cross sections and profiles of the streets and construction drawings related to all of the improvements to be constructed within the subdivision. All drawings and materials shall be in compliance with the Ephraim City Construction Standards and be signed and stamped by a registered professional engineer.
Drainage plan. A final storm drainage study, with schematic solutions and the associated calculations to demonstrate primary on-site drainage containment and an overflow plan. If sumps are proposed, the submittal shall include the estimated life and the engineering tests supporting the design.
Any proposed restrictive covenants.
Electronic copies of the plans and plat, in Autocad© or DXF file format, shall also be submitted. This electronic shall be submitted with at least two identified points on opposite corners, in state plane coordinates. The drawing shall be accompanied with the projection file and projection information as applicable.
Upon recommendation for approval of the final plat by the Planning Commission, the final plat shall be presented to the legislative body for its consideration. Along with the final plat, the Planning Director or his designee shall prepare a staff report and make a copy of this staff report available to the developer of required conditions of the subdivision. These conditions shall be kept on file in the City office along with the plat once final approval is given.
Once a plat receives final recommendation for approval by the Planning Commission the plat shall remain in the custody of Ephraim City until final recording in the office of the Sanpete County Recorder. An approved plat is deemed to be voidable if not recorded within a time period of one year unless a written agreement for an extension is received by the City and approved by the City Council. A transfer of land is voidable pursuant to a void plat. (2006)
If approval is given, the subdivider submits the following to the City for review by the City attorney.
Guarantee of improvements.
Any agreements and conditions of approval, including aid in construction or pioneering agreements, development agreements, time to complete/extend, etc.
Upon completion of legal review, the plat, along with all guarantees and agreements will be recorded by the Planning Director or his designee. (2006)
11.24.040 As-Built Drawings
The subdivider shall provide as-built drawings, in both hard copy and an electronic copy in an approved Autocad© or DXF file format, of all completed and accepted subdivision improvements before building permits are issued. As-built drawings shall be submitted, for all improvements not constructed and accepted at the time building permits are issued, before those improvements are accepted. These as-built drawings shall show, but not be limited to, the following:
Location of water lines and laterals referenced to property corners. 
Location of sewer lines and laterals referenced to property corners.
Location of gas lines referenced to property corners.
Storm drains, ground drains, drainage ditches, clean-out boxes, and other fixtures.
Location of irrigation water lines and laterals referenced to property corners.
Location of electric system facilities referenced to property corners.
Other items as directed by the City Engineer.
11.24.050 Dedication Of Streets And Public Improvements
The subdivider shall be deemed to have dedicated the public streets, easements, and other public improvements to Ephraim City at the time the final plat is approved by Ephraim City. This dedication constitutes an offer by the subdivider which shall be irrevocable until the final plat is recorded or one (1) year, whichever comes first. Not withstanding the foregoing, the subdivider shall be responsible to construct and install the public improvements required by this ordinance, and to maintain and guarantee these improvements for a period of two years after completion and acceptance by the City.
The subdivider shall also certify and guarantee in writing that the improvements comply with the minimum requirements of this ordinance at the time of acceptance.
11.28 DEVELOPMENT SEQUENCE
11.28.010 Sequence
11.28.020 Enforcement And Responsibility

11.28.010 Sequence
After final approval, the applicant may choose one of the following options:
Before the applicant may sell any lots, the applicant must submit a financial guarantee as outlined in ECC 11.32. Once the Financial guarantee has been reviewed and approved, the city will proceed to record the final subdivision plat at the county, after which the applicant may start selling the lots and proceed with the construction and installation of the subdivision infrastructure.
The applicant may begin construction/installation of the subdivision infrastructure before the final plat is recorded at the county only if all requirements for preconstruction meetings and inspection schedules have been satisfied. Lots may be sold after the final plat is recorded once a financial guarantee has been submitted to and approved by the City.
No building permit or Land Use permit shall be issued until the following improvements are installed, approved, and accepted by the City. As-built drawings shall be provided as hard copies and shall also be submitted electronically in Autocad© or DXF file format.
Sanitary sewer
Culinary water
Road base
No building permit or Land Use permit shall be issued until the following improvements are installed and approved and as-built drawings submitted to and approved by the City or are guaranteed as provided for in this ordinance. As-built drawing shall be provided as hard copies and shall also be submitted electronically in Autocad© or DXF file format.
Pressure irrigation as applicable
Curb, gutter, and sidewalk
Asphalt pavement
Drainage improvements
Other buried utilities as applicable
Electric Service
Natural Gas
The subdivider shall provide temporary garbage disposal facilities within a subdivision when homes are occupied and asphalt surface improvements have not been placed and approved by the City. A minimum pickup of 10 cubic feet of garbage per occupied home per week shall be provided, starting at the time the first home is occupied and continuing until the asphalt surface improvements are completed and the City agrees to provide garbage service. The garbage pickup facilities shall be located within the bounds of the subject subdivision, but not on an existing improved street.
The subdivider shall keep the streets within a subdivision in a well-graded condition during the time when homes are occupied but the asphalt surfacing improvements are not complete. The subdivider shall be given 48 hours (covering two weekdays) to improve the street condition after being notified by the City that the street condition is unacceptable. If the problem has not been corrected to the satisfaction of the City at the end of 48 hours, the City shall have the right to have a separate contractor perform the work, with payment for such work and administrative costs coming from the guarantee of improvements.
11.28.020 Enforcement And Responsibility
Ephraim City will not authorize the building inspector, nor will the City Land Use administrative officer or any administrative official of Ephraim City issue any permit for the proposed erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or use until proof of full compliance with all the provisions of this ordinance has been provided. No City officer shall issue any permit or license for the use of any building, structure, or land when such land is part of a subdivision, as defined herein, until such subdivision has been approved and recorded in the county recorder’s office. Any license or permit issued in conflict with the provisions of this ordinance shall be null and void.

11.32 GUARANTEE OF IMPROVEMENTS
11.32.010 Guarantee Of Improvements Required
11.32.020 Option 1; Deposit With City (Preferred)
11.32.030 Option 2; Bond
11.32.040 Option 3; Escrow
11.32.050 Fees
11.32.060 Legal Remedies For Violation

11.32.010 Guarantee Of Improvements Required
In lieu of the actual completion and acceptance by the legislative body of the improvements required by this ordinance and before approval of the final plat by the legislative body the developer shall guarantee, by written agreement and by one or more of the following methods, the installation and construction of the required improvements within one year from the date of approval of the final plat unless granted an extension by the City Council. Said agreement and guarantee must state “In favor of Ephraim City.” In addition the developer shall guarantee by one or more of the following methods that the improvements shall be maintained in a state of good repair free from defective material or workmanship during the one year warranty period. (2015)

11.32.020 Option 1; Deposit With City (Preferred)
The developer shall deposit with the City a sum equal to 115% of the costs of the required improvements not installed, constructed, and accepted by the City. The City shall deposit this amount in a separate interest bearing account. The developer shall have the right to draw against the account with the City all sums to 100% of the cost of the improvements not installed which shall be paid to the order of persons installing, constructing, or maintaining the improvements. The City shall hold the additional 15% to guarantee that the improvements are maintained in a state of good repair free from defects of material or workmanship throughout the one year warranty period following approval of the improvements. The City may, at least 30 days, after making written demand on the developer in the manner required in the below section of this chapter, install, construct, or repair the improvements and pay such costs from the developer’s account. The City shall refund any sums remaining in the developer’s account after the city engineer or appointee accepts the improvements and the warranty period expires. (2015)

11.32.030 Option 2; Bond
The developer shall furnish and file with the City recorder a bond with corporate surety in an amount equal to 115% of the cost of the improvements not previously installed and accepted plus 15% of the cost of previously installed improvements within the one year warranty period immediately following the approval of the subdivision plat by the legislative body and that the improvements shall be maintained in a state of good repair free from defects of material or workmanship for the one year warranty period following the date of final approval for the improvements, which bond shall be approved by the legislative body and City attorney.
Upon completion of the improvements for which a surety or cash bond has been filed, the developer shall call for inspection by the City Engineer, such inspection to be made within five days from the date of request. If inspection shows City standards and specifications have been met in completion of such improvements, the portion of the bond corresponding to the completion to the improvements shall be released within seven days from the time of inspection. The portion of the bond corresponding to the warranty improvements will be released following inspection and verification of the condition of the improvements after the one year warranty period.
11.32.040 Option 3; Escrow
The developer shall deposit with a City insurance company, bank, or savings and loan institution in an escrow account an amount of money equal to at least 115% of the costs of the improvements required by this ordinance not previously accepted by the City. The costs of the improvements shall be determined by the City Engineer. The escrow agreement shall be subject to approval by the City attorney and shall be signed by the developer, the City, and the escrow holder. (2015)

11.32.050 Fees
Subdivision approval within Ephraim City shall be subject to the following fees established by the legislative body.

Preliminary Plat Application Fee: At the time of filing the preliminary plat, the subdivider shall deposit with the City a non-refundable fee made payable to Ephraim City. The legislative body shall by resolution from time to time prescribe the amount of such fee, which shall be for the purpose of reimbursing the City for the expense of checking and reviewing such preliminary subdivision plats.
Final Plat Application Fee: At the time of filing the final plat, the subdivider shall deposit with the City a non-refundable fee made payable to Ephraim City. The legislative body shall by resolution from time to time prescribe the amount of such fee, which shall be for the purpose of reimbursing the City for the expense of checking and reviewing such final subdivision plats. The subdivider shall also pay to the City an amount equal to the normal fee for recording a subdivision in Sanpete County as established by the Sanpete County Recorder.
Inspection Fee: At the time of filing the final plat, the subdivider will deposit with Ephraim City an inspection fee consisting of 7% of the estimated cost of improvements, as approved by Ephraim City. Ephraim City will draw on this deposit to pay the costs of inspection services for the subdivision. After final approval of all subdivision improvements, Ephraim City will return to the subdivider any unused portion of the inspection fee. In the event that inspection costs exceed the subdivision fee deposit, subdivider will pay to Ephraim City the additional inspection costs.
11.32.060 Legal Remedies For Violation
In accordance with Utah Code § 10-9-1003, any applicant that violates this Title maybe charged with a Class C misdemeanor and subject to all fines and imprisonment associated with such penalty.

Because it is impractical to expect that all grading, infrastructure, and other improvements can be adequately inspected by Ephraim City, Ephraim City expects applicants to complete all development improvements in accordance with the approved plans. If an applicant installs improvements that are inconsistent with the development approval granted by the City Council, the improvements will be corrected to satisfy the approval granted by the City Council at the applicant’s expense even if discovery of the inconsistency occurs after an initial acceptance of the development improvements. Failure to correct the inconsistencies may result in any legal action necessary to correct the inconsistencies.


		


