Title 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Chapters:
1.04         General Provisions
1.08         Establishment
1.12         Ordinances
1.16         General Penalty
1.18         Recoupment of Administrative Costs Incurred by the City
1.20         Policies and Procedures
1.30         Purchasing and Procurement

Chapter 1.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
1.04.010     Rules for construction.
1.04.020     Definitions.
1.04.030     Interpretation of prohibiting words.
1.04.040     Adoption of Title 10 of the Utah Code Annotated.

1.04.010 Rules for construction.
In the construction of this code the rules set out in this chapter shall be observed unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the code provision or the context of the code. (Prior code §1-3)

1.04.020 Definitions.
These words and terms shall be defined as follows:
“Bribe” means any money, goods, right in action, property, thing of value, advantage, promise asked, given, or accepted with a corrupt intent to influence unlawfully the person to whom it is given in his action, vote, or opinion in any public or official capacity.
“Highway” includes public bridges, county roads, common ways, common roads, and state roads.
“Occupant” means the same as “tenant.”
“Officers” includes officers and boards in charge of departments and the members of such boards.
“Owner,” applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or lessee of the whole or a part of such building or land.
“Road” means the name as “highway.”
“Signature” means any name, mark, or sign written with the intent to authenticate any instrument or writing.
“Street” means alleys, lanes, courts, boulevards, public ways, public squares, public places and sidewalks.
“Tenant” means any person who occupies the whole or any part of such building or land either alone or with others. (Prior code §1-3)

1.04.030 Interpretation of prohibiting words.
Words prohibiting anything being done except in accordance with a license or permit or authority from a board or officer shall be construed as giving such board or officer power to license or permit to authorize such thing to be done. (Prior code §1-3)

1.04.040 Adoption of Title 10 of the Utah Code Annotated.
The “Utah Municipal Code” as contained in Title 10, U.C.A., 1953 as amended and constituted in 2004, is hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Ordinances of Lindon City where relevant and pertinent. (Ord. 2005-4, amended, 2005; Ord. 2000-15, adopted, 2000)

Chapter 1.08 ESTABLISHMENT

Sections:
1.08.010     Establishment.

1.08.010 Establishment.
The corporate seal of the Lindon City, Utah, shall be circular in form, 1 ½ inches in diameter with the word “Seal” in Old English capital encircled with a wreath of the words: LINDON CITY, UTAH COUNTY, UTAH, in capital letters around the margin thereof and the same is established and declared to be the seal of the Lindon City, Utah. (Prior code §9-1)

Chapter 1.12 ORDINANCES

Sections:
1.12.010     Enacting clause designated.
1.12.020     Numbering.
1.12.030     Liability of employer and agents to penalty for violation.

1.12.010 Enacting clause designated.
The enacting style of all ordinances of Lindon City shall be: Be it ordained by the city council of Lindon City, Utah. (Prior code §1-4)

1.12.020 Numbering.
The city recorder shall number all ordinances consecutively, adopted after an ordinance revising the ordinances of the prior code, passed on October 3, 1953, beginning with number one and shall continue thereafter to consecutively number all ordinances filed and spread upon his records in the order of their passage and shall assign appropriate section numbers in conformity with the code. (Prior code § 1-5)

1.12.030 Liability of employer and agents to penalty for violation.
When the provisions of an ordinance prohibit the commission or omission of an act, not only the person actually doing the prohibited thing or omitting the directed act, but also the employer and all other persons concerted aiding or abetting therein shall be guilty of the offered described and liable to the penalty prescribed for the offense. (Prior code §1-5)

Chapter 1.16 GENERAL PENALTY

Sections:
1.16.010     Designated.
1.16.020     Limits on Penalties.

1.16.010 Designated.
Whenever no other penalty is prescribed any violation of any provision of any ordinance included in the revised ordinances or ordinances hereafter enacted in the Lindon City Code shall be punishable as a Class B Misdemeanor. Each day a violation of the Lindon City Code continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000; Ord. 7-93, amended, 1993; Ord. 152 §1, amended, 1987)

1.16.020 Limits on Penalties.
1. Unless otherwise proscribed under this Code, all offenses designated as Class B misdemeanors shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment for a period not longer than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
2. Unless otherwise proscribed under this Code, all offenses designated as Class C misdemeanors shall be punished by a fine in a sum not to exceed seven hundred fifty dollars ($750), or by imprisonment for a period not longer than ninety (90) days, or by both such fine and imprisonment.
3. Unless otherwise proscribed under this Code, all offenses designated as infractions shall be punished by a fine not to exceed the sum of seven hundred fifty dollars ($750).

Chapter 1.18 RECOUPMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE COSTS INCURRED BY THE CITY

Sections:
1.18.010     Assessment of Cost.
1.18.020     Notice.
1.18.030     Collection.

1.18.010 Assessment of Cost.
1. Except for those violations for which the Utah State Code expressly precludes cities from seeking recoupment through administrative procedures, the city administrator shall have the power to assess those persons or entities not in compliance with the city code for the costs and expenses associated with remedying the negative effects of such noncompliance.
2. The city administrator shall have the power to direct either city employees or independent private contractors to perform any work necessary to abate nuisances or otherwise remedy the negative effects of noncompliance with a city code.
3. The costs and expenses referred to in Section 1.18.010(1) shall consist of:
    a. The actual cost of remedying any negative effect or circumstance caused by the failure to comply with a city code ordinance; and
    b. The administrative costs incurred in the supervision and direction of any remedial efforts.
    c. Cost and attorney’s fees incurred in remedying the noncompliance. For purposes of the Lindon City Code, Attorneys Fees and costs mean all fees and costs incurred in remedying the noncompliance, including those incurred before and after litigation is commenced.
4. The costs and expenses shall be computed by taking the actual time spent by any administrative official, city employee, and independent private contractor and multiplying it by one hundred twenty five percent (125%) of the normal hourly wage or fee of the foregoing individual or entities. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Ord. 2000-17, adopted, 2000)

1.18.020 Notice.
Once the costs and expenses of any remedial efforts have been computed, the city administrator shall mail an itemized bill to the person or entity in violation of the city code provision identifying the code section violated, the dates of violation, and the nature of the remedial efforts and a notice that the amounts assessed must be paid in full within 30 days of the itemized bill being provided. For purposes of this section, receipt of notice shall be deemed to have occurred upon the earlier of the date written notice is delivered or three days after the notice is mailed. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Ord. 2000-17, adopted, 2000)

1.18.030 Collection.
1. If the full amount assessed to the person or entity is not paid in full within thirty (30) days of the date of receipt of notice of the itemized bill, as calculated in Section 1.18.020, interest will begin to accrue on the remaining balance at the rate of twelve percent (12%) per annum to be compounded monthly.
2. If the full amount assessed to the person or entity, including interest, is not paid within sixty (60) days, and additional two hundred dollar ($200.00) surcharge shall be added to the amount due. An additional two hundred dollar ($200.00) surcharge shall be added to the amount due for every subsequent one hundred eighty (180) day period in which the full amount of the assessment plus interest and surcharges is not paid in full.
3. If the full amount assessed to the person or entity, including interest, is not paid within one hundred eighty (180) days of receipt of the notice, as calculated in Section 1.18.020, the city administrator may initiate collection proceeding against the delinquent person or entity. The person or entity against which the collection proceedings are brought shall be responsible for all court costs, reasonable attorney fees, and other expenses associated with collection efforts. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Ord. 2000-17, adopted, 2000)

Chapter 1.20 POLICIES AND PROCEDURES

Sections:
1.20.010     Purpose.
1.20.020     Policies and Procedures Manual.
1.20.030     Policies do not constitute an employee contract.

1.20.010 Purpose.
The Lindon City Policies and Procedures Manual (herein referenced as the ‘Manual’) shall be created to govern the administrative functions and employee policies of the City that are not otherwise outlined within Lindon City Code. The Manual should identify the organizational structure, rules, benefits, responsibilities, and obligations of employment with the City including policies on topics such as risk management, proper use of city property and equipment, purchasing and procurement, personnel policies, employee benefits, performance responsibilities, etc.

1.20.020 Policies and Procedures Manual.
The Lindon City Policies and Procedures Manual as is currently constituted, and as may be amended from time to time, is hereby authorized as an official regulatory document of Lindon City and is supplementary to the ordinances thereof. Minor alterations to the Manual can be authorized by the City Administrator, with periodic ratification by the City Council. Significant policy changes to the Manual shall be subject to approval by the City Council after recommendation by the City Administrator.

1.20.030 Policies do not constitute an employee contract.
1. The policies and procedures expressed in the Manual, as well as those in associated personnel materials which may be issued from time to time, do not create a binding contract, agreement, obligation or liability on the part of the City. The City disclaims any construction of the Manual as, or implication of, an employment contract.
2. The Manual should not be construed to limit the City’s right to discharge employees or to create any other obligation or liability on the City. The City reserves the right to unilaterally change or make exceptions to the policies and procedures stated in the manual at any time, for any reason.
3. No supervisor, manager, or representative of the City other than the Mayor or City Administrator, has the authority to enter into any agreement with an individual for employment for any specified period or to make any promises or commitments contrary to the contents of the Manual. Any actual employment agreement must be in writing and signed by the Mayor or City Administrator. (Ord. 2013-17, amended, 2013)

Chapter 1.30 PURCHASING AND PROCUREMENT

Sections:
1.30.010     Purpose and Adoption.
1.30.020     Purchasing and Procurement Policies and Procedures.

1.30.010 Purpose and Adoption.
Pursuant to Utah Code Annotated §10-6-122, §10-7-20, §10-8-1, §10-8-2, and other pertinent provisions of the laws of the State of Utah, the Lindon City Council hereby adopts and establishes this Purchasing and Procurement ordinance to fairly and legally govern the purchase and procurement of goods and services by the City.

1.30.020 Purchasing and Procurement Policies and Procedures.
Policies and procedures to regulate the creation and administration of the Purchasing and Procurement system for Lindon City shall henceforth be located within the Lindon City Policies and Procedures Manual as is currently constituted, and as may be amended from time to time. Purchasing and procurement policies adopted as part of the Lindon City Policies and Procedures Manual are hereby authorized as an official regulatory document of Lindon City and are supplementary to the ordinances thereof. Minor alterations to the Lindon City Policies and Procedures Manual, including Purchasing and Procurement policies, can be authorized by the City Administrator, with periodic ratification by the City Council. Significant changes to the Purchasing and Procurement policies within the Lindon City Policies and Procedures Manual shall be subject to approval by the City Council after recommendation by the City Administrator. (Ord. 2013-18, amended, 2013)

Title 2 ADMINISTRATIVE AND PERSONNEL

Chapters:
2.04         Mayor
2.08         City Council
2.12         City Recorder
2.16         Justice of the Peace
2.20         City Attorney
2.24         City Engineer
2.28         Officers Generally
2.30         Emergency Management Succession of Offices
2.32         Fire Department
2.36         Police Department
2.38         Historic Preservation Commission
2.39         Repealed
2.40         City Prison
2.42         City Sexton
2.44         Elections

Chapter 2.04 MAYOR

Sections:
2.04.010     Mayor and mayor pro tempore designated.
2.04.020     Mayor Pro Tem -- Right to vote.
2.04.030     Vacancy.
2.04.040     Mayor to preside over council.
2.04.050     Powers generally.
2.04.070     Examination of books.
2.04.080     Messages to council on city affairs.
2.04.090     Power to call out inhabitants.
2.04.100     Supervisory authority.
2.04.110     Signature on documents.
2.04.120     Committee appointments.
2.04.130     Granting of Privileges.
2.04.140     Appointment of officers and assistants.

2.04.010 Mayor and mayor pro tempore designated.
The chief executive officer of the city shall be the mayor. In the temporary absence of the mayor or because of his inability or refusal to act, the governing body may elect a member of the governing body to preside over the meeting as mayor pro tempore. The election of a mayor pro tempore shall be entered in the minutes of the meeting. (Ord. 92-7, amended, 1992; Prior code §9-15)

2.04.020 Mayor Pro Tem -- Right to vote.
When the mayor pro tempore is presiding, he shall have all of the powers and duties of the mayor during the mayor's absence or disability. He shall also have all the powers and duties as a city councilman which he would otherwise have if he were not acting as mayor pro tempore, including the right to vote as a councilman. (Ord. 7-92, amended, 1992; Prior code § 9-16)

2.04.030 Vacancy.
1. Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the office of mayor, the city council shall appoint a mayor who is a registered voter in the municipality who shall possess all the rights and powers of mayor until 12:00 noon on the first Monday of January following the next municipal election, except as provided in paragraph 3 of this section.
2. If, for any reason the council does not fill the vacancy within 30 days after the vacancy occurs, the two persons having the highest number of votes of the council shall come before the council. If neither candidate receives a majority vote of the council at that time, the vacancy shall be filled by lot in the presence of the council.
3. A vacancy in the office of mayor shall be filled by an interim appointment, followed by an election to fill a two-year term, if:
    a. The vacancy occurs, or a letter of resignation is received by the governing body at least 14 days before the deadline for filing for election in an odd-numbered year; and
    b. Two years of the vacated term will remain after the first Monday of January following the next municipal election.

2.04.040 Mayor to preside over council.
The mayor shall be the chairman and preside at all meetings of the city council but shall not vote except in case of a tie, when he shall cast the deciding vote. (Ord. 6-92, amended, 1992; Prior code § 9-17)

2.04.050 Powers generally.
The mayor may exercise within the city limits the powers conferred upon him to suppress disorder and keep peace. The mayor shall have authority to grant full pardons for violations of the ordinances of the city or to remit so much of any fine or penalty as belongs to the city, together with the costs of prosecution when to him it shall seem just, reasonable and a meritorious cause. He shall report monthly to the city council the number of fines remitted and pardons granted and the reasons for them. (Ord. 124 § 1, amended; Prior code § 9-20)

2.04.070 Examination of books.
The mayor shall have the power and authority at all times to examine and inspect the books, records and papers of any officer or agent employed by the city. (Prior code § 9-22)

2.04.080 Messages to council on city affairs.
The mayor shall from time to time give the council messages on city affairs and will recommend for their consideration such measures as he may deem expedient. (Prior code §9-23)

2.04.090 Power to call out inhabitants.
The mayor shall have power, when necessary, to call upon every male inhabitant of the city over the age of 21 years to aid in enforcing the laws, in suppressing riots and other disorderly conduct. (Prior code § 9-24)

2.04.100 Supervisory authority.
The mayor shall supervise the conduct of all city officers and may suspend any appointive officer from office for what he shall deem sufficient cause, such suspension, however to terminate at the next regular meeting of the city council, unless such officer is, after a hearing and an opportunity to present his defense, thereupon removed from office; provided, that such meeting of the city council may be adjourned from time to time for the purpose of passing upon the right of the officer to continue office. (Prior code § 9-25)

2.04.110 Signature on documents.
The mayor shall sign all contracts, leases, bonds, and other writings on the part of the city authorized by the city council, or required by certificates of license issued, by or under authority of any ordinance of the city, and all warrants on the city treasurer for money authorized to be drawn there from by the city council or by law, except as otherwise provided by law or ordinance. (Prior code §9-26)

2.04.120 Committee appointments.
The mayor will appoint all committees authorized ordinance or resolution of the city council. (Prior code §9-27)

2.04.130 Granting of Privileges.
The mayor may grant such privileges and free licenses as are authorized by ordinance. (Prior code §9-28)

2.04.140 Appointment of officers and assistants.
The mayor by and with the advice and consent of the council may appoint all appointive officers and agents that may be provided for by law or ordinance, and in like manner, fill all vacancies among the same, except as otherwise provided by law; except that elective officers shall have the sole right to appoint all their deputies and assistants who shall be confirmed by the city council. (Prior code §51-29)

Chapter 2.08 CITY COUNCIL

Sections:
2.08.010     Meetings.
2.08.020     Quorum.
2.08.030     Disciplinary power.
2.08.040     Authority to create rules.
2.08.045     Rules of Order and Procedure for City Council Meetings.
2.08.050     Voting and passage procedures.
2.08.055     Electronic Meeting Policy of the City Council.
2.08.060     Taking of office.
2.08.070     Vacancy.
2.08.080     Open meetings of governing body.
2.08.090     Conduct of public at meetings.
2.08.100     Requiring attendance of witnesses, production of evidence.
2.08.110     Failure to comply with subpoena.

2.08.010 Meetings.
The legislative body of the city shall be the city council. The city council shall consist of five members or such other number as may be required by Utah State law. The city council together with the mayor shall constitute the governing body of the city. The city council shall meet each first and third Tuesday of each month at 7:00 p.m. at the Lindon City offices, 100 North State Street, Lindon, Utah. In the absence of other provisions therefor by resolution, if a meeting shall be held on the next business day following, and adjourned meetings shall be held from time to time as circumstances may require. The mayor or any two council members may call special meetings by issuing a written notice to each member of the city council and the mayor, served personally or left at the member’s or mayor’s usual place of residence, and no business shall be transacted at any special meeting except that stated in the notice thereof, unless all council members are present and unanimously consent thereto. (Ord. 6-92, amended, 1992)

2.08.020 Quorum.
The majority of the council elected shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from time to time and are empowered to compel the attendance of absent members, and may when necessary, direct the marshal to bring in such members under arrest. Should any member of the council refuse or neglect to attend any meeting of the council when notified by the marshal or other proper officer that his presence is necessary to form a quorum, or should any member leave the council when in session without the consent of council when such leaving would break the quorum, he may be fined any sum not to exceed $50. (Prior code §9-7)

2.08.030 Disciplinary power.
The city council may punish its members for disorderly conduct and with the concurrence of 2/3 of the members, the council may expel a member for cause, but no member shall be removed for cause unless furnished with a copy of the charges against him and given an opportunity of being heard in his own defense. (Prior code § 9-8)

2.08.040 Authority to create rules.
The council may, from time to time, make such rules for the government of its proceedings as may be deemed necessary and proper. (Prior code §9-9)

2.08.045 Rules of Order and Procedure for City Council Meetings.
Pursuant to Utah Code 10-3-606, the following rules of order and procedure shall govern the meetings of the City Council:
1. Meeting Procedures. All City Council meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the required procedures contained in the Utah Code.
2. Public Comment. Every agenda for a regularly scheduled meeting of the City Council shall have an item entitled “public comment”. The limited purpose of this item is to allow members of the public to speak to the City Council about any item not on the agenda. During this agenda item, each commenting member of the public is free to express any idea, ask any question, or share any view point without limitation except for the time and manner of the presentation. Each member of the public is limited to the time allowed by the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem. The Mayor shall use his or her best efforts to ensure that the public comment portion is civil and orderly, to allow the free expression of each commenting member of the public, and to keep the meeting in order. The Mayor, Council members, and staff should not interrupt, argue with, or otherwise interfere with any comment made by a member of the public who is following the time and manner limitations. The Mayor, Council members, and staff may ask clarifying questions of the member of the public making a presentation. The Mayor may allow other members of the public to comment on such a presentation.
3. Public Participation in the Meeting. A member of the public may only participate in a City Council meeting (a) in the public comment portion of a public meeting; (b) if the member of the public is on the agenda; (c) if the Mayor or a City Council member has requested that the person present to the council; or (d) at the Mayor’s or Mayor Pro Tem’s discretion. Any disorderly member of the public may be expelled from a meeting per procedures set forth in Section 2.08.090 of this Chapter. By issuance of subpoena the City Council may also require attendance and testimony of any person per Section 2.08.100 of this Chapter.
4. Council Member Participation. In City Council meetings, Council members shall at all times conduct themselves with decorum and respect and shall refrain from making any disparaging remarks concerning another person. At regular City Council meetings, Council members should discuss and vigorously debate agenda items as needed and without interrupting others who are speaking. A work meeting shall be more informal and Council members may freely participate as long as proper decorum is maintained.
5. Chairing the Meeting. The Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem shall chair each City Council meeting and shall pace the meeting so that all items on the agenda are addressed and either concluded or continued. The Mayor shall use his or her best efforts to ensure that the Council members and members of the public are always treated with respect and that the meetings are orderly.
6. Meeting Adjournment. As a goal, City Council meetings shall be scheduled to end at a reasonable hour. The Mayor and City Council members the meeting in a timely manner. A City Council meeting shall not be adjourned until either all agenda items have been acted upon or a motion to adjourn is made and is approved of by a majority of the City Council. (Ord. 2014-3, adopted, 2014)

2.08.050 Voting and passage procedures.
A roll call vote shall be taken and recorded for all ordinances, resolutions, and any action which would create a liability against the municipality and in any other case at the request of any member of the governing body by a “yes” or a “no” vote and shall be recorded. Every resolution or ordinance shall be in writing before the vote is taken. The concurrence of a majority of the members elected to the city council shall be necessary to the passage of any ordinance, resolution, or other action of the city council. Unless otherwise prescribed by law, in no event shall the city council pass any ordinance or resolution, or take any other action unless at least three votes favor the proposed ordinance, resolution, or action. All ordinances passed must be signed by the mayor and attested to by the recorder as proof of their regular passage. In no event shall the mayor have the power to veto any act of the governing body unless otherwise specifically authorized by Utah State statute. (Ord. 6-92, amended, 1992; Prior code §9-8)

2.08.055 Electronic Meeting Policy of the City Council.
The Lindon City Council may conduct electronic meetings where one or more of its members participates by means of a telephonic or telecommunications conference pursuant to Section 52-4-207 of the Utah Code Annotated as may be amended. The following procedures shall be followed for an electronic meeting of the City Council:
1. Members Considered Present. City Council members participating electronically shall be considered present at the meeting for all purposes, shall be afforded every opportunity to participate in the discussion of the agenda items, and shall be allowed to cast their vote on issues coming to the City Council for a vote.
2. Anchor Location. The main anchor location as described in State Law is 100 North State Street, Lindon, Utah, 84042. Any additional anchor location (i) shall be identified by the City Council by its proper address; or (ii) shall be the location of the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem with the proper declaration and shall be identified by its proper address or other identification as defined in the notification requirements of the State Law.
3. Public Notice. Public notice of an electronic meeting of the City Council shall be given pursuant to Section 52-4-202 of the Utah Code Annotated by:
    a. posting written notice at all anchor locations;
    b. posting written notice on the Utah Public Notice Website created under Section 63F-1-701; and
    c. providing written or electronic notice to (a) at least one newspaper of general circulation within the County, or (b) a local media correspondent.
4. Notice to City Council Members. City staff shall provide notice of an electronic City Council meeting to all Council members at least 24 hours before the meeting so that they may participate in the meeting and be counted as present for all purposes including the determination of whether a quorum is present. This notice shall include a statement that one or more members of the City Council will be participating electronically, a description of how each member participating electronically will be connected to the meeting, and the regularly published agenda for that meeting.
5. Mayor Participation. Unless specified otherwise, no City Council meeting may be held electronically unless the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem is present at an anchor location and conducts the meeting.
6. Electronic Communications Line. Immediately prior to opening an electronic City Council meeting, the Mayor or Mayor Pro Tem shall communicate with each Council member who is participating electronically and ensure that he or she is prepared to move forward. From that time forward until the adjournment of the meeting, the electronic communications line shall be kept open unless a Council member participating electronically wishes to withdraw from the meeting.
7. Continuing the Meeting. If a City Council member who participates electronically withdraws early from a meeting, any remaining meeting agenda items may be completed if (i) there is still a quorum of the Council present at the main anchor location, or (ii) there are sufficient other Council members who are participating electronically to comprise a quorum with those at the main anchor location.
8. Public Attendance. The public may attend the open portions of an electronic City Council meeting at the main anchor location. The public may participate to the same extent as with a non-electronic City Council meeting.
9. Electronic Participation. Prior to taking a vote on any issue, the Mayor or the Mayor Pro Tem:
    a. shall inquire of each City Council member participating electronically if he or she has been able to adequately monitor the discussion, including comments from the public, and
    b. shall allow each City Council member the opportunity to make any comments that he or she desires.
10. Electronic Meeting Minutes. The minutes of an electronic meeting of the City Council shall include the name of each Council member who participated electronically, the nature of the electronic communication, and the duration of the Council member’s participation. (Ord. 2014-4, adopted, 2014)

2.08.060 Taking of office.
The city council shall take office on the first Monday of January after their election. (Prior code § 9-11)

2.08.070 Vacancy.
Whenever a vacancy shall occur in the office of a city council member, the city council shall appoint a registered voter in the municipality to fill the unexpired term of the office vacated until 12:00 noon on the first Monday of January following the next municipal election, except as provided in paragraph 2 of this section.
1. If, for any reason, the council does not fill the vacancy within 30 days after the vacancy occurs, the two persons having the highest number votes of the council shall come before the council. If neither candidate receives a majority vote of the council at that time, the vacancy shall be filled by lot in the presence of the council.
2. A vacancy in the office of a city council member shall be filled by an interim appointment, followed by an election to fill a two-year term, if:
    a. The vacancy occurs, or a letter of resignation is received by the governing body at least 14 days before the deadline for filing for election in an odd-numbered year; and
    b. Two years of the vacated term will remain after the first Monday of January following the next municipal election.

2.08.080 Open meetings of governing body.
All meetings of the governing body of Lindon City shall be held in compliance with the provisions of Chapter 4 of Title 52, U.C.A. 1953, relating to open and public meetings. (Ord. 6-92, amended, 1992)

2.08.090 Conduct of public at meetings.
The governing body on a 2/3 vote may expel any person who is disorderly during the meeting of the governing body. This section or any action taken by the governing body pursuant hereto, shall not preclude prosecution under any other provision of law. (Ord. 6-92, amended, 1992)

2.08.100 Requiring attendance of witnesses, production of evidence.
The governing body of Lindon City may require the attendance of any person to give testimony or produce records, documents or things for inspection, copying or produce records, documents or things for inspection, copying or examination necessary or useful for the governance of Lindon City. The governing body may issue subpoenas in its own name in the same manner as is provided in the Utah Rules of Civil Procedure. (Ord. 6-92, amended, 1992)

2.08.110 Failure to comply with subpoena.
Failure to comply with a subpoena issued by the City Council pursuant to this Section shall be punishable as a Class B. Misdemeanor. (Ord. 2010-6, adopted, 2010)

Chapter 2.12 CITY RECORDER

Sections:
2.12.010     Duties.
2.12.020     Payment of money into treasury.
2.12.030     Open inspection of records and papers.
2.12.040     Mayor may not serve as recorder.

2.12.010 Duties.
It shall be the duty of the city recorder to keep the records, papers and seal of the city in order, the date of all laws and resolutions passed by the city council in a book kept for that purpose. He shall keep in a separate book a record of the proceedings of the city council, whose meetings it shall be his duty to attend. He shall keep in a book provided for that purpose the name of all persons elected or appointed to any office within the city, their terms of office and the dates of the death, resignation or removal of any such officer, and the names of the person appointed to fill the vacancy so created. He shall cause a certified copy of all laws passed by the city council to be posted in three public places in the city within one week after the passage of such law by the city council unless published as otherwise provided by law. (Ord. 6-92, amended, 1992)

2.12.020 Payment of money into treasury.
The city recorder shall pay into the city treasury all moneys belonging to the city coming into his hands by virtue of his office. He shall deliver to his successor in office the corporate seal, together with all books, papers, records and other property in his possession belonging to the city. (Prior code §9-48)

2.12.030 Open inspection of records and papers.
All records, books, papers and documents belonging to any office in the city government shall be open to the inspection of the public at all reasonable office hours. (Prior code § 9-49)

2.12.040 Mayor may not serve as recorder.
The mayor of Lindon City may not serve as the city recorder.

Chapter 2.16 JUSTICE OF THE PEACE

Sections:
2.16.010     Duties--Generally.
2.16.020     Payment of moneys received.
2.16.030     Vacancy.

2.16.010 Duties--Generally.
The city justice of the peace shall keep his office at such place as the city council may from time to time direct. He shall perform the duties required of him by the ordinances of the city and the general law. He shall report monthly to the city council at its first regular meeting in each month showing the total number of cases brought before him on behalf of the city during the previous month, the amount of fines levied and the amount collected. (Prior code §9-66)

2.16.020 Payment of moneys received.
The city justice of the peace shall pay all moneys belonging to the city received by him for fines or otherwise into the city treasury on or before the second Monday of each and every month taking the treasurer’s receipt therefore; provided, however, that said justice shall retain as part of the compensation for said office all fees in civil cases brought in that justice’s court. (Prior code §9-67)

2.16.030 Vacancy.
If a vacancy shall occur in the office of the city justice of the peace, the mayor by and with the City council shall forthwith fill any vacancy by appointment for the unexpired term, the person so appointed shall qualify in the same manner as a city justice and shall have and exercise all the powers conferred by law upon a city justice. In case the city justice shall for any reason be unable or disqualified to perform the duties of his office, or shall be absent, the mayor shall appoint some other justice of the peace residing within the county to act as city justice of the peace pro tem, and he shall have the powers and discharge the duties of such city justice during the existence of such disability or absence only in the same manner and to the same extent as the city justice might have done. (Prior code § 9-68)

Chapter 2.20 CITY ATTORNEY

Sections:
2.20.010     Appointment.

2.20.010 Appointment.
The council shall, if it deems expedient, at any regular or special meeting appoint a city attorney. The city attorney must be a regularly licensed attorney and shall perform the duties required of him by the general laws and by the ordinances of the city and such other duties as the council may by law or resolution require. In case of disability or inability, the city attorney may with the consent and approval of the city council appoint a deputy to advise the city officers in any or all legal matters and to perform any duty ordinarily performed by the city attorney. Instead of appointing a city attorney, the council may, upon recommendation of the mayor, employ an attorney to perform such duties as shall prescribe. (Prior code §9-35)

Chapter 2.24 CITY ENGINEER

Sections:
2.24.010     Appointment.

2.24.010 Appointment.
The council shall, if it deems expedient, at any regular or special meeting, appoint a city engineer. The city engineer shall perform the duties required of him by the general laws and by the ordinances of the city and such other duties as the council may by law or resolution require. Instead of appointing a city engineer, the council may, upon recommendation of the mayor, employ an engineer to perform such duties as it shall prescribe. (Prior code § 9-35)

Chapter 2.28 OFFICERS GENERALLY

Sections:
2.28.010     Official oath and security.
2.28.020     Reserved.
2.28.030     Oath.
2.28.040     Execution of new bond or insurance.
2.28.050     Amount of bonds or insurance policies.
2.28.060     Adoption of compensation schedule.
2.28.070     Appointment by council.
2.28.080     Modification of compensation.
2.28.090     Time of payment of officers.
2.28.100     Use of office for personal benefit prohibited.
2.28.110     Allowances.

2.28.010 Official oath and security.
All elective and appointive officers of this municipality, as identified in this chapter, shall, before assuming the duties of office, file with the city recorder a constitutional oath of office, and shall obtain an official bond with corporate sureties, or shall be covered by a policy of crime or theft insurance. The form and proof of the required bond or insurance shall be approved by the city administrator and shall be filed and maintained with the city recorder. (Ord. 2019-3 §1, amended, 2019; Prior code §9-72)

2.28.020 Reserved.
(Ord. 2019-3 §1, amended, 2019; Prior code §9-73)

2.28.030 Oath.
Before any officer of this municipality shall be entitled to assume the duties of his office, he shall take and subscribe to the following oath: I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support, obey and defend the Constitution of the United States and the constitution of this State; that I will discharge the duties of my office with fidelity. (Prior code §9-74)

2.28.040 Execution of new bond or insurance.
In case of the insolvency of any surety or insurer which has issued an official bond or policy of crime or theft insurance during the incumbency of any elected or appointed officer, such elected or appointed officer shall immediately execute, deliver, and file a new bond or proof of insurance. In the event an elected or appointed officer fails to do so within ten (10) days after notice of the need to secure a new bond or policy of insurance, their office shall be deemed to be vacant, and the proper appointing power will proceed to fill said vacancy in manner conformable to law and ordinance. (Ord. 2019-3 §1, amended, 2019; Prior code §9-75)

2.28.050 Amount of bonds or insurance policies.
The amount for which the respective officers shall give a bond or a policy of insurance as stated in Section 2.28.040 shall be as follows:
+---------------------+----------+
| Mayor               | $10,000  |
+---------------------+----------+
| City Administrator  | $10,000  |
+---------------------+----------+
| Chief of Police     | $10,000  |
+---------------------+----------+
| Treasurer           | $500,000 |
+---------------------+----------+
| Recorder            | $10,000  |
+---------------------+----------+
| Council Members     | $10,000  |
+---------------------+----------+
| Attorney            | $10,000  |
+---------------------+----------+
| Justice Court Judge | $10,000  |
+---------------------+----------+
The city council may at any time require further and additional bonds of any officer elected or appointed as it may deem proper. The bonds or insurance required for these persons listed above may be provided for by the city through the issuance of a blanket bond or insurance policy covering the persons listed above. The blanket bond or insurance policy shall not be less than seven hundred fifty thousand dollars ($750,000). (Ord. 2019-3 §1, amended, 2019; Prior code §9-76)

2.28.060 Adoption of compensation schedule.
1. Pursuant to Utah Code 10-3-818, compensation for elected and appointed officials of Lindon City will be adopted as part of the annual budget.
2. Elected city officials will receive any annually approved cost of living increases. (Ord. 116 §1, amended, 1985; Ord. 95 §1, amended, 1983; Prior code §9-82; Ord. 99-3, amended, 2000; Ord. 2014-6, adopted, 2014)

2.28.070 Appointment by council.
The city council may appoint such other officers as may be necessary for the order and well-being of the city, define their duties, fix their term and compensation, remove them from office at pleasure and require them to take and subscribe an oath and give bond as they shall provide by resolution or ordinance. (Prior code § 9-86)

2.28.080 Modification of compensation.
In the event the governing body decides that compensation or compensation schedules should be adopted, changed, or amended, it shall set a time and place for public hearing at which all interested persons shall be given an opportunity to be heard. Notice of the time, place, and purpose of the meeting shall be published at least seven days prior thereto by publication at least once in a newspaper published in Utah County and circulated in Lindon City. After the conclusion of the public hearing, the governing body may enact an ordinance fixing, changing, or amending the compensation of any elective or appointive Lindon City officer or adopting a compensation schedule applicable to any officer or officers. (Ord. 6-92, adopted, 1992)

2.28.090 Time of payment of officers.
The compensation of all Lindon City officers, if any, shall be paid at least monthly out of the municipal treasury. (Ord. 92-6, amended, 1992)

2.28.100 Use of office for personal benefit prohibited.
1. No elected or appointed officer or municipal employee shall:
    a. Improperly disclose private, confidential, or protected information acquired by reason of his official position or improperly use such information to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or others;
    b. Use or attempt to use his official position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or others; or
    c. Knowingly receive, accept, take, seek, or solicit, directly or indirectly, any gift or loan for himself or another if the gift or loan tends to influence him in the discharge of his official duties.
2. This Section does not apply to:
    a. An occasional non-pecuniary gift having a value of less than $50;
    b. An award publicly presented;
    c. Any bona fide loan made in the ordinary course of business;
    d. A political campaign contribution if the contribution is actually used in a political campaign.
3. In addition to any penalty contained in any other provision of law, any person who knowingly and intentionally violates this Section, shall be dismissed from employment or removed from office and shall be subject to prosecution pursuant to state law. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Ord. 92-6, adopted, 1992)

2.28.110 Allowances.
1. The Mayor or the City Council may, within budgeted appropriations, authorize the payment of an allowance for members of the City Council and Planning Commission for the purchase, or assistance in the purchase, of a smart phone, laptop computer, digital tablet, or similar device that is capable of receiving and displaying City documents in a digital format. The amount for said allowance shall be established by the City Council and identified within the annually adopted Lindon City budget. The use of this allowance to purchase, or to aid in the purchase, of a smart phone, laptop computer, digital tablet, or similar device is considered part of the compensation provided to members of the City Council and Planning Commission and when used does not constitute the purchase of City equipment, but the purchase of personal property for the individual member. Such devices shall be and shall remain the personal property of the individual member seeking use of the allowance.
2. Subject to budgetary constraints, this allowance shall be available to each member of the City Council as of April 16, 2013 and each member of the Planning Commission as of July 1, 2013 and shall thereafter be made available to each newly elected or appointed member of each respective body. The allowance for City Council members may be renewed every two years. The allowance for Planning Commissioners may be renewed every three years. This allowance shall not be renewed and made available on reelection or reappointment of a member if they have already used the allowance within the previous two or three year timeframes as listed above. (Ord. 2013-2, adopted, 2013)

Chapter 2.30 EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT SUCCESSION OF OFFICES

Sections:
2.30.010     Definitions.
2.30.020     Designating interim successors.
2.30.030     Master list.
2.30.040     Duties of interim successors.
2.30.050     No oath of office required.
2.30.060     City Council approval.
2.30.070     Seat of government.

2.30.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following words are defined as follows:
“Absent” means not physically present or not able to be communicated with for 12 hours, or, during an emergency, such shorter period of time as determined by the Mayor, or his successor, on a case-by-case basis. Absent does not include a person who can be communicated with via telephone, radio, or telecommunications.
“Attack” means a nuclear, conventional, biological, or chemical warfare action against the United States of America or the State of Utah.
“Disaster” means a situation causing, or threatening to cause, widespread damage, social disruption, or injury or loss of life or property resulting from attack, internal disturbance, natural phenomenon, or technological hazard.
“Emergency interim successor” means a person designated by this chapter to exercise the powers and discharge the duties of an office when the person legally exercising the powers and duties of the office is unavailable.
“Executive director” means the person with ultimate responsibility for managing and overseeing the operations of each department, however denominated.
“Internal disturbance” means a riot, prison break, disruptive terrorism, or strike.
“Natural Phenomenon” means earthquake, tornado, storm, flood, landslide, avalanche, forest or range fire, drought, epidemic, or other catastrophic event.
“Office” includes all city offices, the powers and duties of which are defined by constitution, statutes, charters, optional plans, ordinances, articles, or by-laws, including all heads of departments.
“Place of governance” means the physical location where the powers of an office are being exercised.
“Political subdivision officer” means a person holding an office in the city.
“Technological hazard” means any hazardous materials accident, mine accident, train derailment, air crash, radiation incident, pollution, structural fire, or explosion.
“Unavailable” means absent from the place of governance during a disaster that seriously disrupts normal governmental operations, whether or not that absence or inability would give rise to a vacancy under existing constitutional or statutory provisions.

2.30.020 Designating interim successors.
Each person holding an office, as defined in this Chapter, shall provide to the City Council, within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this Chapter, and on or before the 1st day of July of each year thereafter, a written list designating three emergency interim successors and their order of succession. Each officer shall also submit a new list if the officer or any of the successors changes.

2.30.030 Master list.
After the City Council approves the emergency interim successors and their order of succession, the lists shall be given to the City Recorder, who shall compile a master list for Lindon City and submit it to the Division of Comprehensive Emergency Management for the State of Utah.

2.30.040 Duties of interim successors.
If the officer is unavailable once a disaster has occurred, the designated emergency interim successor shall exercise the power and duties of the office according to the order of succession. The emergency interim successor shall exercise the powers and duties of the office only until the vacancy is filled in accordance with the Constitution or statutes, or until the officer, his deputy, or an emergency interim successor earlier in the order of succession become available to exercise the powers and duties of the office.

2.30.050 No oath of office required.
The emergency interim successor shall not be required to take an oath of office, unless specifically provided by law.

2.30.060 City Council approval.
Until persons designated as emergency interim successors succeed to the exercise of the powers and duties of an office, they shall serve as emergency interim successors at the pleasure of the City Council and may be approved and replaced by the City Council at any time, with or without cause.

2.30.070 Seat of government.
The City Council, upon a determination that the Lindon City offices are not capable of functioning as the seat of government for the City, may designate another location, outside of the City if necessary, to serve as a seat of government during the emergency.

Chapter 2.32 FIRE DEPARTMENT

Sections:
2.32.010     Chief appointment.
2.32.020     Salary.
2.32.030     Appointment and removal power.
2.32.040     Chief--Duty and powers.
2.32.060     Removal of poles/ wires and buildings-- Authority.
2.32.070     Street blockades.
2.32.080     Authority to prescribe limits in vicinity of fire.
2.32.090     Unlawful interference penalty.
2.32.100     Authority regarding use of water.
2.32.110     Places of public assemblage-- Authority to prescribe rules.
2.32.130     Right of entry.
2.32.140     Defective structures.
2.32.150     Unoccupied buildings.
2.32.160     Fire investigation and report.
2.32.170     Causing a fire.
2.32.180     Apparatus--Maintenance.
2.32.200     False alarms--Penalty.
2.32.210     Violation--Penalty.

2.32.010 Chief appointment.
The council shall appoint a chief of the fire department who shall qualify by taking and subscribing the constitutional oath and filing with the recorder a bond as fixed by the city council. (Prior code § 7-1)

2.32.020 Salary.
The salary of the chief of the fire department and the members of the fire department shall be fixed by resolution of the city council from time to time, and shall be paid from the funds of the city upon warrants drawn upon the city. (Prior code §7-3)

2.32.030 Appointment and removal power.
The chief of the department shall have power to appoint members and to remove any officer or member of the department at any time he sees fit, subject to confirmation by the city council. (Prior code §7-3)

2.32.040 Chief--Duty and powers.
The duty of extinguishing fires and of protecting life and property within the city is entrusted to the chief of the fire department. He may divide the city into fire districts and make such rules and regulations, subject to the approval of the city council for the government of all officers and members of the department, as he may deem expedient. He may make suitable regulations under which the officers and members of the department shall be required to wear an appropriate uniform or badge, by which, in case of fire and at other times, their authority and position in the fire department may be known. The chief shall have sole and entire command over all officers and members of the department at fires. He shall have full charge at all times of all apparatus and appurtenances belonging to the department, and he shall adopt such measures as he shall deem expedient for the extinguishment of fire, protection of property or preservation of order and observation of the laws of the state, duties required of him by law and the ordinances of the city council. It shall be the duty of the chief of the department to examine the condition of all houses, and to inspect engines, hose and hook and ladder equipment of the city fire department. (Prior code § 7-4)

2.32.060 Removal of poles/ wires and buildings-- Authority.
When a fire is in progress, the chief of the department, or in his absence the officer in charge, in case of urgent public necessity, may order any telegraph, telephone, electric light wire or poles, in close proximity thereto, to be torn down or otherwise disposed of, and he may likewise order any building or buildings, in close proximity thereto, to be torn down or otherwise disposed of for the purpose of checking the conflagration, but neither the chief of the department nor any other officer or member of the fire department shall unnecessarily or recklessly destroy or injure any building or other property. (Prior code §7-6)

2.32.070 Street blockades.
Whenever a fire shall occur it shall be lawful for the chief, or the officer in command, to blockade any street, avenue, alley, sidewalk or other place if in his judgment it is necessary to secure the ladder apparatus under his command, and to protect the hose of said department from injury. It is unlawful for any person to break through said blockade. (Prior code §7-8)

2.32.080 Authority to prescribe limits in vicinity of fire.
The marshal, in conjunction with the fire officer in charge, may prescribe the limits in the vicinity of the fire within which no person, except members of the department, marshal and police, or those admitted by order of the officer in charge, shall be permitted to come. (Prior code §7-8)

2.32.090 Unlawful interference penalty.
Any person who shall willfully hinder any officer or foreman in the charge of his duty at a fire, or in any manner injure, deface, or destroy any engine, hose or other fire apparatus belonging to the city or who shall interfere with any fire company or person, or who shall willfully break or injure any water pipe, or in any way interfere with the water or its source of supply, shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Prior code §7-10)

2.32.100 Authority regarding use of water.
The chief of the department, or other officer in charge, shall have the right to use water from any source for the purpose of extinguishing fires or for saving property in danger of being destroyed thereby. (Prior code §7-11)

2.32.110 Places of public assemblage-- Authority to prescribe rules.
It shall be the duty of the fire chief, subject to the approval of the city council, to name such rules and regulations as may be necessary for the prevention of fire in theaters, schools, churches and other places of assemblage or public amusement. Such rules and regulations shall be printed and posted in conspicuous places as designated by the fire chief and it is unlawful for any person to remove, obstruct or deface the same. It shall be the duty and responsibility of the owner, manager, agent or person having control of such building to cause and bring about compliance with all such rules and regulations. (Prior code §7-12)

2.32.130 Right of entry.
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this chapter, or whenever the chief or his authorized representative has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition which makes such building or premises unsafe, the chief or his authorized representative may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the chief by this chapter, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials and demand entry; and if such building or premises is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other persons having charge or control of the building or premises and demand entry. If such entry is refused, the chief or his authorized representative shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry. (Ord. 125 §1, amended; Prior code §7-13)

2.32.140 Defective structures.
Whenever, in the judgment of the fire chief, any building or structure, or any portion thereof, or any appurtenances or fixtures thereto, or any chimney, smokestack, stove, oven, furnace or wiring or thing connected with such building or premises is deemed defective or unsafe, and such defect or unsafe condition is such as to create a danger from fire; or whenever the owner or occupant of such building or structure or part thereof keeps or stores any explosive, combustible, flammable material, waste or rubbish of any description in such manner that the same creates a danger from fire, the fire chief or his deputies shall give the owner or person having control of such building or structure notice not exceeding five days of required changes, alterations or repairs necessary to render the same safe to life and property from fire, and any person refusing or neglecting to comply with such notice shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Prior code §7-15)

2.32.150 Unoccupied buildings.
Whenever any unoccupied building is not properly secured or enclosed, the fire chief, or his deputies, shall immediately visit the premises and notify the owner or person having control of the same, forthwith to secure or enclose the same, and the person so notified as aforesaid shall, within 48 hours, comply therewith. (Prior code §7-16)

2.32.160 Fire investigation and report.
The chief (or in his absence his assistants in charge of the fire) shall, after its extinguishment, make a prompt and thorough investigation of the cause of the fire, the time of breaking out, the amount of loss and insurance, a description of the affected buildings and premises, and shall secure all other affected buildings and premises, and shall secure all other useful information and data available and record the same in a record book kept for that purpose in the office of the department and shall report the same to the city council at such times as it may direct. (Prior code §7-17)

2.32.170 Causing a fire.
It is unlawful for any person, willfully or negligently, to ignite or cause to be ignited, any tree or shrub, cultivated crop or fence, building or other property on any land not his own, or to throw away any lighted cigar, cigarette, match or other burning material whatsoever on any land cover which will carry fire. A person violating this Section shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Prior code §7-18)

2.32.180 Apparatus--Maintenance.
All engines, hose and other fire equipment shall be kept at such place or places as the city council shall provide and designate and shall be kept in proper condition for immediate use. (Prior code §7-22)

2.32.200 False alarms--Penalty.
Any person who shall without cause give an alarm of fire by outcry or ringing of bells or otherwise, shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Prior code § 7-24)

2.32.210 Violation--Penalty.
1. Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
2. Each day that any violation continues after notification by the Chief or his agent that such violation exists shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Prior code § 7-27)

Chapter 2.36 POLICE DEPARTMENT

Sections:
2.36.010     Marshal--Duties generally.
2.36.020     Marshal--Duties specifically.
2.36.030     Marshal--Duty to inquire into violations.
2.36.040     Marshal--Authority as chief of police.
2.36.050     Marshal--Register of arrest.
2.36.060     Marshal--Nuisance abatement-- Financial accounting.
2.36.070     Marshal--Authority to make regulations.
2.36.080     Authority of mayor to appoint officers.
2.36.090     Duty of officers.

2.36.010 Marshal--Duties generally.
The marshal shall perform the duties required of him by the general laws and the ordinances of the city and such other duties as the city council may by ordinance or resolution require. (Prior code §14-1)

2.36.020 Marshal--Duties specifically.
The marshal shall at the request of the mayor attend meetings of the city council; shall have charge of the city prison, police quarters and furniture and appurtenances hereunto belonging and cause the same to be kept in good order; execute all orders of the mayor and city council; preserve the peace and good order of the city; quell all riots; serve all processes issued by the city justice of the peace, and to him directed, and see that all orders and judgments of said court are carried into effect; and shall take such measures as shall secure the peace and good order of all public meetings and of the city generally. (Prior code §14-2)

2.36.030 Marshal--Duty to inquire into violations.
The marshal shall diligently inquire into all violations of the city ordinances that come to his attention or knowledge and shall enter complaint before the proper court against all persons who he has good cause to believe guilty of such violation. (Prior code § 14-3)

2.36.040 Marshal--Authority as chief of police.
The marshal is the chief of police and all policemen are subordinate to him and must obey all reasonable and lawful commands made by him. (Prior code §14-3)

2.36.050 Marshal--Register of arrest.
The marshal shall provide and cause to he kept in the police headquarters in the city hall a register of all arrests upon which shall be entered a statement showing the date and hour of such arrests, the name of the person arrested, the offense charged and a description of any property found on the person arrested. (Prior code §14-5)

2.36.060 Marshal--Nuisance abatement-- Financial accounting.
The marshal shall cause to be abated or removed any nuisance found within the limits of the city; he shall keep a correct account in a book provided for that purpose of all moneys which may, by virtue of his office, come into his hands, stating from whom and on what account received and pay into the city treasury monthly all moneys in his hands belonging to the city or which by law are required to be paid into the treasury. (Prior code §14-6)

2.36.070 Marshal--Authority to make regulations.
The marshal is authorized and required to make all needful regulations not inconsistent with the ordinances of the city or general laws for the government and control of the police department; and the marshal must report to the mayor any violations of such rules or the ordinances by any policeman. The marshal may, by and with the advice and consent of the mayor, appoint special policemen on holidays or such other times as in his judgment it becomes necessary. (Prior code § 14-7)

2.36.080 Authority of mayor to appoint officers.
The mayor, by and with the consent of the city council, may from time to time appoint such number of policemen as shall be necessary for the good government of the city. (Prior code § 14-8)

2.36.090 Duty of officers.
Policemen are officers of the city and must diligently and faithfully perform the duties imposed upon them by the ordinances of the city or the resolutions of the city council. They must obey the rules provided by the mayor and marshal and must diligently enforce all ordinances concerning the public peace. (Prior code § 14-9)

Chapter 2.38 HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION

Sections:
2.38.010     Purpose.
2.38.020     Historic preservation commission.
2.38.030     Commission duties.
2.38.040     Lindon City historic sites list.
2.38.050     Lindon historic landmark register.
2.38.060     Standards for rehabilitation.

2.38.010 Purpose.
The Lindon City recognizes that the historical heritage of the Lindon community is among its most valued and important assets. It is therefore the intent of Lindon City to identify, preserve, protect, and enhance historic areas and sites lying within the city limits of Lindon City.

2.38.020 Historic preservation commission.
1. The commission shall consist of a minimum of five members with a demonstrated interest, competence, or knowledge in historic preservation, appointed by the city council for terms of not less than two years.
2. To the extent available in the community, two Commission members shall be professionals, as defined by National Park Service regulations, from the disciplines of history, archaeology, planning, architecture, or architectural history.
3. The Commission shall meet at least twice each year and conduct business in accordance with the Open Public Meeting laws of Utah. This includes public notification of meeting place, time, and agenda items.
4. Written minutes of each Commission meeting shall be prepared and made available for public inspection. A historic preservation commission is hereby established by Lindon City with the following provisions:

2.38.030 Commission duties.
The historic preservation commission shall have the following duties:
1. Survey and Inventory Community Historic Resources. The Historic Preservation Commission shall conduct or cause to be conducted a survey of the historic, architectural, and archaeological resources within the community. The survey shall be compatible with the Utah Inventory of Historic and Archaeological Sites. Survey and inventory documents shall be maintained and shall be open to the public. The survey shall be updated at least every 10 years.
2. Review Proposed Nominations to the National Register of Historic Places. The Historic Preservation commission shall review and comment to the State Historic Preservation Officer on all proposed National Registry nominations for properties within the boundaries of Lindon City. When the Historic Preservation Commission considers a National Register nomination which is normally evaluated by professionals in a specific discipline and that discipline is not represented on the Commission, the Commission shall seek expertise in that area before rendering its decision.
3. Provide advice and information.
    a. The historic preservation commission shall act in an advisory role to other officials and departments of government regarding the identification and protection of local historic and archaeological resources.
    b. The historic preservation commission shall work toward the continuing education of citizens regarding historic preservation and community history.
4. Enforcement of state historic preservation laws.
    a. The commission shall support the state laws relating to historic preservation. These include, but are not limited to: U.C.A.§17A-3-1301 through 1306, “The Historic District Act;” and U.C.A.§9-8-301 through 506 regarding the protection of Utah antiquities and historic sites.
    b. Anyone violating this Chapter or any portion of the State Code adopted or referenced herein shall be guilty of a Class B Misdemeanor. Each day that a violation of this Chapter continues after notification by the commission or its agent that such violation exists shall be considered a separate offense.

2.38.040 Lindon City historic sites list.
The historic preservation commission may designate historic properties to the historic sites list as a means of providing recognition to and encouraging the preservation of historic properties in the community.
1. Criteria for designating properties to the Lindon historic sites list. Any district, building, structure, object, or site may be designated to the historic sites list if it meets all the criteria outlined below:
    a. It is located within the official boundaries of the city.
    b. It is at least 50 years old.
    c. It retains its historic integrity, in that there are no major alterations or additions that have obscured or destroyed the significant historic features. Major alterations that would destroy the historic integrity include, but are not limited to, changes in pitch of the main roof, enlargement or enclosure of windows on the principal facades, addition of upper stories or the removal of original upper stories, covering the exterior walls with non-historic materials, moving the resource from its original location to one that is dissimilar to the original, additions which significantly detract from or obscure the original form and appearance of the house when viewed from the public way.
    d. It has been documented according to the Utah State Historic Preservation office standards for intensive level surveys (January 1990 version or subsequent revisions) and copies of that documentation have been placed in the local and state historic preservation files.
2. Nomination and list procedures. Any person, group, or government agency may nominate a property for listing in the Lindon historic sites list. The nomination and listing procedures are as follows:
    a. Completed intensive level survey documentation for each nominated property must be submitted in duplicate to the historic preservation commission.
    b. The commission will review and consider properly submitted nominations at its next scheduled meeting. The commission will notify the nominating party, either orally or in writing, one week prior to the meeting that the nomination will be considered and will place that item on the agenda posted for the meeting. The one-week notification may be waived at the nominating party's option in order to accommodate “last-minute” submittals, although no nomination will be reviewed if it is submitted to the commission less than 48 hours prior to the meeting.
    c. The historic preservation commission will review the documentation for completeness, accuracy, and compliance with the criteria for designating historic properties to the “Lindon historic sites list” and will make its decision accordingly.
    d. Owners of officially designated historic sites may obtain a historic site certificate from the historic preservation commission. The certificate contains the historic name of the property, the date of designation, and signatures of the mayor and the historic preservation commission chairperson.
    e. If a historic site is to be demolished or extensively altered, efforts will be made to document its physical appearance before that action takes place.
    f. The city will delay issuing a demolition permit for a maximum of one week and will notify a member of the historic preservation commission, which will take responsibility for the documentation.
    g. Documentation will include, at minimum exterior photographs (both black-and-white and color slides) of all elevations of the historic building. When possible, both exterior and interior measurements of the building will be made in order to provide an accurate floor plan drawing of the building.
    h. The demolition permit will be issued after one week of the initial application whether or not the Commission has documented the building. The permit may be issued earlier if the commission completes its documentation before the one-week deadline.
    i. The documentation will be kept in the Commission's historic site files, which are open to the public.
3. Removal of properties from the historic sites list. Properties which, in the opinion of the historic preservation commission, no longer meet the criteria for eligibility may be removed from the historic sites list after review and consideration by the committee.

2.38.050 Lindon historic landmark register.
Significant historic properties may be designated to the historic landmark register for the purpose of recognizing their significance and providing incentives and guidelines for their preservation.
1. Criteria for designation to the Lindon historic landmark. Any district, building, structure, object, or site may be designated to the historic landmark register if it meets all the criteria outlined below:
    a. It is located within the official boundaries of the city.
    b. It is currently listed in the National Register of Historic Places, or it has been officially determined eligible for listing in the National Register of Historic Places under the provisions of 36 CFR 60.4(s). Properties listed on or determined eligible for the National Register must, in addition to retaining their integrity, meet at least one of the following National Register criteria:
        i. Associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or ii. Associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or iii. Embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or iv. Has yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history (archaeological sites, for example).
    c. The owner of the property approves of the action to designate his/her property to the historic landmark register and has submitted to the commission a written statement to that effect.
2. Designation procedures.
    a. Official designation proceedings must begin with the submittal of a written request for designation by the property owner to the commission chairperson. The letter must identify the property by its address and historic name, give the date the property was listed in the National Register where officially determined eligible, and include a statement verifying that the property owner is indeed the owner of legal record of the property proposed for designation. This official request may be preceded by informal contacts with the property owner by commission members, private citizens, local officials, or others regarding designation of the property.
    b. Upon receipt of the written request for designation, the commission chairperson shall arrange for the nomination to be considered at the next commission meeting, which shall be held at a time not to exceed 30 days from the date the request was received.
    c. The decision by the commission shall be based on the eligibility of the property in terms of meeting the criteria for designating properties to the Lindon historic landmark register. The commission shall forward its recommendations in writing to the city council within 14 days.
    d. The city council may, by approval and passage of an appropriate resolution, designate properties to the historic landmark register. Following designation, a notice of such shall be mailed to the owners of record together with a copy of this ordinance.
    e. After a property has been formally designated to the historic landmark register, the designation may be amended or rescinded in the same manner as the original designation was made.
    f. Upon official designation, the commission shall record the designation with the county recorder's office to indicate such designation on the official title thereof.
    g. Results of designation to the historic landmark register.
    h. Properties designated to the historic landmark register may receive special consideration in the granting of zoning variances or conditional use permits in order to encourage their preservation.
    i. In the event of rehabilitation of the property, local building officials, to the extent permitted by applicable law, will consider waiving certain code requirements in accordance with Section 104(f) of the Uniform Building Code (1988 Edition, which deals with historic buildings, or the uniform code for building conservation, a special code for existing buildings.)
    j. Owners of historic landmarks may seek assistance from the historic preservation commission in applying for grants or tax credits for rehabilitating their properties.
    k. Proposed repairs, alterations, or additions to historic landmarks are subject to the review of the historic preservation commission and the subsequent review and approval of the city council. The purpose of this review is to ensure the preservation of historic materials and features to the greatest degree possible.
    l. Applications for permits pertaining to historic landmark properties shall be forwarded by the building inspector to the historic preservation commission prior to their issuance.
    m. At its next scheduled meeting, the commission shall review the applications and proposed work for compliance with the Secretary of the Interior's “Standards for Rehabilitation,” hereafter referred to as the “standards.”
    n. The commission's recommendation shall be forwarded within three days to the city council for their consideration in reviewing the applications. The recommendation must indicate which of the standards the commission's decision was based on and, where appropriate, a brief explanation. Copies of the recommendation shall be sent to the building inspector and the property owner at the same time.
    o. The city council shall schedule the matter for its next city council meeting and, upon review of the historic preservation commission's recommendation and other comments given at the meeting, make a decision regarding the appropriateness of the proposed action. Approved projects will be issued a “Certificate of Historical Appropriateness” which authorizes the building permit to be issued.
3. Enforcement. The provisions of this section are subject to the enforcement provisions established with regard to building permits and building codes. (Ord. 12-92, amended, 1993)

2.38.060 Standards for rehabilitation.
The following “standards for rehabilitation” shall be used by the historic preservation commission and city council when determining the historic appropriateness of any application pertaining to historic landmark properties:
1. A property shall be used for its historic purpose or be placed in a new use that requires minimal change to the defining characteristics of the building and its site and environment.
2. The historic character of a property shall be retained and preserved. The removal of historic materials or alteration of features and spaces that characterize a property shall be avoided.
3. Each property shall be recognized as a physical record of its time, place, and use. Changes that create a false sense of historical development, such as adding conjectural features or architectural elements from other buildings, shall not be undertaken.
4. Most properties change over time; those changes that have acquired historic significance in their own right shall be retained and preserved.
5. Distinctive features, finishes, and construction techniques or examples of craftsmanship that characterize a property shall be preserved.
6. Deteriorated historic features shall be repaired rather than replaced. Where the severity of deterioration requires replacement of a distinctive feature, the new feature shall match the old in design, color, texture, and other visual qualities and, where possible, materials. Replacement of missing features shall be substantiated by documentary, physical, or pictorial evidence.
7. Chemical or physical treatments, such as sandblasting, that cause damage to historic materials shall not be used. The surface cleaning of structures, if appropriate, shall be undertaken using the gentlest means possible.
8. Significant archaeological resources affected by a project shall be protected and preserved. If such resources must be disturbed, mitigation measures shall be undertaken.
9. New additions, exterior alterations, or related new construction shall not destroy historic materials that characterize the property. The new work shall be differentiated from the old and shall be compatible with the massing, size, scale, and architectural features to protect the historic integrity of the property and its environment.
10. New additions and adjacent or related new construction shall be undertaken in such a manner that if removed in the future, the essential form and integrity of the historic property and its environment would be unimpaired. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Ord. 12-92, amended, 1993)

Chapter 2.39 COMMUNITY CENTER ADVISORY BOARD
(Ord. 2019-2 §1 (Exh. A), repealed, 2019; Ord. 2011-1, adopted, 2011)

Chapter 2.40 CITY PRISON

Sections:
2.40.010     Jailor—Designated.
2.40.020     Jailor--Duty to adopt rules.
2.40.030     Jailor--Duties Generally.
2.40.040     Prisoner labor.

2.40.010 Jailor—Designated.
The city marshal shall be ex officio jailor and he shall perform the duties of jailer without extra compensation. (Prior code §14-10)

2.40.020 Jailor--Duty to adopt rules.
It shall be the duty of the jailor to formulate a system of prison rules and to keep a record on which he shall enter a statement of every infraction thereof committed by any person confined therein. (Prior code §14-12)

2.40.030 Jailor--Duties Generally.
It shall be the duty of the Jailor to take charge of the city prison, to cause to be warmed and lighted when it shall be necessary and kept clean and in proper order. He shall have the custody of the inmates thereof and shall see to feeding and otherwise caring for them. He shall see that all rules prescribed by the city council for the government of the prison are carried into effect. (Prior code § 14-13)

2.40.040 Prisoner labor.
Whenever any person is sentenced to imprisonment for violation of any city ordinance and such person is required by the judgment of the court to labor, such labor shall be performed under the direction of the city marshal. If committed for nonpayment of a fine, for such work the person so required to labor shall be allowed $2 for each day's work on account of such fine. (Prior code § 14-14)

Chapter 2.42 CITY SEXTON

Sections:
2.42.010     Office of city sexton.
2.42.020     Duties of city sexton.
2.42.030     Sexton to record plats and conveyances.
2.42.040     Sexton to furnish burial rights certificate.
2.42.050     Sexton to file transcripts.
2.42.060     Sexton to attend to interments.
2.42.070     Receipts deposited with treasurer.
2.42.080     Prohibited activities.
2.42.090     Compensation.

2.42.010 Office of city sexton.
The office of city sexton is hereby created, which office shall be filled by appointment of the mayor with the approval of the city council. (Ord. 92-11, adopted, 1992)

2.42.020 Duties of city sexton.
The city sexton shall possess such supervisory and administrative powers, duties, and responsibilities relating to city cemeteries as are not repugnant to law or contrary to any specific direction or limitation set forth by Lindon City, including, but not limited to, the following:
1. Supervising the operations and maintenance of the cemetery grounds and improving such grounds under the direction of the city council.
2. Recommending to the city council such additional rules and regulations as may be required for the proper and efficient operation, maintenance, use, and protection of city cemeteries.
3. Subdividing all city cemeteries into sections and lots, and maintaining a plat of the cemetery grounds showing the location of the same.
4. Maintaining an accurate, indexed record of the present ownership or use of all burial lots in all city cemeteries. Said record shall indicate the identity of the purchaser.
5. Preventing any city cemetery from being used beyond its capacity, as established by the city council.
6. Preventing the trespass of animals not confined at all times within a vehicle and of minors not employed by the city and not accompanied by an adult; enforcing traffic regulations within city cemeteries in cooperation with the city police; reporting as well as preventing, to the extent practicable, the vandalism of cemetery property.
7. Opening and closing or causing to be opened or closed all graves required for the burial of the dead in city cemeteries.
8. Interring or permitting the interment of the remains of the dead only if such interment is to be made by a licensed funeral director or by a person in possession of a burial-transit permit as required by U.C.A. §26-12-17, and all other state and local laws and regulations.
9. Complying with the procedures mandated by U.C.A. §26-2-12, and all other state and local laws and regulations.
10. Keeping current a true and complete record of all interments made in city cemeteries, setting forth the name of the decedent, the place of death, the date of burial, and the name and address of the funeral director or other person making the interment. Such record shall be prepared and maintained at the expense of the city and shall be open to public inspection.
11. Preparing and sending a list of interments, made in city cemeteries each month, in the manner and to the state officer designated in U.C.A. §26-2-17(3), and other applicable law.
12. Collecting in advance such charges and fees relating to city cemeteries as the city council may set by resolution.
13. Selling burial rights and collecting all sums arising from such sales, to include the purchase price of the burial rights and the fees established by resolution of the city council.
14. Removing or causing to be removed, without notice, floral pieces, displays, or other items left on any grave, as deemed necessary to the appearance or maintenance of city cemeteries.
15. Directing the parking, standing, or movement of vehicles through city cemeteries.
16. Performing such other duties in relation to the cemetery as may be required by this chapter and Chapter 8.32 of this Code. (Ord. 92-11, adopted, 1992)

2.42.030 Sexton to record plats and conveyances.
The city sexton shall file and cause to be filed in the office of the Utah County Recorder an accurate plat of all city cemeteries, which shall clearly show the section of burial lots for which burial rights have been conveyed, the names of the persons owning such burial rights, and the sections of burial lots for which no burial rights have been conveyed. The city sexton shall periodically update its filings with the County Recorder to reflect changes in the foregoing information and shall, prior to the offering for sale any burial rights in any additions of land to a city cemetery, record a plat for the addition to the cemetery. (Ord. 92-11, adopted, 1992)

2.42.040 Sexton to furnish burial rights certificate.
The city sexton shall furnish every purchaser of burial rights in a city cemetery with a certificate of burial rights, properly executed, in form sufficient to permit filing and recording by the county recorder upon payment of the purchase price and all fees required by the city. All such certificates shall state that the holder thereof has not acquired any title or interest in real property, but only holds a right to burial. Each certificate shall constitute the sole evidence of the purchaser's interest. A certified copy of such certificate shall remain on file at the office of the city sexton. (Ord. 94-3, amended, 1994; Ord. 92-11, adopted, 1992)

2.42.050 Sexton to file transcripts.
On the first days of January and July of each year, the city sexton shall file with the Utah County Recorder a transcript, duly certified by the city sexton, of any and all burial rights, certificates of sale, or evidences of burial rights issued by the city sexton during the preceding six months. (Ord. 92-11, adopted, 1992)

2.42.060 Sexton to attend to interments.
The city sexton shall attend to every interment in the city cemetery in person or by a competent deputy. (Ord. 92-11, adopted, 1992)

2.42.070 Receipts deposited with treasurer.
All receipts and cash received by the city sexton in connection with the sexton's duties at city cemeteries shall be deposited with the city treasurer, for which deposits the sexton shall take a receipt and retain the same on file in the sexton's office for a period of at least two years. (Ord. 92-11, adopted, 1992)

2.42.080 Prohibited activities.
The city sexton and employees or other persons assigned to work at a city cemetery shall not, either directly or indirectly, knowingly act or serve as agents, employees, or salespersons for (1) any person or company furnishing materials used at a city cemetery; (2) any mortuary, funeral home, or similar establishment; or (3) any person or company selling grave markers or monuments. The city sexton and employees or other persons assigned to work at a city cemetery shall not be interested in any manner in any monument, vault, casket manufacturing, or related business, and shall not in any manner receive any profits or rewards growing out of the sale or placement of any monuments, caskets, vaults, or markers. Each violation of this section is a Class C misdemeanor. Each day a person acts or serves as an agent, employee or sales person in violation of this Section shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Ord. 92-11, adopted, 1992)

2.42.090 Compensation.
The city sexton shall receive such compensation as may be fixed by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 92-11, adopted, 1992)

Chapter 2.44 ELECTIONS

Sections:
2.44.010     Definitions.
2.44.020     Municipal election--Term of office.
2.44.030     Election of officers.
2.44.040     Determining two (2) and four (4) year terms.
2.44.050     Primary elections.
2.44.060     Individuals eligible to register and vote--Exceptions.
2.44.070     Declaration of candidacy requirements.
2.44.080     Nomination of candidates.
2.44.090     Write-in candidates.
2.44.100     Certification of candidates--Objection to candidates.
2.44.110     Campaign materials on city property prohibited.
2.44.120     Tie votes.
2.44.130     Residency required after election.
2.44.140     Campaign finance disclosure.
2.44.150     Adoption of State Election Code by reference.

2.44.010 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the terms identified below shall have the following meanings:
“Agent of a candidate” means:
    a. Any individual acting on behalf of a candidate at the direction of the reporting entity;
    b. Any individual employed by a candidate in the candidate’s capacity as a candidate;
    c. The personal campaign committee of a candidate;
    d. Any member of the personal campaign committee of a candidate in the member’s capacity as a member of the personal campaign committee of the candidate; or
    e. A political consultant of a candidate.
“Anonymous contribution limit” means an amount of fifty dollars ($50.00) and is from an unknown source.
“Candidate” means an individual who files a declaration of candidacy for municipal office or who receives contributions, makes expenditures, or gives consent for any other individual to receive contributions or to make expenditures to bring about the individual’s election to a municipal office.
“Candidate” does not include an individual who filed for the office of judge of the Lindon City justice court.
“Contribution” means:
    a. A monetary contribution;
    b. A gift, subscription, donation, loan, advance, or anything of value given to a candidate;
    c. A contract, promise or agreement to make a gift, subscription, donation, loan, advance, or deposit of money or anything of value to the candidate;
    d. Any transfer of funds from another reporting entity to the candidate;
    e. Compensation paid by any individual or reporting entity, other than the candidate, for personal services provided without charge to the candidate;
    f. A loan made by a candidate deposited to the candidate’s own campaign; or
    g. Any in-kind contribution.
A “contribution” does not include:
    h. Services provided by an individual volunteering the individual’s time on behalf of the candidate if the services are provided without compensation by the candidate, an agent of the candidate, or any other person;
    i. Money lent to the candidate by a financial institution in the ordinary course of business; or
    j. Goods or services provided for the benefit of a candidate at less than fair market value that were not authorized by or coordinated with the candidate or an agent of the candidate.
“Coordinating with the candidate” means providing services or goods for the benefit of a candidate or using official logos, slogans, or elements belonging to or owned by the candidate, with the prior knowledge or agreement of the candidate or an agent of the candidate.
“Expenditure” means:
    a. Any disbursement from a campaign account in a financial institution of contributions or receipts;
    b. A purchase, payment, donation, distribution, loan, advance, deposit, gift of money, or anything of value made for political purposes;
    c. An express, legally enforceable contract, promise, or agreement to make any purchase, payment, donation, distribution, loan, advance, deposit, gift of money, or anything of value for a political purpose;
    d. Compensation paid by a candidate or an agent of the candidate for personal services rendered by an individual without charge to a reporting entity; or
    e. Goods or services provided by a reporting entity for the benefit of the candidate for political purposes at less than fair market value.
“Expenditure” does not include services provided without compensation by an individual volunteering the individual’s time on behalf of the candidate.
“In-kind contribution” means anything of value other than money that is accepted by the candidate, an agent of the candidate, or through coordinating with the candidate.
“Monetary contribution” means a contribution given to a candidate or an agent of the candidate of any money or credit made in cash, check, or any electronic transfer.
“Political consultant” means an individual who is paid by a candidate, or paid by another person on behalf of and with the knowledge of the candidate, to provide political advice to the candidate and includes individuals who:
    a. Have already been paid with money or other consideration;
    b. Expects to be paid in the future with money or other consideration; or
    c. Understands that they may be paid in the future, with money or other consideration, at the discretion of the candidate, or another person on behalf of and with the knowledge of the candidate.
“Political purposes” means an act done with the intent or in a way to influence or tend to influence, directly or indirectly, any individual to refrain from voting or to vote for or against any candidate or an individual seeking a municipal office at any caucus, political convention, or election.
“Reporting entity” means:
    a. A candidate;
    b. A committee appointed by a candidate to act for the candidate.
“Reporting limit” means an amount of fifty dollars ($50.00). (Ord. 2017-7 §1, adopted, 2017)

2.44.020 Municipal election--Term of office.
1. A municipal general election shall be held in Lindon City on the first Tuesday after the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year. At the municipal general election, the voters shall:
    a. Choose individuals to serve as municipal officers to fill all elective offices vacated by 12:00 noon on the first Monday in January following the election; and
    b. Approve or reject any proposed initiatives or referenda that have qualified for the ballot as provided by law and any other ballot propositions submitted to the voters that are authorized by the Utah Code.
2. The officers elected shall continue in the office to which they were elected for four (4) years except in case of death, resignation, removal, or disqualification from office. The officers so elected shall begin their term of office at 12:00 noon on the first Monday in January following their election. (Ord. 2017-7 §1, renumbered, 2017; Ord. 2007-7, amended, 2007; Ord. 92-6, amended, 1992; Prior code §91-1. Formerly 2.44.010)

2.44.030 Election of officers.
The election and terms of office shall be as follows:
1. The offices of mayor and two (2) councilmen shall be filled in municipal elections held in every fourth year after 1977. Their terms shall be for four (4) years.
2. The offices of the other three (3) councilmen shall be filled in municipal elections held in every fourth year after 1979. The terms shall be for four (4) years.
3. The officers shall be elected in at-large elections which are held at the time and in the manner provided for electing municipal officers.
4. On or before May 1st in a year in which there is a municipal general election, the city recorder shall publish a notice identifying the municipal offices to be voted upon in the general municipal election which satisfies the requirements of § 10-3-301, Utah Code (1953, as amended). (Ord. 2017-7 §1, renumbered, 2017. Formerly 2.44.020)

2.44.040 Determining two (2) and four (4) year terms.
Where both two (2) and four (4) year terms are to be filled by election or appointment, the election ballot or appointment shall clearly state which individuals are to be elected or appointed to the shorter term and to the longer term. (Ord. 2017-7 §1, renumbered, 2017; Ord. 92-6, amended, 1992; Prior code §91-1. Formerly 2.44.030)

2.44.050 Primary elections.
Lindon City shall utilize the primary election procedure established by §§20A-9-404 and 20A-1-201.5, Utah Code (1953, as amended), as the procedure to establish candidates for municipal offices if the number of candidates for any particular city office exceeds twice the number of individuals needed to fill that office. (Ord. 2017-7 §1, renumbered, 2017; Ord. 2007-1, amended, 2007; Ord. 8-93, amended; Ord. 92-6, amended, 1992; Prior code §91-1. Formerly 2.44.040)

2.44.060 Individuals eligible to register and vote--Exceptions.
Any individual who is eligible or qualified to vote in a general election may register and vote in a municipal election in Lindon City, except:
1. An individual involuntarily confined in a jail or prison within Lindon City who was not a resident of Lindon City prior to confinement or incarceration; or
2. An individual who resides outside the boundaries of the Lindon City; or
3. An individual who has not registered to vote within the time and in the manner prescribed by Chapter 2, Title 20A, Utah Code (1953, as amended). (Ord. 2017-7 §1, renumbered, 2017; Ord. 2007-7, amended, 2007; Ord. 92-6, amended, 1992; Prior code §91-1. Formerly 2.44.050)

2.44.070 Declaration of candidacy requirements.
1. Each individual seeking to become a candidate for municipal office shall file a declaration of candidacy, which complies with the requirements described in § 20A-9-203 of the Utah Code (1953, as amended), with the city recorder during office hours and not later than 5:00 p.m. between June 1st and June 7th of any odd-numbered year. When June 7th is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the filing time shall be extended until 5:00 p.m. on the following business day. The declaration of candidacy shall be filed in person by the individual seeking to be a candidate, or by the individual’s agent, provided the requirements of § 20A-9-203(5), Utah Code (1953, as amended), are properly satisfied.
2. Before filing a declaration of candidacy for election to any city office, an individual shall:
    a. Be a registered voter;
    b. Have resided within the boundaries of Lindon City for at least twelve (12) consecutive months immediately preceding the date of the election. In the case of annexation by Lindon City, any individual who has resided in the territory annexed for the prescribed twelve (12) month period is deemed to meet the residence requirements for candidacy in Lindon City;
    c. Not have had their right to hold public office restricted pursuant to Article IV, Section 6 of the Utah Constitution or §20A-2-101.5, Utah Code (1953, as amended).
3. An individual seeking to file a declaration of candidacy may not:
    a. Be a candidate for more than one (1) office, including offices within Lindon City, the state of Utah, or any other political subdivision of the state, during any election year;
    b. Be the candidate of more than one (1) political party; or
    c. Be a current employee of Lindon City.
4. Before accepting any declaration of candidacy, the filing officer shall:
    a. Read to the prospective candidate the constitutional and statutory qualification requirements for the office that the candidate is seeking; and
    b. Require the candidate to state whether or not the candidate meets those requirements.
5. If the prospective candidate states that they do not meet the qualification requirements for the office, the filing officer may not accept the prospective candidate’s declaration of candidacy. If the candidate states that they meet the requirements of candidacy, the filing officer shall:
    a. Provide the candidate with a copy of the pledge of fair campaign practices described under § 20A-9-206, Utah Code (1953, as amended), and inform the candidate that signing the pledge is voluntary and that signed pledges shall be filed with the city for public inspection;
    b. Accept the candidate’s declaration of candidacy;
    c. If the candidate has filed for a partisan office, provide a certified copy of the declaration of candidacy to the chair of the county or state political party of which the candidate is a member; and
    d. If the candidate elects to sign the pledge of fair campaign practices, the filing officer shall accept the candidate’s pledge and provide a certified copy of the candidate’s pledge to the chair of the county or state political party of which the candidate is a member if the candidate has filed for a partisan office.
6. The form of the declaration of candidacy shall be as established by § 20A-9-203, Utah Code (1953, as amended). (Ord. 2017-7 §1, renumbered, 2017; Ord. 2007-7, amended, 2007; Ord. 92-6, amended, 1992; Prior code §91-1. Formerly 2.44.060)

2.44.080 Nomination of candidates.
1. Any resident of Lindon City may nominate a candidate for a city office by filing a nomination petition with the city recorder or town clerk during office hours but not later than 5:00 p.m. between June 1st and June 7th of any odd-numbered year. When June 7th is a Saturday, Sunday, or holiday, the filing time shall be extended until 5:00 p.m. on the following business day.
2. The nomination petition must be signed by twenty-five (25) residents of Lindon City who are at least eighteen (18) years old.
3. The form of the nomination petition shall be as established by § 20A-9-203, Utah Code (1953, as amended). (Ord. 2017-7 §1, renumbered, 2017; Ord. 2007-7, amended, 2007. Formerly 2.44.070)

2.44.090 Write-in candidates.
1. Each individual wishing to become a valid write-in candidate shall file a declaration of candidacy with the city recorder not later than sixty (60) days before the regular municipal general election. If the filing deadline falls on a weekend or holiday, it shall be extended to the next regular business day.
2. The city recorder shall:
    a. Read to the candidate the constitutional and statutory requirements for the office as required in this chapter; and
    b. Ask the candidate whether or not the candidate meets the requirements. If the candidate cannot meet the requirements of office, the filing officer may not accept the write-in candidate’s declaration of candidacy.
3. A voter may cast a write-in vote by entering the name of a valid write-in candidate on a paper ballot or ballot sheet or in the areas designated on any other form of ballot provided. (Ord. 2017-7 §1, renumbered, 2017; Ord. 2007-7, amended, 2007. Formerly 2.44.080)

2.44.100 Certification of candidates--Objection to candidates.
1. The city recorder shall verify with the county clerk that all candidates are registered voters. Any candidate who is not registered to vote is disqualified and the recorder may not include the candidate’s name on the ballot.
2. Immediately after expiration of the period for filing a declaration of candidacy, the city recorder shall:
    a. Cause the names of the candidates as they will appear on the ballot to be published in at least two (2) successive publications of a newspaper with general circulation in Lindon; and
    b. Notify the lieutenant governor of the names of the candidates as they will appear on the ballot.
3. A declaration of candidacy or nomination petition is valid unless a written objection is filed with the clerk within five (5) days after the last day for filing. If an objection is made, the clerk shall:
    a. Mail or personally deliver notice of the objection to the affected candidate immediately; and
    b. Decide any objection within forty-eight (48) hours after it is filed.
4. If the city recorder sustains the objection, the candidate may correct the problem by amending the declaration or petition within three (3) days after the objection is sustained or by filing a new declaration within three (3) days after the objection is sustained.
5. The city recorder’s decision on an objection to form is final. Challenges to the city recorder’s decision on substantive matters shall be made pursuant to § 20-9-203, Utah Code (1953, as amended). (Ord. 2017-7 §1, renumbered, 2017; Ord. 2007-7, amended, 2007. Formerly 2.44.090)

2.44.110 Campaign materials on city property prohibited.
No candidate for any public office, including city, county, state, or federal offices or the offices of any other political subdivision of the state or federal government, may place campaign signs or materials on Lindon City property. This section shall in no way be interpreted as prohibiting any candidate or citizen from engaging in political speech in public or in displaying such materials on private property. (Ord. 2017-7 §1, renumbered, 2017; Ord. 2007-2, amended, 2007. Formerly 2.44.100)

2.44.120 Tie votes.
1. If two (2) or more candidates for a position have an equal and the highest number of votes for any office, the election officer shall determine by lot which candidate is selected in a public meeting in the presence of each individual subject to the tie within thirty (30) days of the canvass or within thirty (30) days of the recount if one (1) is requested or held.
2. For any primary election, if two (2) or more candidates for a position have an equal and the highest number of votes for any office, the election officer shall determine by lot which candidate is selected in a public meeting in the presence of each individual subject to the tie within five (5) days of the canvass or within five (5) days of the recount if one (1) is requested or held. (Ord. 2017-7 §1, renumbered, 2017; Ord. 2007-7, amended, 2007. Formerly 2.44.110)

2.44.130 Residency required after election.
Each elected Lindon City officer shall maintain residency within the boundaries of Lindon City during his term of office. If an elected officer established his place of residence, as provided in § 20-2-14, Utah Code (1953, as amended), outside the boundaries of Lindon City during his term of office, the office is automatically vacant. If an elected Lindon City officer is absent from Lindon City any time during his term of office for a continuous period of more than sixty (60) days without the consent of the city council, the office is automatically vacant. (Ord. 2017-7 §1, renumbered, 2017; Ord. 2007-7, amended, 2007; Ord. 92-6, amended, 1992; Prior code §91-1. Formerly 2.44.120)

2.44.140 Campaign finance disclosure.
1. Deposit of Monetary Contributions. Each candidate:
    a. Shall deposit a monetary contribution in a separate campaign account in a financial institution; and
    b. May not deposit or mingle any monetary contributions received into a personal or business account.
2. Anonymous Contributions. Within thirty (30) days of receiving a contribution that exceeds the anonymous contributions limit, a candidate shall disburse the amount of the anonymous contribution to either:
    a. The Utah State Treasurer for deposit into the state’s general fund;
    b. The Lindon City clerk for deposit into the city’s general fund; or
    c. An organization that is exempt from federal income taxation under Section 501(c)(3), Internal Revenue Code.
3. In a year in which a municipal primary is held, each candidate who will participate in the municipal primary shall file a campaign finance statement with the municipal clerk or recorder no later than seven (7) days before the primary election.
4. Each candidate for municipal office who is not eliminated at a municipal primary election shall file with the city recorder a campaign finance statement as described in this chapter:
    a. No later than seven (7) days before the date of the municipal general election; and
    b. No later than thirty (30) days after the date of the municipal general election.
5. Each candidate for municipal office who is eliminated at a municipal primary election shall file with the city recorder a campaign finance statement as described in this chapter no later than thirty (30) days after the date of the municipal primary election.
6. The campaign finance statement for each candidate who receives more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) in campaign contributions or spends more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) on the candidate’s campaign shall:
    a. Report all of the candidate’s itemized and total campaign contributions, including contributions given to the candidate or an agent of the candidate, which were received before the close of the reporting date;
    b. Itemize each individual contribution amount, regardless of whether the contribution exceeds the reporting limit;
    c. For each contribution which exceeds the reporting limit, identify the name of the donor;
    d. Report all of the candidate’s campaign expenditures made through the close of the reporting date; and
    e. Identify for each campaign expenditure the amount of the expenditure and the name of the recipient of the expenditure.
7. The campaign finance statements for each candidate who receives five hundred dollars ($500.00) or less in campaign contributions and spends less than five hundred dollars ($500.00) on the candidate’s campaign expenditures shall report the total amount of all campaign contributions and expenditures.
8. Campaign finance statements, which are required to be filed seven (7) days before the municipal primary and the general elections, shall include all contributions received and all expenditures made up to and including five (5) days before the campaign finance statement is due.
9. The city recorder shall, at the time a candidate for municipal office files a declaration of candidacy, and again fourteen (14) days before each municipal general election, notify the candidate in writing of:
    a. The provisions of this chapter;
    b. The dates when the candidate’s campaign finance statement is required to be filed; and
    c. The penalties that apply for failure to file a timely campaign finance statement, including the statutory provision that requires removal of the candidate’s name from the ballot for failure to file the required campaign finance statement when required.
10. The city recorder shall make each campaign finance statement filed by a candidate available for public inspection and copying no later than one (1) business day after the statement is filed.
11. If a candidate fails to file a campaign finance statement before the municipal general election by the deadline specified herein, the city recorder shall inform the appropriate election official who shall, if practicable:
    a. Remove the candidate’s name from the ballot by blacking out the candidate’s name before the ballots are delivered to voters; or
    b. If removing the candidate’s name from the ballot is not practicable, inform the voters by any practicable method that the candidate has been disqualified and that votes cast for the candidate will not be counted.
12. Election officials may not count any votes for a candidate who has been disqualified for failure to comply with this section.
13. A candidate who files a campaign finance statement seven (7) days before a municipal general election is not disqualified if the statement details accurately and completely the information required herein, except for inadvertent omissions or insignificant errors or inaccuracies and the omissions, errors, or inaccuracies are corrected in an amended report or in the next scheduled report.
14. A campaign finance statement required under this section is considered filed if it is received in the city recorder’s office by 5:00 p.m. on the date that it is due.
15. If the municipal clerk or recorder fails to notify the candidate of the provisions of this chapter as required herein, a candidate for municipal office shall not be subject to the provisions of this section, but shall be subject to the campaign finance disclosure requirements as contained in § 10-3-208, Utah Code (1953, as amended).
16. In addition to the other penalties established herein, any candidate who fails to comply with the requirements of this section is guilty of an infraction. (Ord. 2017-7 §1, renumbered, 2017; Ord. 2007-7, amended, 2007; Ord. 2001-7, amended, 2001. Formerly 2.44.130)

2.44.150 Adoption of State Election Code by reference.
All provisions of the Utah State Election Code, as contained in § 20A-1-101 et seq., Utah Code (1953, as amended), which pertain to municipal elections, are adopted and incorporated by reference. (Ord. 2017-7 §1, adopted, 2017)

Title 3 REVENUE AND FINANCE

Chapters:
3.04         Sales and Use Tax
3.05         Parks, Arts, Recreation and Culture Tax
3.06         Transient Room Tax
3.07         Disposal of Parcels of Real Property
3.08         Sale of Property to Collect Assessments
3.09         Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax
3.10         Utility Franchise Tax
3.11         Repealed
3.12         Telecommunication License Tax

Chapter 3.04 SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:
3.04.010     Short title.
3.04.020     Purpose.
3.04.030     Sales and Use Tax.
3.04.040     Contract with State Tax Commission.
3.04.050     Penalties and Interest.
3.04.060     Attorney Fees and cost of collection.

3.04.010 Short title.
This chapter shall be known as the Tax Ordinance of the Lindon City. (Ord. 176, amended, 1990)

3.04.020 Purpose.
The 48th Session of the Utah State Legislature has authorized the counties and municipalities of the State of Utah to enact sales and use tax ordinances imposing a 1% tax. It is the purpose of the ordinance codified in this chapter to conform the sales and use tax of the municipality to the requirements of the Sales and Use Tax Act, Chapter 12 of Title 59, U.C.A., 1953, as currently amended. (Ord. 176, amended, 1990)

3.04.030 Sales and Use Tax.
1. Beginning the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, there is levied and there shall be collected and paid a tax upon every retail sale of tangible personal property, services and meals made within the municipality at the rate of 1%.
2. An excise tax is hereby imposed on the storage, use or other consumption in this municipality of tangible personal property from any retailer on or after the operative date of the ordinance codified in this chapter at the rate of one percent of the sales price of the property.
3. For the purpose of this chapter all retail sales shall be presumed to have been consummated at the place of business of the retailer unless the tangible personal property sold is delivered by the retailer or his agent to an out-of-state destination or to a common carrier for delivery to an out-of-state destination. In the event a retailer has no permanent place of business in the State of Utah, or has more than one place of business, the place or places at which the retail sales are consummated shall be as determined under the rules and regulations prescribed by and adopted by the State Tax Commission. Public utilities as defined by Title 54, U.C.A., 1953, shall not be obligated to determine the place or places within any county or municipality where public utilities services are rendered, but the place of sale or the sales tax revenue arising from such service allocable to the city shall be as determined by the State Tax Commission pursuant to an appropriate formula and other rules and regulations to be prescribed and adopted by it
4. Except as hereinafter provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of the Sales Tax Act, all of the provisions of Chapter 12, Title 59, U.C.A., 1953, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter, insofar as they are related to sales taxes, excepting §59-12-101 and §59-12-119 thereof, are hereby adopted and made a part of the ordinance codified in this chapter as though fully set forth herein.
5. Wherever, and to the extent that in Chapter 12 of Title 59, U.C.A., 1953, the State of Utah is named or referred to as the taxing agency, the name of this municipality shall be substituted therefore. Nothing in subparagraph (b) shall be deemed to require substitution of the name of the municipality for the word “State” when that word is used as part of the title of the State Tax Commission, or of the Constitution of the State of Utah, nor shall the name of the municipality be substituted for that of the State in any section when the result of the substitution would require action to be taken by or against the municipality or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax Commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of the ordinance codified in this chapter.
6. If an annual license has been issued to a retailer under Section §59-12-106 of the U.C.A., 1953, an additional license shall not be required by reason of this section.
7. There shall be excluded from the purchase price paid or charged by which the tax is measured:
    a. The amount of any sales or use tax imposed by the State of Utah upon a retailer or consumer;
    b. The gross receipts from the sale of or the cost of storage, use or other consumption of tangible personal property upon which a sales or use tax has become due by reason of the sale transaction to any other municipality and any county in the State of Utah, under the sales or use tax ordinance enacted by that county or municipality in accordance with the Sales and Use Tax Act.

3.04.040 Contract with State Tax Commission.
Heretofore, this municipality has entered into an agreement with the State Tax Commission to perform all functions incident to the administration or operation of the sales and use tax ordinance of the municipality. That contract is confirmed and the mayor is authorized to enter into such supplementary agreement with the State Tax Commission as may be necessary to the continued administration and operation of the local sales and use tax ordinance of the municipality as enacted by the ordinance codified in this chapter. (Ord. 176, amended, 1990)

3.04.050 Penalties and Interest.
1. Penalties and interest equal to those authorized by U.C.A. Sections 59-1-104 and 59-1-402 shall be imposed on any person who:
    a. is required to pay the tax under this Chapter: and
    b. does not remit the tax to the collecting agent within the time prescribed by law.
2. Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class B Misdemeanor.
3. Each day a violation of this Chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Ord. 176 §2, amended, 1990)

3.04.060 Attorney Fees and cost of collection.
Unless otherwise altered or limited by state law, every person, entity, or company obligated to pay the tax imposed by this Chapter shall be required to pay all costs of collection of the tax imposed herein, including reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, and all other costs incident to the collection of the tax as are incurred by Lindon City in enforcing any of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010)

Chapter 3.05 PARKS, ARTS, RECREATION AND CULTURE TAX

Sections:
3.05.010     Short Title.
3.05.020     Statutory Authority.
3.05.030     Purpose.
3.05.040     Imposition of Tax and Amount.
3.05.050     Use of Revenues.
3.05.060     Collection and Duration.
3.05.070     Distribution of Revenues.
3.05.080     Effective Date.

3.05.010 Short Title.
This Chapter shall be known as the Parks, Arts, Recreation and Culture Tax (PARC Tax) Ordinance.

3.05.020 Statutory Authority.
The authority for imposing the PARC tax is derived from Title 59, Chapter 12, Section 1401 et seq., U.C.A.

3.05.030 Purpose.
The purpose of this Chapter is to enact and levy a Parks, Arts, Recreation and Culture Tax (known as the PARC Tax) to be used to finance cultural and recreational facilities and associated ongoing operations, and to finance ongoing operations of cultural organizations within Lindon City.

3.05.040 Imposition of Tax and Amount.
1. There is levied for collection a local sales and use tax in the amount of one-tenth of one percent (0.1%) on the transactions within Lindon City as described in Subsection 59-12-103(1) of the U.C.A., except such transactions that are exempt from sales and use tax under §59-12-104 of the U.C.A.
2. Pursuant to U.C.A. §59-12-1402(1)(c) and (e) of the U.C.A., the PARC Tax shall not be imposed on amounts paid for food or food ingredients, unless the food or food ingredients are sold as part of a bundled transaction attributable to food and food ingredients and tangible personal property other than food and food ingredients.

3.05.050 Use of Revenues.
Revenues received from local sales and use taxes levied pursuant to this Chapter shall be used solely for the purpose of financing cultural and recreational facilities and associated ongoing operations, and for financing ongoing operations of cultural organizations within Lindon City.

3.05.060 Collection and Duration.
Taxes enacted under this Chapter shall be:
1. Collected, and enforced in accordance with the same procedures used to administer, collect, and enforce taxes under U.C.A., Title 59, Part 1(Tax Collection) and Part 2 (Local Sales and Use Tax Act): and
2. Levied for a period of ten years, and may be reauthorized pursuant to the procedures set for in §59-12-1401 et seq. of the U.C.A.

3.05.070 Distribution of Revenues.
1. The distribution and use of revenues and the determination of eligible operating expenses shall be made by the Lindon City Council. The City Council may adopt supplementary policies and procedures to regulate the distribution of PARC Tax revenues.
2. The determination of uses of revenue and of eligible operating expenses shall be made in accordance with the provision of this Chapter and with the requirements of § 59-12-1401 et seq. of the U.C.A.

3.05.080 Effective Date.
The enactment of the PARC Tax Ordinance is December 3, 2013 and the effective date of the tax is April l, 2014. The tax shall take effect pursuant to the requirements and procedures set forth in §59-12-1402 of the U.C.A.

Chapter 3.06 TRANSIENT ROOM TAX

Sections:
3.06.010     Purpose.
3.06.020     Definitions.
3.06.030     Transient room tax.
3.06.040     Exemption from the transient room tax.
3.06.050     Collection of transient room tax - Contract with the State Tax Commission.
3.06.060     Penalties and interest.
3.06.070     Attorney; fees and cost of collection.

3.06.010 Purpose.
It is the intent of Lindon City to adopt a transient room tax pursuant to and in accordance with U.C.A. Section 59-12-301, et seq. (Ord. 99-15, adopted, 2000)

3.06.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply to terms used herein:
“Public accommodation” means a place providing temporary sleeping accommodations to the public and includes:
    a. a motel;
    b. a hotel;
    c. a motor court;
    d. an inn;
    e. a bed and breakfast establishment;
    f. a condominium; and
    g. a resort home.
“Rents” include:
    a. rents (any compensation received in exchange for providing the public accommodation); and
    b. timeshare condo fees or dues.
“Transient” means a person who occupies a public accommodation for 30 consecutive days or less. (Ord. 99-15, adopted, 2000)

3.06.030 Transient room tax.
There is hereby levied a transient room tax equal to one percent (1%) of the rents charged to transients occupying public accommodations within Lindon City. This tax shall be known as the transient room tax.
1. Subject to the limitations of U.C.A. Section 59-12-352(1), Lindon City may increase or decrease the tax at any time by adopting an ordinance to the effect.
2. Revenues generated by the tax shall be used for general fund purposes. (Ord. 99-15, adopted, 2000)

3.06.040 Exemption from the transient room tax.
Pursuant to U.C.A. Section 59-12-352(1)(b), the transient room tax shall be imposed on rents relating to the Olympic Winter Games of 2002 paid to or by an organization exempt from federal income taxation under Section 501(c)(3), Internal Revenue Code, unless the rents are,
1. Paid for in full by the Salt Lake Organizing Committee for the Olympic Winter Games of 2002;
2. Exclusively used by:
    a. an officer, a trustee, or an employee of the Salt Lake Organizing Committee for the Olympic Winter Games of 2002, or
    b. a volunteer supervised by the Salt Lake Organizing Committee for the Olympic Winter Games of 2002; and
3. For which the Salt Lake Organizing Committee for the Olympic Winter Games of 2002 does not receive reimbursement. (Ord. 99-15, adopted, 2000)

3.06.050 Collection of transient room tax - Contract with the State Tax Commission.
1. The tax shall be levied at the same time and collected in the same manner as provided in U.C.A. Section 59-12-201, et seq., otherwise known as the Local Sales and Use Tax Act.
2. Within 30 days of the effective date of this chapter, Lindon City shall contract with the State Tax Commission for that agency to perform all functions incident to the administration and collection of the tax. The City Council is hereby authorized to enter into such agreements with the State Tax Commission as may be necessary for the continued administration and operation of the transient room tax ordinance enacted by this chapter.
3. Lindon City shall:
    a. authorize the State Tax Commission to collect the tax on the first day of a calendar quarter; and
    b. notify the State Tax Commission at least thirty (30) days before the day on which the Commission is required to collect the tax. (Ord. 99-15, adopted, 2000)

3.06.060 Penalties and interest.
1. Penalties and interest equal to those authorized by U.C.A. Sections 59-1-401 and 59-1-402 shall be imposed on any person who:
    a. is required to pay the tax under this Chapter; and
    b. does not remit the tax to the collecting agent within the time prescribed by law.
2. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class B Misdemeanor.
3. Each day a violation of this Chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 99-15, adopted, 2000)

3.06.070 Attorney; fees and cost of collection.
Unless otherwise altered or limited by state law, every person, entity. Or company obligated to pay the tax imposed by this Chapter shall be required to apply all costs of collection of the tax imposed herein, including reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, and all other costs incident to the collection of the tax as are incurred by Lindon City in enforcing any of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010)

Chapter 3.07 DISPOSAL OF PARCELS OF REAL PROPERTY

Sections:
3.07.010     Notice Required.
3.07.020     Public Comment.
3.07.030     Definitions.

3.07.010 Notice Required.
If the property that is declared surplus pursuant to section 3.07.030 is a significant parcel of real property, then the city shall provide reasonable notice, as defined below, of the proposed disposition, at least 14 days before the proposed disposition, to provide the public an opportunity for comment on the proposed disposition.

3.07.020 Public Comment.
If the City received public comment on the proposed disposition, the city recorder shall forward copies of such public comment to the city council. Thereafter, the city council may rescind its declaration of surplus property, direct the mayor to proceed with the sale, or impose such additional terms and conditions as the city council may adopt. If the city does not receive public comment on the proposed disposition, the mayor may proceed with the sale after satisfying all of the other terms and conditions applicable to the disposition.

3.07.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this section, “disposition” shall mean to transfer control of city-owned property to another by any means including, but not limited to, sale, lease, or other type of conveyance of such property.
For purposes of this section, a “reasonable notice” shall mean posting notice of the proposed disposition in at least three public places within the city and publishing notice of the proposed disposition in a newspaper of general circulation in the city.
For purposes of this section, a “significant parcel of real property” shall mean a parcel of real property owned by the city with a reasonable value equal to or greater than $100,000 or reasonable yearly rental value equal to or greater than $15,000. (Ord. 2005-2, adopted, 2005)

Chapter 3.08 SALE OF PROPERTY TO COLLECT ASSESSMENTS

Sections:
3.08.010     Method of sale.
3.08.020     Cumulative remedies.

3.08.010 Method of sale.
When any action is taken to collect assessments under the special improvement districts heretofore and hereafter enacted by the city, the method of sale of property subject to a lien for the assessment, shall be, at the election and sole discretion of the city, by the method provided by state law for the sale of property for delinquent general property taxes, or, by the method provided by state law for action to foreclose mortgage liens, or by the method provided by state law for foreclosure of trust deeds, or by any other method authorized by law. If at the sale no person or entity shall bid and pay the city the amount due on the assessment, plus interest and cost, the property shall be deemed sold to the city for the amount due on the assessment, plus interest and costs. (Ord. 176, amended, 1990; Ord. 100 §1, amended, 1983)

3.08.020 Cumulative remedies.
The remedies provided herein shall be deemed and construed to be cumulative and the use of any one method or means of collection or enforcement shall not deprive the city of the use of any other method or means. (Ord. 176, amended, 1990; Ord. 100 §2, amended, 1983)

Chapter 3.09 MUNICIPAL ENERGY SALES AND USE TAX

Sections:
3.09.010     Purpose.
3.09.020     Definitions.
3.09.030     Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
3.09.040     Exemptions from the municipal energy sales and use tax.
3.09.050     No effect upon existing franchise agreements--Credit for franchise fees.
3.09.060     Tax collection contract with State Tax Commission.
3.09.070     Incorporation of Part 1, Chapter 12 of Title 59, U.C.A., including amendments.
3.09.080     No additional license to collect the municipal energy sales and use tax required--No additional license or reporting requirements.
3.09.090     Penalties and interest.
3.09.100     Attorney fees and cost of collection.

3.09.010 Purpose.
It is the intent of Lindon City to adopt the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax, pursuant to, and in accordance with, U.C.A. §10-1-301, et seq., The Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.

3.09.020 Definitions.
“Consumer” means a person who acquires taxable energy for any use that is subject to the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
“Contractual Franchise Fee” means:
    a. a fee;
        i. provided for in a franchise agreement, and agreement; or ii that is consideration for the franchise agreement; or
    b. a fee similar to subsection (2)(a); or
    c. any combination of subsections (2)(a) or (2)(b).
“Delivered Value” means the fair market value of the taxable energy delivered for sale or use in the municipality and includes:
    i. The value of the energy itself; and
    ii. Any transportation, freight, customer demand charges, service charges, or other costs typically incurred in providing taxable energy in usable form to each class of customer in the municipality,
“Delivered Value” does not include the amount of a tax paid under Part 1 or Part 2 of Chapter 12, Title 59 of the U.C.A.
“Energy Supplier” means a person supplying taxable energy, except for persons supplying a minimum amount of taxable energy, if such persons are excluded by rule promulgated by the State Tax Commission.
“Franchise Agreement” means a franchise or an ordinance, contract, or agreement granting a franchise.
“Franchise Tax” means:
    a. a franchise tax
    b. a tax similar to a franchise tax;
    c. any combination of subsections (a)(b).
    “Person” includes any individual, firm, partnership, joint venture, association, corporation, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, syndicate, this state, or any group or combination acting as a unit.
“Sale” means any transfer of title, exchange, or barter, conditional or otherwise, in any manner, of taxable energy for a consideration. It includes:
    a. installment and credit sales;
    b. any closed transaction constituting a sale;
    c. any transaction under which right to acquire, use or consume taxable energy is granted under a lease or contract and the transfer would be taxable if an outright sale were made.
“Storage” means any keeping or retention of taxable energy in Lindon City for any purpose except sale in the regular course of business.
“Taxable Energy” means gas and electricity.
“Use” means the exercise of any right of power over taxable energy incident to the ownership or the leasing of the taxable energy. “Use” does not include the sale, display, demonstration, or trial of the taxable energy in the regular course of business and held for resale.

3.09.030 Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
There is hereby levied, subject to the provisions of this chapter, a tax on every sale or use of taxable energy within Lindon City equaling four and one-half percent (4.5%) of the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer. This tax shall be known as the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
1. The tax shall be calculated on the delivered value of the taxable energy to the consumer.
2. The tax shall be in addition to any sales or use tax on taxable energy imposed by Lindon City authorized by Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 2 of the U.C.A., The Local Sales and Use Tax Act.
3. Lindon City may increase the tax at any time up to the maximum allowed by state law by adopting an ordinance. (Ord. 2003-12, amended, 2003; Ord. 97-5, adopted, 1997)

3.09.040 Exemptions from the municipal energy sales and use tax.
1. No exemptions are granted from the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax except as expressly provided in U.C.A.10-1-305(2)(b); notwithstanding an exemption granted by 59-1-104 of the U.C.A.
2. The following are exempt from the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax, pursuant to U.C.A. §10-1-305(2)(b):
    a. Sales and use of aviation fuel, motor fuel, and special fuels subject to taxation under Title 59, Chapter 13 of the U.C.A.;
    b. Sales and use of taxable energy that is exempt from taxation under federal law, the United States Constitution, or the Utah Constitution
    c. Sales and use of taxable energy purchased or stored for resale,
    d. Sales or use of taxable energy to a person, if the primary use of the taxable energy is for use in compounding or producing taxable energy or a fuel subject to taxation under Title 59, Chapter 13 of the U.C.A.;
    e. Taxable energy brought into the state by a nonresident for the nonresident's own personal use or enjoyment while within the state, except taxable energy purchased for the use in the state by a nonresident living or working in the state at the time of purchase;
    f. The sale or use of taxable energy for any purpose other than as a fuel or energy; and
    g. The sale of taxable energy for use outside the boundaries of Lindon City.
3. The sale, storage, use, or other consumption of taxable energy is exempt from the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax levied by this chapter, provided:
    a. The delivered value of the taxable energy has been subject to a municipal energy sales or use tax levied by another municipality within the state authorized by Title 59, Chapter 12, Part 3, U.C.A.; and
    b. Lindon City is paid the difference between the tax paid to the other municipality and the tax that would otherwise be due under this chapter, if the tax due under this chapter exceeds the tax paid to the other municipality. (Ord. 97-5, adopted, 1997)

3.09.050 No effect upon existing franchise agreements--Credit for franchise fees.
1. This chapter shall not alter any existing franchise agreements between Lindon City and energy suppliers.
2. There is a credit against the tax due from any consumer in the amount of a contractual franchise fee paid if:
    a. the energy supplier pays the contractual franchise fee to Lindon City pursuant to a franchise agreement in effect on July 1, 1997;
    b. the contractual franchise fee is passed through by the energy supplier to a consumer as a separately itemized charge; and
    c. the energy supplier has accepted the franchise. (Ord. 97-5, adopted, 1997)

3.09.060 Tax collection contract with State Tax Commission.
1. On or before the effective date of this chapter, Lindon City shall contract with the State Tax Commission to perform all functions incident to the administration and collection of the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax, in accordance with this chapter. The mayor, with the advice and consent of the city council is hereby authorized to enter into agreements with the State Tax Commission that may be necessary to the continued administration and operation of the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax ordinance enacted by this chapter.
2. An energy supplier shall pay the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax revenues collected from consumers directly to Lindon City monthly if:
    a. Lindon City is the energy supplier; or
    b. the energy supplier estimates that the municipal energy sales and use tax collected annually from its Utah consumers equals $1,000,000 or more, and
    c. the energy supplier collects the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax.
3. An energy supplier paying the Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax directly to Lindon City may deduct any contractual franchise fees collected by the energy supplier qualifying as a credit and remit the net tax less any amount the energy supplier retains as authorized by §10-1-307(4), UCA. (Ord. 97-5, adopted, 1997)

3.09.070 Incorporation of Part 1, Chapter 12 of Title 59, U.C.A., including amendments.
1. Except as herein provided, and except insofar as they are inconsistent with the provisions of Chapter 1 of Title 10, Part 3, Municipal Energy Sales and Use Tax Act, as well as this chapter, all of the provisions of Part 1, Chapter 12 of Title 59, U.C.A., 1953, as amended, and in force and effect on the effective date of this Chapter, insofar as they relate to sales and use taxes, excepting §59-12-101 and 59-12-119 thereof, and excepting for the amount of the sales and use taxes levied therein, are hereby adopted and made a part of this chapter as if fully set forth herein.
2. Wherever, and to the extent that in Part 1, Chapter 12 of Title 59, U.C.A., 1953, as amended, the State of Utah is named or referred to as the “taxing agency,” the name of Lindon City shall be substituted, insofar as is necessary for the purposes of that part, as well as Part 3, Chapter 1, Title 10, U.C.A., 1953, as amended. Nothing in this subparagraph (2) shall be deemed to require substitution of the name Lindon City for the word “state” when that word is used as part of the title of the State Tax Commission, or of the Constitution of Utah, nor shall the name of Lindon City be substituted for that of the state in any section when the result of such a substitution would require action to be taken by or against Lindon City or any agency thereof, rather than by or against the State Tax Commission in performing the functions incident to the administration or operation of this chapter.
3. Any amendments made to Part 1, Chapter 12 of Title 59, U.C.A., 1953 as amended, which purposes would be applicable to Lindon City for the purposes of carrying out this chapter are hereby incorporated herein by reference and shall be effective upon the date that they are effective as a Utah statute. (Ord. 97-5, adopted, 1997)

3.09.080 No additional license to collect the municipal energy sales and use tax required--No additional license or reporting requirements.
1. There is hereby levied upon the business of every person or company engaged within Lindon City, Utah, in the business of supplying for sale, municipal or public telephone exchange services, sewer, culinary or secondary water, electricity, or natural gas utility service, an annual franchise tax equal to four and one-half percent (4.5%) of the gross revenue attributable to the sale and use of the services by such entity delivered within the corporate limits of Lindon City, the tax being in addition to any franchise fee.
2. Remittance date. Within thirty (30) days after the end of each month in a calendar year, any public or municipal utility taxed hereunder shall file with the Lindon City Treasurer, a report of its gross revenue derived from the sale and use of public or municipal utility service in Lindon City together with the computation of the tax levied hereunder against the utility. Coincidental with the filing of such report, the utility shall pay to the Lindon City Treasurer the amount of the tax due for the month which is the subject of the report. (Ord. 2003-12, amended, 2003; Ord. 2000-16, amended, 2000; Ord. 10-95, repealed and replaced; Ord. 97-5, adopted, 1997)

3.09.090 Penalties and interest.
1. Penalties and interest equal to those authorized by U.C.A. Sections 59-1-401 and 59-1-402 shall be imposed on any person who:
    a. is required to pay the tax under this Chapter; and
    b. does not remit the tax to the collecting agent within the time prescribed by law.
2. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class B Misdemeanor.
3. Each day a violation of this Chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Ord. 99-15, adopted, 2000)

3.09.100 Attorney fees and cost of collection.
Unless otherwise altered or limited by state law, every person, entity or company obligated to pay the tax imposed by this Chapter shall be required to apply all costs of collection of the tax imposed herein, including reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, and all other costs incident to the collection of the tax as are incurred by Lindon City in enforcing any of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010)

Chapter 3.10 UTILITY FRANCHISE TAX

Sections:
3.10.010     Municipal and public utilities.
3.10.020     Businesses in competition with municipal or public utilities.
3.10.030     Definitions.
3.10.040     Yearly review.
3.10.050     Constitutionality.
3.10.060     Attorney fees and cost of collection.
3.10.070     Penalty and interest.

3.10.010 Municipal and public utilities.
1. There is hereby levied upon the business of every person or company engaged within Lindon City, Utah, in the business of supplying for sale, municipal or public telephone exchange services, sewer, culinary or secondary water, electricity, or natural gas utility service, an annual franchise tax equal to four and one-half percent (4.5%) of the gross revenue attributable to the sale and use of the services by such entity delivered within the corporate limits of Lindon City, the tax being in addition to any franchise fee.
2. Remittance date. Within thirty (30) days after the end of each month in a calendar year, any public or municipal utility taxed hereunder shall file with the Lindon City Treasurer, a report its gross revenue derived from the sale and use of public or municipal utility service in Lindon City together with the computation of the tax levied hereunder against the utility. Coincidental with the filing of such report, the utility shall pay to the Lindon City Treasurer the amount of the tax due for the month which is the subject of the report. (Ord. 2003-12, amended, 2003; Ord. 2000-16, amended, 2000; Ord. 10-95, repealed and replaced; Ord. 2-93, amended)

3.10.020 Businesses in competition with municipal or public utilities.
1. There is hereby levied upon the business of every person or company engaged in the business of supplying local exchange telephone services, electricity, culinary or secondary water, sewer, or natural gas service in Lindon City, in competition with the municipal or public utilities, an annual franchise tax equal to four and one-half percent (4.5%) of the gross revenue attributable to the sale and use of such competitive services sold, used, or delivered within the corporate limits of Lindon City, the fee being in addition to any franchise fee.
2. Within thirty (30) days after the end of each month in a calendar year, any business taxed hereunder shall file with the city treasurer a report of its gross revenue attributable to the sale and use of services specified hereunder rendered in competition with public utilities in Lindon City, together with a computation of the tax levied hereunder against such business. Coincidental with the filing of such report, the business shall pay to the Lindon City Treasurer the amount of the tax due for the calendar month which is the subject of the report. (Ord. 2003-12, amended, 2003; Ord. 2000-16, amended, 2000; Ord. 10-95, repealed and replaced; Ord. 2-93, amended)

3.10.030 Definitions.
“Gross revenue”, as used herein, shall mean revenue derived from the sale or use of public utility services within Lindon City provided that “gross revenue” as applied to the local exchange telephone services shall be construed to mean basic local exchange service revenues received from subscribers located within the Lindon City.
“In competition with public or municipal utilities” shall mean to trade in products or services within the same market as a public or municipal utility as taxed by 3.10.010 and 3.10.020 respectively.
“Local exchange telephone service revenues” shall mean revenues received from the furnishing of Telecommunications within Lindon City and from access to the local telecommunications exchange network, whether on a flat rate or measured basis by means of an access line. Local exchange telephone service revenues shall not include revenues obtained by the telephone public utility company from the provision of terminal or mobile telephone equipment services (such as basic telephone sets, private branch exchanges and key telephone systems), or from other telephone equipment which is obtainable from either the telephone company or other suppliers.
“Municipal utility” as used herein shall mean Lindon City and the departments thereof.
“Public utility” as used herein shall mean any person or business who sells, delivers, or otherwise furnishes natural gas, electricity, local exchange telephone service, sewer service, culinary or secondary water, as a commodity or service to the public for domestic, commercial, or industrial use by means or through the use of any public street or way. (Ord. 2000-16, amended, 2000; Ord. 10-95, repealed and replaced; Ord. 2-93, amended)

3.10.040 Yearly review.
The percent of the gross revenue paid as a franchise tax under this chapter shall be subject to yearly review by the Lindon City Council, and may be increased or decreased by duly enacted ordinance and thirty (30) days’ notice to such utilities. (Ord. 2000-16, amended, 2000; Ord. 10-95, repealed and replaced; Ord. 2-93, amended)

3.10.050 Constitutionality.
If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this ordinance is for any reason held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions of this ordinance. The council hereby declares that it would have passed this ordinance, and each section, subsection, sentence, clause, and phrase thereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more sections, subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases had been declared invalid or unconstitutional. (Ord. 2000-16, amended, 2000; Ord. 10-95, repealed and replaced; Ord. 2-93, amended)

3.10.060 Attorney fees and cost of collection.
Every person or company obligated to pay the tax imposed by this chapter shall be required to pay all costs of collection of the tax imposed herein, including reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and all other costs incident to the collection of the tax as are incurred by Lindon City in enforcing any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2000-16, amended, 2000; Ord. 10-95, repealed and replaced; Ord. 2-93, amended)

3.10.070 Penalty and interest.
1. A penalty of 10% of the unpaid tax shall be imposed on every person, entity, or company obligated to pay the tax imposed by this Chapter. Additionally, interest in the amount of 18% per annum on the amount of the unpaid tax from the date due until paid, both before and after judgment, shall be imposed on every person, entity, or company obligated to pay the tax imposed by this Chapter.
2. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class B Misdemeanor.
3. Each day a violation of this Chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Ord. 2000-16, amended, 2000; Ord. 10-95, repealed and replaced; Ord. 2-93, amended)

Chapter 3.11
(Ord. 2005-3, amended, 2005; Ord. 2004-6, amended, 2004; Ord. 2003-11, adopted, 2003)

Chapter 3.12 TELECOMMUNICATION LICENSE TAX

Sections:
3.12.010     Definitions.
3.12.020     Levy of tax.
3.12.030     Rate.
3.12.040     Rate limitation and exemption therefrom.
3.12.050     Effective date of tax levy.
3.12.060     Changes in Rate or Repeal of the Tax.
3.12.070     Interlocal Agreement for collection of the tax.
3.12.080     Repeal of inconsistent taxes and fees.
3.12.090     Penalties and interest.
3.12.100     Attorneys fees and cost of collection.

3.12.010 Definitions.
As used in this ordinance:
“Commission” means the State Tax Commission.
Customer. 
    a. Subject to Subsections (b) and (c), “customer” means the person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract.
    b. For purposes of this ordinance, “Customer” means:
        i. the person who is obligated under a contract with a telecommunications provider to pay for telecommunications service received under the contract; or
        ii. if the end user is not the person described in Subsection (2)(b)(i), the end user of telecommunications service.
    c. “Customer” does not include a reseller:
        i. of telecommunications service; or
        ii. for mobile telecommunications service, of a serving carrier under an agreement to serve the customer outside the telecommunications provider's licensed service area.
End User. 
    a. End user means the person who uses a telecommunications service.
    b. For purposes of telecommunications service provided to a person who is not an individual, end user means the individual who uses the telecommunications service on behalf of the person who is provided the telecommunications service.
“Gross Receipts attributed to the municipality” means those gross receipts from a transaction for telecommunications services that is located within the municipality for the purposes of sales and use taxes under Utah Code Title 59, Chapter 12, Sales and Use Tax Act and determined in accordance with Utah Code Section 59-12-207.
“Gross receipts from telecommunications service” means the revenue that a telecommunications provider receives for telecommunications service rendered except for amounts collected or paid as:
    a. a tax, fee, or charge:
        i. imposed by a governmental entity;
        ii. separately identified as a tax, fee, or charge in the transaction with the customer for the telecommunications service; and
        iii. imposed only on a telecommunications provider;
    b. sales and use taxes collected by the telecommunications provider from a customer under Title 59, Chapter 12, Sales and Use Tax Act; or
    c. interest, a fee, or a charge that is charged by a telecommunications provider on a customer for failure to pay for telecommunications service when payment is due.
“Mobile telecommunications service” is as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec. 124.
“Municipality” means Lindon City.
“Place of primary use”:
    a. for telecommunications service other than mobile telecommunications service, means the street address representative of where the customer's use of the telecommunications service primarily occurs, which shall be:
        i. the residential street address of the customer; or
        ii. the primary business street address of the customer; or
    b. for mobile telecommunications as defined in the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec 124.
9. Notwithstanding where a call is billed or paid, “service address” means:
    a. if the location described in this Subsection (9)(a) is known, the location of the telecommunications equipment;
        i. to which a call is charged; and
        ii. from which the call originates or terminates;
    b. if the location described in Subsection (9)(a) is not known but the location described in this Subsection (8)(b) is known, the location of the origination point of the signal of the telecommunications service first identified by:
        i. the telecommunications system of the telecommunications provider; or
        ii. if the system used to transport the signal is not a system of the telecommunications provider, information received by the telecommunications provider from its service provider; or Commission of Utah regulates: (i) that person; or
    c. if the locations described in Subsection (9)(a) or (b) are not known, the location of a customer’s place of primary use.
10. 
    a. Subject to Subsections (9)(b) and (9)(c), “telecommunications provider” means a person that:
        i. owns, controls, operates, or manages a telecommunications service; or
        ii. engages in an activity described in Subsection (9)(a)(i) for the shared use with or resale to any person of the telecommunications service.
    b. A person described in Subsection (9)(a) is a telecommunications provider whether or not the Public Service Commission of Utah regulates:
        i. that person; or
        ii. the telecommunications service that the person owns, controls, operates, or manages.
    c. “Telecommunications provider” does not include an aggregator as defined in Utah Code Section 54-8b-2.
“Telecommunications service” means:
    a. telephone service, as defined in Utah Code Section 59-12-102, other than mobile telecommunications service, that originates and terminates within the boundaries of this state; and
    b. mobile telecommunications service, as defined in Utah Code Section 59-12-102;
        i. that originates and terminates within the boundaries of one state; and
        ii. only to the extent permitted by the Mobile Telecommunications Sourcing Act, 4 U.S.C. Sec. 116 et seq.

3.12.020 Levy of tax.
There is hereby levied a municipal telecommunications license tax on the gross receipts from telecommunications service attributed to Lindon City.

3.12.030 Rate.
The rate of the tax levy shall be 4% of the telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunications service that are attributed to Lindon City subject to the following:
If the location of a transaction is determined to be other than Lindon City, then the rate imposed on the gross receipts for telecommunications services shall be the lower of (1) the rate imposed by the taxing jurisdiction in which the transaction is located or (2) the rate for non-mobile telecommunications services shall be the rate imposed by the municipality in which the customer's service address is located; or for mobile telecommunications service, the rate imposed by the municipality of the customer's primary place of use.

3.12.040 Rate limitation and exemption therefrom.
The rate of this levy shall not exceed 4% of the telecommunication provider's gross receipts from telecommunication service attributed to Lindon City unless a higher rate is approved by a majority vote of the voters in Lindon City that vote in:
a. a municipal general election;
b. a regular general election; or
c. a local special election.

3.12.050 Effective date of tax levy.
This tax shall be levied beginning the earlier of July 1, 2004 or the first day of any calendar quarter after a 75 day period beginning on the date the Commission received notice pursuant to Utah Code Section 10-1-403 that Lindon City has enacted this ordinance.

3.12.060 Changes in Rate or Repeal of the Tax.
This ordinance is subject to the requirements of Utah Code Section 10-1-403. If the tax rate is changed or the tax is repealed, then the appropriate notice shall be given provided in Utah Code Section 10-1-403.

3.12.070 Interlocal Agreement for collection of the tax.
On or before the effective date of the ordinance, Lindon City shall enter into the uniform interlocal agreement with the Commission as described in Utah Code Section 10-1-405 for the collection, enforcement, and administration of this municipal telecommunications license tax.

3.12.080 Repeal of inconsistent taxes and fees.
Any tax or fee previously enacted by Lindon City under authority of Utah Code Section 10-1-203 or Utah Code Title 11, Chapter 26, Local Taxation of Utilities Limitation is hereby repealed. Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted to repeal any municipal ordinance or fee which provides that the municipality may recover from a telecommunications provider the management costs of the municipality caused by the activities of the telecommunications provider in the rights-of-way of the municipality, if the fee is imposed in accordance with Utah Code Section 72-7-102 and is not related to the municipality's loss of use of a highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right of way, or increased deterioration of a highway as a result of the activities of the telecommunications provider in a right-of-way nor does this ordinance limit the municipality's right to charge fees or taxes on persons that are not subject to the municipal telecommunications license tax under this ordinance and locate telecommunications facilities, as defined in Utah Code Section 72-7-108, in this municipality. (Ord. 2004-6, adopted, 2004)

3.12.090 Penalties and interest.
1. Penalties and interest equal to those authorized by U.C.A. Sections 59-1-401 and 59-1-402 shall be imposed on any person who:
    a. is required to pay the tax under this part; and
    b. does not remit the tax to the collecting agent within the time prescribed by law.
2. Any person violating any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class B Misdemeanor.
3. Each day a violation of this Chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 99-15, adopted, 2000)

3.12.100 Attorneys fees and cost of collection.
Unless otherwise altered or limited by state law, every person, entity. Or company obligated to pay the tax imposed by this Chapter shall be required to apply all costs of collection of the tax imposed herein, including reasonable attorney’s fees, court costs, and all other costs incident to the collection of the tax as are incurred by Lindon City in enforcing any of the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010)

Title 4 GOVERNMENT RECORDS ACCESS MANAGEMENT

Chapters:
4.01         Government Records Access Management
4.02         Classification of Records
4.03         Disclosure of Records
4.04         Requests for Records
4.05         Records Retention
4.06         Appeals
4.07         Rights of Individuals on Whom Data Is Maintained
4.08         Criminal Penalties

Chapter 4.01 GOVERNMENT RECORDS ACCESS MANAGEMENT

Sections:
4.01.010     Method of classification.
4.01.020     Intent.
4.01.030     Definitions.

4.01.010 Method of classification.
Lindon City recognizes and acknowledges two fundamental constitutional rights: the right of privacy in relation to personal data gathered by the city; and the public’s right of access to information concerning the conduct of the public’s business.
1. The city shall:
    a. evaluate all record series that it uses or creates;
    b. designate those record series as provided by this title; and
    c. report the designation of its record series to the state archives.
2. The city may classify a particular record, record series, or information within a record at any time, but is not required to classify a particular record, record series, or information until access to the record is requested.
3. The city may designate another record series or reclassify a record or record series, or information within a record at any time. (Ord. 6-93, amended, 1993; Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.01.020 Intent.
It is the intent of Lindon City to:
1. Establish fair information practices to prevent abuse of personal information by the city while protecting the public’s right of easy and reasonable access to unrestricted public records;
2. Provide guidelines of openness to government information and privacy of personal information consistent with nationwide standards; and
3. Establish and maintain an active, continuing program for the economical and efficient management of the city’s records as provided in this ordinance. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.01.030 Definitions.
For purposes of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
“Audit” means a systematic examination of financial, management, program, and related records for the purpose of determining the fair presentation of financial statements, adequacy of internal controls, or compliance with laws and regulations; or a systematic examination of program procedures and operations for the purpose of determining their effectiveness, economy, efficiency, and compliance with statutes and regulations.
“Chronological logs” mean the regular and customary summary records of law enforcement agencies and other public safety agencies that show the time and general nature of police, fire, and paramedic calls made to the agency and any arrests or jail bookings made by the agency.
“Classification,” “classify,” and their derivative forms mean determining whether a record series, record, or information within a record is public, private, controlled, protected, or exempt from disclosure under U.C.A.,§6-32-201(3)
“Computer program” means a series of instructions or statements that permit the functioning of a computer system in a manner consistent with the manipulation of associated documentation and source material that explain how to operate the computer program.
    a. “Computer program” does not mean:
        i. the original data, including numbers, text, voice, graphics, and images;
        ii. analysis, compilation, and other manipulated forms of the original data produced by use of the program; or
        iii. the mathematical or statistical formulas (excluding the underlying mathematical algorithms contained in the program) that could be used if the manipulated forms of the original data were to be produced manually.
“Controlled record” means a record containing data on individuals that is controlled as provided in Section 4.02.070.
“Contractor” means any person who contracts with the city to provide goods or services directly to the city; or any private, nonprofit organization that receives funds from the city. “Contractor” does not mean a private provider.
“Gross compensation” means every form of remuneration payable for a given period to any individual for services provided including salaries, commissions, vacation pay, severance pay, bonuses, and any board, rent, housing, lodging, payments in kind, and any similar benefit received from the individual’s employer.
“Designation,” “designate,” and their derivative forms mean indicating, based on the city's familiarity with a record series or based on the city's review of a reasonable sample of a record series, the primary classification that a majority of records in a record series would be given if classified and the classification that other records typically present in the record series would be given if classified.
“Initial contact report”
    a. means an initial written or recorded report, however titled, prepared by peace officers engaged in public patrol or response duties describing official actions initially taken in response to either a public complaint about or the discovery of an apparent violation of law, which report may describe: the date, time, location, and nature of the complaint, the incident, or offense;
        i. names of victims;
        ii. the nature or general scope of the agency's initial actions taken in response to the incident;
        iii. the general nature of any injuries or estimate of damages sustained in the incident;
        iv. the name, address, and other identifying information about any person arrested or charged in connection with the incident; and
        v. the identity of the public safety personnel (except undercover personnel) or prosecuting attorney involved in responding to the initial incident.
    b. “Initial contact report” does not include follow-up or investigative reports prepared after the initial contact report. However, if the information specified in subsection (1) appears in follow-up or investigative reports, it may only be treated confidentially if it is private, controlled, protected, or exempt from disclosure under U.C.A. § 63-2-201(3)(b).
“Individual” means a human being.
“Person” means any individual, nonprofit or profit corporation, partnership, sole proprietorship, or other type of business organization.
“Private record” means a record containing data on individuals that is private as classified by Sections 4.02.050 and 4.02.060.
“Private provider” means any person who contracts with the city to provide services directly to the public.
“Protected record” means a record that is protected as classified by Section 4.02.080.
“Public record” means a record that has not been appropriately classified private, controlled, or protected as provided in Sections 4.02.050, 4.02.060, 4.02.070, and 4.02.080 of this title.
“Record” means
    a. all books, letters, documents, papers, maps, plans, photographs, films, cards, tapes, recordings, or other documentary materials, and electronic data regardless of physical form or characteristics, prepared, or owned, used, received, or retained by the city.
    b. “Record” does not mean:
        i. temporary drafts or similar materials prepared for the originator's personal use or prepared by the originator for the personal use of an individual for whom he is working;
        ii. materials that are legally owned by an individual in his private capacity;
        iii. materials to which access is limited by the laws of copyright or patent unless the copyright or patent is owned by the city;
        iv. proprietary software;
        v. junk mail or commercial publications received by the city or an official or employee of the city;
        vi. books and other materials that are cataloged, indexed, or inventoried and contained in the collections of libraries open to the public, regardless of physical form or characteristics of the material;
        vii. daily calendars and other personal notes prepared by the originator for the originator's personal use or for the personal use of an individual for whom he is working;
        viii. computer programs that are developed or purchased by or for the city for its own use; or ix. notes or internal memoranda prepared as part of the deliberative process by a member of the judiciary, an administrative law judge, a member of the Board of Pardons, or a member of any other body charged by law with performing a judicial or quasi-judicial function.
“Record series” means a group of records that may be treated as a unit for purposes of designation, description, management, or disposition.
“Records officer” means the city recorder and other individuals as appointed by the Mayor to work in the care, maintenance, scheduling, designation, classification, disposal, and preservation of records.
“Summary data” means statistical records and compilations that contain data derived from private, controlled, or protected information but that do not disclose private, controlled, or protected information. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

Chapter 4.02 CLASSIFICATION OF RECORDS

Sections:
4.02.010     Method of Classification.
4.02.020     Records which are always public.
4.02.030     Records which are normally public.
4.02.040     Records which are not public.
4.02.050     Records which are always private.
4.02.060     Records which may be private.
4.02.070     Controlled Records.
4.02.080     Protected records.

4.02.010 Method of Classification.
The following rules shall apply in classifying records in the city's possession or control:
1. The city shall:
    a. Evaluate all record series that it uses or creates;
    b. Designate those record series as provided by this title; and
    c. Report the designation of its record services to the state archives.
2. The city may classify a particular record, record series, or information within a record at any time, but is not required to classify a particular record, record series, or information until access to the record is requested.
3. The city may designate another record series or reclassify a record or record series, or information within a record at any time.

4.02.020 Records which are always public.
All records are public unless otherwise expressly provided by this title or State or Federal law or regulation. The lists of public records in this section and Section 4.02.030 are not exhaustive and should not be used to limit access to records.
The following records are always public:
1. Laws and ordinances;
2. Names, gender, gross compensation, job titles, job descriptions, business addresses, business telephone numbers, number of hours worked per pay period, dates of employment, and relevant education, previous employment, and similar job qualifications of the city's former and present employees and officers, excluding undercover law enforcement personnel or investigative personnel if disclosure could reasonably be expected to impair the effectiveness of investigations or endanger any individuals safety;
3. Final opinions, including concurring and dissenting opinions, and orders that are made by the city in an administrative, adjudicative, or judicial proceeding, except that if the proceedings were properly closed to the public, the opinion and order may be withheld to the extent that they contain information that is private, protected, or controlled;
4. Final interpretations of statutes or rules by the city unless classified as protected under Section 4.02.080(15), (16), or (17);
5. Information contained in or compiled from transcripts, minutes, or reports of the open portion of a meeting of the city, including the records of all votes of each member of the city council;
6. Judicial records unless a court orders the records to be restricted under the rules of civil or criminal procedure or unless the records are private.
7. Records filed with or maintained by county recorders, clerks, treasurers, surveyors, zoning commissions, the Division of State Lands and Forestry, the Division of Oil, Gas and Mining, the Division of Water Rights, or other governmental entities that give public notice of:
    a. Titles or encumbrances to real property;
    b. Restrictions on the use of real property;
    c. The capacity of persons to take or convey title to real property; or
    d. Tax status for real or personal property;
8. Records of the Department of Commerce that evidence incorporations, mergers, name changes, and uniform commercial code filings;
9. Data on individuals that would otherwise be private under this ordinance if the individual who is the subject of the record has given the city written permission to make the records available to the public;
10. Documentation of the compensation that the city pays to a contractor or private provider;
11. Summary data. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.02.030 Records which are normally public.
The following records are normally public, but to the extent a record is expressly exempted from disclosure, access may be restricted:
1. Administrative staff manuals, instructions to staff, and statements of policy;
2. Records documenting a contractor's or private provider's compliance with the terms of a contract with the city;
3. Records documenting the services provided by a contractor or private provider to the extent the records would be public if prepared by the city;
4. Contracts entered into by the city;
5. Any account, voucher, or contract that deals with the receipt or expenditure of funds by the city;
6. Records relating to governmental assistance or incentives publicly disclosed, contracted for, or given by the city, encouraging a person to expand or relocate a business in Utah, except as provided in U.C.A. Subsection 63-2-304(34);
7. Chronological logs and initial contact reports;
8. Correspondence by and with the city in which the city determines or states an opinion upon the rights of the state, a political subdivision, the public, or any person;
9. The empirical data contained in drafts if:
    a. The empirical data is not reasonably available to the requester elsewhere in similar form; and
    b. The city is given opportunity to correct any errors or make non-substantive changes before release.
10. Drafts that are circulated to anyone other than the city, state, or federal agency if the city, state, or federal agency are jointly responsible for implementation of a program or project that has been legislatively approved;
11. Drafts that have never been finalized but were relied on by the city in carrying out action or policy;
12. Original data in a computer program if the city chooses not to disclose the program;
13. Arrest warrants after issuance, except that, for good cause, a court may order restricted access to arrest warrants prior to service;
14. Search warrants after execution and filing of the return, except that a court, for good cause, may order restricted access to search warrants prior to trial;
15. Records that would disclose information relating to formal charges or disciplinary actions against a past or present city employee if:
    a. The disciplinary action has been completed and all time periods for administrative appeal have expired; and
    b. The formal charges were sustained.
16. Records maintained by the Division of State Lands and Forestry or the Division of Oil, Gas and Mining that evidence mineral production on government lands;
17. Final audit reports;
18. Occupational and professional licenses;
19. Business licenses; and
20. A notice of violation, a notice of agency action under U.C.A. § 63-46b-3, or similar records used to initiate proceedings for discipline or sanctions against persons regulated by the city, but not including records that initiate employee discipline; (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.02.040 Records which are not public.
The following records are not public:
1. Records that are appropriately classified as private, controlled, or protected only those records specified in Sections 4.02.050, 4.02.060, 4.02.070, and 4.02.080 may be classified as private, controlled, or protected; and
2. Records to which access is restricted pursuant to court rule, state statute, federal statute, or federal regulation, including records for which access is governed or restricted as a condition of participation in a state or federal program or for receiving state or federal funds. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.02.050 Records which are always private.
The following records are always private:
1. Records concerning an individual's eligibility for unemployment insurance benefits, social services, welfare benefits, or the determination or benefit levels;
2. Records containing data on individuals describing medical history, diagnosis, condition, treatment, evaluation, or similar medical data;
3. Records of publicly funded libraries that when examined alone or with other records identify a patron;
4. Records received or generated in a Senator or House ethics committee concerning any alleged violation of the rules on legislative ethics if the committee meeting was closed to the public.
5. Records concerning a current or former city employee or applicant for city employment that would disclose the individual’s home address, home telephone number, social security number, insurance coverage, marital status, or payroll deductions. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.02.060 Records which may be private.
1. Records concerning a current or former city employee or applicant for city employment, including performance evaluations and personal status information such as race, religion, or disabilities, but not including records that are public or private;
2. Records describing an individual’s finances, except that the following are public:
    a. Records described in Section 4.02.020;
    b. Information provided to the city for the purpose of complying with a financial assurance requirement; or
    c. Records that must be disclosed in accordance with another statute
3. Records of independent state agencies if the disclosure of those records would conflict with fiduciary obligations of the agency;
4. Other records containing data on individuals, the disclosure of which constitutes a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy;
5. Records provided by the United States or by a governmental entity outside the state that are the records are given with the requirement that the records are managed as private records, if the providing entity states in writing that the record would not be subject to public disclosure if retained by it. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.02.070 Controlled Records.
A record is controlled only if:
1. The record contains medical, psychiatric, or psychological data about an individual;
2. The city reasonably believes that releasing the information in the record to the subject of the record would be detrimental to the subject's mental health, or releasing the information would constitute a violation of normal professional practice and medical ethics; and
3. The city has properly classified the record. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.02.080 Protected records.
The following records are protected if properly classified as protected by the city:
1. Trade secrets as defined in U.C.A. §3-24-2 if the person submitting the trade secret has provided the city with the information specified in U.C.A. §63-2-308;
2. Commercial information or non-individual financial information obtained from a person if:
    a. Disclosure of the information could reasonably be expected to result in unfair competitive injury to the person submitting the information or disclosure would impair the ability of the city to obtain necessary information in the future;
    b. The person submitting the information has a greater interest in prohibiting access than the public in obtaining access; and
    c. The person submitting the information has provided the city with the information specified in U.C.A. §63-2-308;
3. Commercial or financial information acquired or prepared by the city to the extent that a disclosure would lead to financial speculations in currencies, securities, or commodities that will interfere with a planned transaction by the city or cause substantial financial injury to the city or state economy;
4. Test questions and answers to be used in future license, certification, registration, employment, or academic examinations;
5. Records the disclosure of which would impair governmental procurement or give an unfair advantage to any person proposing to enter into a contract or agreement with the city, except that this subsection does not restrict the right of a person to see bids submitted to or by the city after bidding has closed;
6. Records that would identify real property or the appraisal or estimated value of real or personal property, including intellectual property, under consideration for public acquisition before any rights to the property are acquired, unless:
    a. Public interest in obtaining access to the information outweighs the city’s need to acquire the property on the best terms possible; and
    b. The information has already been disclosed to persons not employed by or under a duty of confidentiality to the entity;
    c. In the case of records that would identify the appraisal or estimated value of property, the potential sellers have already learned of the city's estimated value of the property; or
7. Records prepared in contemplation of sale, exchange, lease, rental, or other compensated transaction of real or personal property including intellectual property, which, if disclosed prior to completion of the transaction, would reveal the appraisal or estimated value of the subject property, unless:
    a. The public interest in access outweighs the interests in restricting access, including the city's interest in maximizing the financial benefit of the transaction; or
    b. When prepared by or on behalf of the city, appraisals or estimates of the value of the subject property have already been disclosed to persons not employed by or under a duty of confidentiality to the city;
8. Records created or maintained for civil, criminal, or administrative enforcement purposes or audit purposes, or for discipline, licensing, certification, or registration purposes if release of the records:
    a. Reasonably could be expected to interfere with investigations undertaken for enforcement, discipline, licensing, certification, or registration purposes;
    b. Reasonably could be expected to interfere with audits, disciplinary, or enforcement proceedings;
    d. Would create a danger of depriving a person of a right to a fair trial or impartial hearing;
    e. Reasonably could be expected to disclose the identity of a source who is not generally known outside of government and, in the case of a record compiled in the course of an investigation, disclose information furnished by a source not generally known outside of government if disclosure would compromise the source; or
    f. Reasonably could be expected to disclose investigative or audit techniques, procedures, policies, or orders not generally known outside of government, if disclosure would interfere with enforcement or audit efforts;
9. Records the disclosure of which would jeopardize the life or safety of an individual;
10. Records the disclosure of which would jeopardize the security of governmental property, governmental programs, or governmental record keeping systems from damage, theft, or other appropriation or use contrary to law or public policy;
11. Records the disclosure of which would jeopardize the security or safety of a correctional facility, or records relating to incarceration, treatment, probation, or parole, that would interfere with the control and supervision of an offender's incarceration, treatment, probation, or parole;
12. Records that if disclosed would reveal recommendations made to the Board of Pardons by an employee of or contractor for the Department of Corrections, the Board of Pardons, or the Department of Human Services that are based on the employee's or contractor's supervision, diagnosis, or treatment of any person within the board's jurisdiction;
13. Records and audit work-papers that identify audit, collection, and operational procedures and methods used by the Utah State Tax Commission, if disclosure would interfere with audits or collections;
14. Records of communications between the city and an attorney representing, retained, or employed by the city, if the communications would be privileged as provided in U.C.A. §78-24-8;
15. Drafts, unless otherwise classified as public;
16. Records concerning the city's strategy about collective bargaining or pending litigation;
17. Records of investigations of loss occurrences and analysis of loss occurrences;
18. Records, other than personnel evaluations, that contain a personal recommendation concerning an individual, if disclosure would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasion of personal privacy, or disclosure is not in the public interest;
19. Records that reveal the location of historic, prehistoric, paleontological, or biological resources that if known would jeopardize the security of those resources or of valuable historic, scientific, educational, or cultural information;
20. Records of independent state agencies if the disclosure of the records would conflict with the fiduciary duties of the agency;
21. Records provided by the United States or by a government entity outside the state the are given to the city with a requirement that they be managed as protected records if the providing entity certifies that the record would not be subject to public disclosure if retained by it;
22. Records of a governmental audit agency relating to an ongoing or planned audit until the final audit is released;
23. Records prepared by or on behalf of the city solely in anticipation of litigation that are not available under the rules of discovery;
24. Records disclosing an attorney's work product, including the mental impressions or legal theories of an attorney or other representative of the city concerning litigation;
25. Transcripts, minutes, or reports of the closed portion of a meeting of a public body except as provided in Section 52-4-7 of the Open and Public Meeting Act;
26. Records that would reveal the contents of settlement negotiations, but not including final settlements or empirical data to the extent that they are not otherwise exempt from disclosure;
27. Memoranda prepared by staff and used in the decision-making process by an administrative law judge, a member of the Board of Pardons, or a member of any other body charged by law with performing a quasi-judicial function;
28. Records that would reveal negotiations regarding assistance or incentives offered by or requested from the city for the purpose of encouraging a person to expand or locate a business in Utah, but only if disclosure would result in actual economic harm to the person or place the city at a competitive disadvantage, but this section may not be used to restrict access to a record evidencing a final contract; and
29. Materials to which access must be limited for purposes of securing or maintaining the city's proprietary protection of intellectual property rights, including patents, copyrights, and trade secrets. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

Chapter 4.03 DISCLOSURE OF RECORDS

Sections:
4.03.010     Disclosure of public records.
4.03.020     Disclosure of non-public records.
4.03.030     Disclosure of private records.
4.03.040     Disclosure of controlled records.
4.03.050     Disclosure of protected records.
4.03.060     Additional limitations on disclosure of private, controlled, and protected records.
4.03.070     Disclosure of private or controlled records for research purposes.
4.03.080     Right to a certified copy of the record.
4.03.090     Additional limitations on public's right of access.
4.03.100     Disclosure pursuant to court order.
4.03.110     Confidential treatment of records for which no exemption applies.

4.03.010 Disclosure of public records.
Every person has the right to inspect a public record free of charge and the right to take a copy of a public record during normal working hours, subject to the payment of costs and fees pursuant to Section 4.05.030. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.03.020 Disclosure of non-public records.
1. The city may not disclose to any person a record that is private, controlled, or protected except as provided in this title.
2. The city may, in its discretion, disclose records that are private or protected to persons other than those otherwise entitled to obtain such records if the city council, or its designee, determines that there are no interests in restricting access to the record, or that the interests favoring access outweigh the interests favoring restriction of access.
3. The disclosure of records to which access is governed or limited pursuant to court rule, state statute, federal statute, or federal regulation, including records for which access is governed or limited as a condition of participation in a state or federal program or for receiving state or federal funds, is governed by the specific provisions of that statute, rule, or regulation, but only if the Lindon City Code is inconsistent with the statute, rule, or regulation. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.03.030 Disclosure of private records.
Upon request the city shall disclose a private record to:
1. The subject of the record;
2. The parent or legal guardian of an un-emancipated minor who is the subject of the record;
3. The legal guardian of a legally incapacitated individual who is the subject of the record;
4. Any other individual who has a power of attorney from the subject of the record, or who submits a notarized release from the subject of the record or his legal representative dated no later than 90 days before the date the request is made; or
5. Any person to whom the record must be provided pursuant to court order. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.03.040 Disclosure of controlled records.
Upon request the city shall disclose a controlled record to:
1. A physician, psychologist, or certified social worker upon submission of a notarized release from the subject of the record that is dated no more than 90 days prior to the date the request is made and a signed acknowledgment of the terms of disclosure of controlled information as provided in Section 4.03.060; and
2. Any person to whom a record must be disclosed pursuant to court order. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.03.050 Disclosure of protected records.
Upon request the city shall disclose a protected record to:
1. The person who submitted the information in the record;
2. Any other individual who has a power of attorney from all persons, government entities, or political subdivisions whose interests were sought to be protected by the protected classification, or who submits a notarized release from their legal representatives dated no more than 90 days prior to the date the request is made; or
3. Any person to whom a record must be provided pursuant to court order. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.03.060 Additional limitations on disclosure of private, controlled, and protected records.
The following additional limitations apply to the disclosure of controlled, private and protected records:
1. A person who receives a controlled record from the city may not disclose controlled information from that record to any other person, including the subject of the record.
2. If there is more than one subject of a private or controlled record, the portion of the record that pertains to another subject shall be segregated from the portion that the requester is entitled to inspect.
3. The city may disclose a record classified as private, controlled, or protected to another governmental entity, city, state, the United States, or a foreign government only as provided by U.C.A.§ 63-2-206.
4. Before releasing a private, controlled, or protected record, the person requesting disclosure shall provide satisfactory evidence of his identity.
5. Except as otherwise provided in this title, the city may not disclose records that are private or protected to persons other than those specified in this chapter.
6. Under U.C.A. Subsection 63-2-404(8) a court may require the disclosure of records that are private, controlled, or protected to persons other than those specified in this chapter. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.03.070 Disclosure of private or controlled records for research purposes.
1. The city may disclose or authorize disclosure of private or controlled records for research purpose if the city:
    a. Determines that the research purpose cannot reasonably be accomplished
    b. without disclosure of the information to the researcher in individually identifiable form;
    c. Determines that the proposed research is bona fide, and that the value of the research outweighs the infringement upon personal privacy.
    d. Requires the researcher to assure the integrity, confidentiality, and security of the records and requires the removal or destruction of the individual identifiers associated with the records as soon as the purpose of the research project has been accomplished.
    e. Prohibits the researcher from disclosing the record in individually identifiable form except as provided in Subsection 2 of this section, or from using the record for purposes other than the research approved by the city; and
    f. Secures from the researcher a written statement of his understanding of an agreement to the conditions of this Section and his understanding that violation of the terms of this section may subject him to criminal prosecution under U.C.A. §6-32-801.
2. A researcher may disclose a record in individually identifiable form if the record is disclosed for the purpose of auditing or evaluating the research program and no subsequent use or disclosure of the record in individually identifiable form will be made by the auditor or evaluator except as provided by this section.
3. The city may require indemnification as a condition of permitting research under this section. (Ord. 6-93, amended, 1993)

4.03.080 Right to a certified copy of the record.
The city shall provide a person with a certified copy of a record if the person requesting the record has a right to inspect it, identifies the record with reasonable specificity, and pays the lawful fees. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.03.090 Additional limitations on public's right of access.
The following are additional limitations on a person's right to access and the city's duty to produce records:
1. The city is not required to create a record in response to a request;
2. Nothing in this ordinance requires the city to fulfill a person's records request if the request unreasonably duplicates prior records requests from that person;
3. If a person requests copies of more than 50 pages of records, and if the records are contained in files that do not contain records that are exempt from disclosure, the city may provide the requester with facilities for copying the requested records and require that the requester make the copies himself; or allow the requester to provide his own copying facilities and personnel to make the copies at the city offices, and waive the fees for copying the records;
4. If the city owns an intellectual property right and offers the intellectual property right for sale or license, the city may control by ordinance or duplication policy, the distribution of the material, based on terms the city considers to be in the public interest. Nothing in this ordinance shall be construed to limit or impair the rights or protections granted to the city under federal copyright or patent law as a result of its ownership of the intellectual property right;
5. The city may not use the physical form, electronic or otherwise, in which a record is stored, to deny or unreasonably hinder the rights of persons to inspect and receive copies of a record under this title. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.03.100 Disclosure pursuant to court order.
The city shall disclose a record pursuant to the terms of a court order signed by a judge from a court of competent jurisdiction, provided that:
1. The record deals with a matter in controversy over which the court has jurisdiction;
2. The court has considered the merits of the request for access to the record;
3. The court has considered and limited the requester’s use and further disclosure of the record, where appropriate, in order to protect privacy interests in the case of private or controlled records, business confidentiality interests in the case of records protected under U.C.A. §63-2-304(1) and (2), and privacy interests in the case of other protected records;
4. To the extent the record is properly classified as private, controlled, or protected, the court has determined that interests favoring access, considering limitations on the requester's use and further disclosure of the record, outweigh the interests favoring restriction of access; and
5. Where access is restricted by a rule, statute, or regulation referred to in Section 4.02.040(2), the court has authority to order disclosure, independent of the Lindon City Code. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.03.110 Confidential treatment of records for which no exemption applies.
1. A court may order confidential treatment and non-disclosure of records for which there is no other exemption from disclosure, if:
    a. There are compelling interests favoring restriction of access to the record; and
    b. The interests favoring restriction of access clearly outweigh the interests favoring access.
2. If the city requests a court to restrict access to a record under this section, the court shall require the city to pay the reasonable attorney fees incurred by the party seeking disclosure in opposing the city's request, if:
    a. The court finds that no statutory or constitutional exemption from disclosure could reasonably apply to the record in question; and
    b. The court denies confidential treatment under this section.
3. This section does not apply to records that are specifically required to be public under this title or U.C.A. §632-301, except as provided in Subsections 4 and 5 of this section.
4. Access to drafts and empirical data in drafts may be limited under this section, but the court may consider, in its evaluation of interests favoring restriction of access, only those interests that relate to the underlying information, and not to the deliberative nature of the record.
5. Access to original data in a computer program may be limited under this section, but the court may consider, in its evaluation of interests favoring restriction of access, only those interests that relate to the underlying information, and not to the status of that data as part of a computer program. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

Chapter 4.04 REQUESTS FOR RECORDS

Sections:
4.04.010     Form of requests.
4.04.020     City's response to requests.
4.04.030     Presumption of public benefit.
4.04.040     Extraordinary circumstances allowing delay in response time.
4.04.050     Time limits for extraordinary circumstances.
4.04.060     Effect of failure to disclose within time limitations.
4.04.070     Disclosure denials.

4.04.010 Form of requests.
A person making a request for a record shall furnish the city with a written request containing his name, mailing address, daytime telephone number if available, and a description of the records requested that identifies the record with reasonable specificity. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.04.020 City's response to requests.
As soon as reasonably possible, but no later than 10 business days after receiving a written request, or five business days after receiving a written request if the requester demonstrates that expedited response to the record request benefits the public rather than the person, the city shall respond to the request by:
1. Approving the request and providing the record;
2. Denying the request;
3. Notifying the requester that it does not maintain the record and providing the name and address of the individual having possession of the record, if known; or
4. Notifying the requester that because of one of the extraordinary circumstances listed in Section 4.04.040, the city cannot immediately approve or deny the request. The notice shall describe the circumstances relied on and specify the earliest time and date when the records will be available. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.04.030 Presumption of public benefit.
Any person who requests a record to obtain information for a story or report for publication or broadcast to the general public is presumed to be acting to benefit the public rather than a person. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.04.040 Extraordinary circumstances allowing delay in response time.
The following circumstances constitute “extraordinary circumstances” that allow the city to delay approval or denial by an additional period of time as specified in Section 4.04.050 if the city determines that due to the extraordinary circumstances it cannot respond within the time limits provided in Section 4.04.020:
1. Another governmental entity is using the record, in which case the city shall promptly request that the other governmental entity return the record;
2. Another governmental entity is using the record as part of an audit and returning the record before completion of the audit would impair the conduct of the audit;
3. The request is for a voluminous quantity of records;
4. The city is currently processing a large number of records requests;
5. The request requires the city to review a large number of records to locate the records requested;
6. The decision to release a record involves legal issues that require the city to seek legal counsel for the analysis of statutes, rules, ordinances, regulations, or case law;
7. Segregating information the requester is entitled to inspect from information that the requester is not entitled to inspect requires extensive editing; or
8. Segregating information that the requester is entitled to inspect from information that the requester is not entitled to inspect requires computer programming. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.04.050 Time limits for extraordinary circumstances.
If one of the extraordinary circumstances listed in Section 4.04.040 precludes approval or denial within the time specified in Section 4.04.020, the following time limits apply to the extraordinary circumstances:
1. For delays under section 4.04.040(1), the governmental entity currently in possession of the record shall return the record to the city within five business days of the request for the return unless returning the record would impair the holder's work.
2. For delays under Section 4.04.040(2), the city shall notify the requester when the record is available for inspection and copying;
3. For delays under Section 4.04.040(3), (4), and (5), the city shall:
    a. Disclose the records that it has located which the requester is entitled to inspect;
    b. Provide the requester with an estimate of the amount of time it will take to finish the work required to respond to the request; and
    c. Complete the work and disclose those records that the requester is entitled to inspect as soon as reasonably possible.
4. For delays under Section 4.04.040(6), the city shall either approve or deny the request within five business days after the response time specified for the original request has expired;
5. For delays under Section 4.04.040(7), the city shall fulfill the request within 15 business days from the date of the original request; for delays under Section 4.04.040(8), the city shall complete its programming and disclose the requested records as soon as reasonably possible. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.04.060 Effect of failure to disclose within time limitations.
If the city fails to provide the requested records or issue a denial within the specified time period, that failure is considered the equivalent of a determination denying access to the records. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.04.070 Disclosure denials.
The following rules apply to denials of record requests:
1. If the city denies the request in whole or part, it shall provide a notice of denial to the requester either in person or by sending the notice to the requester's address by U.S. mail.
2. The notice of denial shall contain the following information:
    a. A description of the record or portions of the record to which access is denied, provided that the description does not disclose private, controlled, or protected information or records to which access is restricted pursuant to court rule, another state statute, federal statute, or federal regulation, including records for which access is governed or restricted as a condition of participation in a state or federal program or for receiving state or federal funds;
    b. Citations to the provisions of this ordinance, another state statute, federal statute, court rule or order, or federal regulation that exempts the record or portions of the record from disclosure, provided that the citations do not disclose private, controlled, or protected information;
    c. A statement that the requester has the right to appeal the denial to the city council; and
    d. A brief summary of the appeals process and the time limit for filing an appeal.
3. Unless otherwise required by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, the city may not destroy or give up custody of any record to which access was denied until the period for an appeal has expired or the end of the appeals process, including judicial appeal. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

Chapter 4.05 RECORDS RETENTION

Sections:
4.05.010     Records retention.
4.05.020     Segregation of records.
4.05.030     Fees.
4.05.040     Fee waivers.
4.05.050     Circumstances under which fee may not be charged.

4.05.010 Records retention.
The city shall by resolution establish a retention schedule for each record series. The initial retention schedule shall be as set forth in Exhibit “A,” attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.05.020 Segregation of records.
Notwithstanding any other provision in this ordinance, if the city receives a request for access to a record that contains both information that the requester is entitled to inspect and information that the requester is not entitled to inspect, and if the information the requester is entitled to inspect is intelligible, the city:
1. Shall allow access to information in the record that the requester is entitled to inspect; and
2. May deny access to information in the record if the information is exempt from disclosure to the requester by issuing a notice of denial. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.05.030 Fees.
The city may charge a reasonable fee to cover the city's actual cost of duplicating a record or compiling a record in a form other than that maintained by the city. The fees may be set by resolution. The initial fees, until changed by resolution, are set forth in Exhibit B, attached hereto and incorporated herein by this reference. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.05.040 Fee waivers.
The city may fulfill a record request without a charge when it determines that:
1. Releasing the record primarily benefits the public rather than a person;
2. The individual requesting the record is the subject of the record; or
3. The requester's legal rights are directly implicated by the information in the record, and the requester is impecunious. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.05.050 Circumstances under which fee may not be charged.
The city may not charge a fee for reviewing a record to determine whether it is subject to disclosure, or for inspecting a record. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

Chapter 4.06 APPEALS

Sections:
4.06.010     Notice of Appeal.
4.06.020     Appeal from claim of extraordinary circumstances.
4.06.030     Appeal involving confidential business records.
4.06.040     Mayor's determination of appeal.
4.06.050     Appeal of mayor's determination to city council.
4.06.060     Appeal of classification determination.
4.06.070     Judicial review.

4.06.010 Notice of Appeal.
Any person aggrieved by the city's access determination under this title, including a person not a party to the city's proceeding, may appeal the determination to the mayor by filing a notice of appeal no later than 30 days after notification of the determination. The notice of appeal shall contain the petitioner's name, address, daytime telephone number, and a statement of the relief sought. The petitioner may also file a short statement of facts, reasons, and legal authority in support of the appeal. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.06.020 Appeal from claim of extraordinary circumstances.
If the city claims extraordinary circumstances and specifies the date when the records will be available and if the requester believes the extraordinary circumstances do not exist or that the time specified is unreasonable, the requester may appeal the city's claim of extraordinary circumstances or date for compliance no later than 30 days after notification of a claim of extraordinary circumstances by the city, despite the lack of a “determination” or its equivalent. The notice of appeal shall contain the petitioner's name, address, daytime telephone number, and a statement of the relief sought. The petitioner may also file a short statement of facts, reasons, and legal authority in support of the appeal. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.06.030 Appeal involving confidential business records.
If the appeal involves a record that is the subject of a business confidentiality claim under U.C.A. §63-2-308:
1. The city recorder shall:
    a. Send notice of the requester's appeal to the business confidentiality claimant within three business days after receiving notice, except that if notice under this section must be given to more than 35 persons, it shall be given as soon as reasonably possible; and
    b. Send notice of the business confidentiality claim and the schedule for the mayor's determination to the requester within three business days after receiving notice of the requester's appeal.
2. The claimant shall have seven business days after notice is sent by the city recorder to submit further support for the claim of business confidentiality. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.06.040 Mayor's determination of appeal.
1. The mayor shall make the determination on the appeal within five business days after the mayor's receipt of the notice of appeal, or within 12 business days after the city sends the requester's notice of appeal to a person who submitted a claim of business confidentiality. However, the parties participating in the proceeding may, by agreement, extend the time periods specified in this chapter.
2. If the mayor fails to make a determination within the time specified in Subsection 1, the failure shall be considered the equivalent of an order denying the appeal.
3. The mayor may, upon consideration and weighing of the various interests and public policies pertinent to the classification and disclosure or non-disclosure, order the disclosure of information properly classified as private or protected if the interests favoring access outweigh the interests favoring restriction of access.
4. The city shall send written notice of the determination of the mayor to all participants. If the mayor affirms the denial in whole or in part, the denial shall include a statement that the requester has the right to appeal the denial to the city council, and the time limits for filing an appeal.
5. The duties of the mayor under this section may be delegated. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.06.050 Appeal of mayor's determination to city council.
Any participant in the mayor's initial determination may appeal the mayor's decision to the city council. The appeal to the city council shall be conducted as follows:
1. A notice of appeal to the city council must be filed with the city recorder no later than 30 days after the mayor has denied the appeal or fails to make a determination within the time specified in Subsection 4.06.040(1). The notice of appeal shall contain the petitioner's name, address, daytime telephone number, and a statement of the relief sought. The petitioner may also file a short statement of facts, reasons, and legal authority in support of the appeal.
2. No less than three business days after receiving a notice of appeal, the recorder shall schedule a hearing for the city council to discuss the appeal, which hearing shall be held not sooner than 15 days and not later than 30 days from the date of the filing of the appeal.
3. At the hearing, the city council shall allow the parties to testify, present evidence, and comment on the issues. The city council may allow other interested parties to comment on the issue.
4. No later than three business days after the hearing, the city council shall issue a signed order either granting the petition in whole or in part or upholding the determination of the city in whole or in part. The order of the city council shall include:
    a. A statement of reasons for the decision, including citations to this title or other state or federal laws or regulations that govern disclosure of the records, provided the citations do not disclose private, controlled, or protected information;
    b. A description of the record or portions of the record to which access was ordered or denied, provided that the description does not disclose private, controlled, or protected information;
    c. A statement that any party to the appeal may appeal the city's decision to the district court; and
    d. A brief summary of the appeal, and a notice that to protect its rights on appeal the party may wish to seek advice from an attorney. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.06.060 Appeal of classification determination.
A person aggrieved by the city's classification or designation determination under this title, but who is not requesting access to the records, may appeal that determination using the procedures provided in this chapter. If a non-requester is the only appellant, the procedures provided in this chapter shall apply, except that the determination on the appeal shall be made within 30 days after receiving the notice of appeal. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.06.070 Judicial review.
Any party to a proceeding before the city council may petition the district court for judicial review of the city council’s order. The petition shall be filed no later than 30 days after the date of the city council's order. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

Chapter 4.07 RIGHTS OF INDIVIDUALS ON WHOM DATA IS MAINTAINED

Sections:
4.07.010     Right to contest accuracy of record.
4.07.020     Approval or denial of amendment request.
4.07.030     Inapplicability of certain sections.
4.07.040     Additional rights of individuals on whom data is maintained.

4.07.010 Right to contest accuracy of record.
Subject to Chapter 4.04 of this title, an individual may contest the accuracy or completeness of any public, private, or protected record concerning that individual by requesting the city to amend the record. This chapter does not affect the right of access to private or protected records. The request shall contain the following information:
1. The requester's name, mailing address, and daytime telephone number; and
2. A brief statement explaining why the city should amend the record. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.07.020 Approval or denial of amendment request.
1. The city shall issue an order either approving or denying the request to amend no later than 30 days after receipt of the request.
2. If the city approves the request, it shall correct all of its records that contain the same incorrect information as soon as practical. A city may not disclose the record until the record is amended.
3. If the city denies the request, it shall inform the requester in writing and provide a brief statement giving its reasons for denying the request.
4. If the city denies a request to amend a record, the requester may submit a written statement contesting the information in the record. In such event, the city shall:
    a. File the requester's statement with the disputed record if the record is in a form such that the statement can accompany the record, or make the statement accessible if the record is not in a form such that the statement can accompany the record; and
    b. Disclose the requester's statement along with the information in the record whenever the city discloses the disputed information.
5. If the city denies a request to amend a record, the requester may appeal the denial pursuant to Chapter 4.06 of this title.

4.07.030 Inapplicability of certain sections.
Sections 4.07.010 and 4.07.020 do not apply to records relating to title to real or personal property, medical records, judicial case files, or any other records that the city determines must be maintained in their original form to protect the public interest and to preserve the integrity of the record system. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.07.040 Additional rights of individuals on whom data is maintained.
1. The city shall file with the state archivist a statement explaining the purposes for which a record series designated private or controlled are collected and used by the city, which statement is a public record.
2. Upon request, the city shall explain to an individual:
    a. The reasons the individual is asked to furnish information to the city that could be classified as private or controlled;
    b. The intended uses of the information; and
    c. The consequences for refusing to provide the information.
3. The city may not use private or controlled records for purposes other than those given in the statement filed with the statement filed with the state archivist under Subsection 1 or for purposes other than those for which the governmental entity could use the record under U.C.A. § 63-2-206. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

Chapter 4.08 CRIMINAL PENALTIES

Sections:
4.08.010     Illegal disclosure of non-public record.
4.08.020     Defenses to illegal disclosure of non-public record.
4.08.030     Illegally obtaining access to non-public record.
4.08.040     Unlawful refusal to release record.
4.08.050     Acts Constituting Separate Offenses.

4.08.010 Illegal disclosure of non-public record.
A public employee or other person who has lawful access to any private, controlled, or protected record under this title, and who intentionally discloses or provides a copy of a private, controlled, or protected record to any person, knowing that such disclosure is prohibited, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.08.020 Defenses to illegal disclosure of non-public record.
The following are defenses to prosecution under Section 4.08.010:
1. The actor released private, controlled, or protected information in the reasonable belief that the disclosure of the information was necessary to expose a violation of law involving government corruption, abuse of office, or misappropriation of public funds or property.
2. The record could have lawfully been released to the recipient if it had been properly classified. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.08.030 Illegally obtaining access to non-public record.
A person who by false pretenses, bribery, or theft, gains access to or obtains a copy of any private, controlled, or protected record to which he is not legally entitled is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. However, no person shall be guilty under this section if the person receives the record, information, or copy after the fact and without prior knowledge of or participation in the false pretenses, bribery, or theft. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.08.040 Unlawful refusal to release record.
A public employee who intentionally refuses to release a record the disclosure of which the employee knows is required by law or by final order which has not been appealed from the city, or a court, is guilty of a class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 9-92, adopted, 1992)

4.08.050 Acts Constituting Separate Offenses.
7. Each act of intentionally disclosing or providing a copy of a private, controlled, or protected record as prohibited by Section 4.08.020 shall constitute a separate offense under this Chapter.
8. Each protected record that is accessed in violation of Section 4.08.030 shall constitute a separate offense.
9. The unlawful refusal to disclose a required document under Section 4.08.040 shall be a separate offense for each request for new documents. The refusal to disclose required documents on multiple requests for the same, or similar documents, from the same applicant, or applicants associated or affiliated with one another, shall only constitute one offense for the purposes of Section 4.08.040.

Title 5 BUSINESS LICENSING AND REGULATIONS

Chapters:
5.04         Business Taxes, Licenses and Regulations
5.05         Cable TV Non-Exclusive Franchise
5.06         Telecommunications Rights-of-Way Ordinance
5.07         Personal Wireless Telecommunications Facilities
5.08         Alcohol Sales and Licensing
5.10         Alcohol Beverage Control Act
5.12         Amusement Devices
5.14         Burglar, Robbery and Fire Alarms
5.16         Auctioneers
5.20         Billiard and Pool Halls
5.24         Cigarette Vending Machines
5.28         Dance Halls
5.32         Pawnbrokers
5.36         Secondhand and Junk Dealers
5.40         Residential Solicitation
5.42         Residential Care Facility Business License
5.44         Conducting Business on Street or Sidewalks
5.48         Landfill License Fee

Chapter 5.04 BUSINESS TAXES, LICENSES AND REGULATIONS

Sections:
5.04.010     Definitions.
5.04.020     Application of rules.
5.04.030     Payment of other licenses not excused.
5.04.040     Effect on past actions and obligations.
5.04.050     License--Required.
5.04.060     Separate license required for each branch, establishment, and type of business at same location.
5.04.070     Exemptions.
5.04.080     Applications, issuance and contents.
5.04.090     Appeal from action.
5.04.100     Transferability.
5.04.110     Duplicate license.
5.04.120     Posting of license.
5.04.130     License fees--When payable.
5.04.140     Failure to pay fee-- Penalty.
5.04.150     Enforcement--Right of entry.
5.04.160     Fee a debt to city.
5.04.170     Remedies cumulative.
5.04.180     Fee schedule.

5.04.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings respectively ascribed to them by this section:
“Business” includes professions, trades and occupations and every kind of calling, whether or not carried on for profit.
“Licensee” means any person to whom a license has been issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter.
“Person” means all domestic and foreign corporations, associations, syndicates, joint stock corporations, partnerships of every kind, corporations, Massachusetts business or common law trusts, societies and individuals engaged in any business in the city. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 § 1, amended, 1984)

5.04.020 Application of rules.
Except as otherwise expressly provided, the provisions of this chapter shall apply to all city licensing activities. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 § 1, amended, 1984)

5.04.030 Payment of other licenses not excused.
Persons required to pay a license tax or fee for transacting and carrying on any business required under any other ordinance of the city shall remain subject to the regulatory provisions of other city ordinances. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 § 2, amended, 1984)

5.04.040 Effect on past actions and obligations.
Neither the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter nor it’s superseding of any portion of any other ordinance of the city shall in any manner be construed to affect prosecution for violation of any other ordinance committed prior to the adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter, nor be construed as a waiver of any license or any penal provision applicable to any such violation, nor be construed to affect the validity of any bond or cash deposit required by any ordinance to be posted, filed or deposited, and all rights and obligations hereunto appertaining shall continue in full force and effect. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 § 3, amended, 1984)

5.04.050 License--Required.
1. There are imposed, upon the businesses, trades, professions, callings and occupations transacted and carried on in the city, license fees in the amounts adopted by resolution and set forth in a separate schedule. It is unlawful for any person to transact and carry on any business, trade, profession, calling or occupation in the city without first having procured a license from the city to so do and without complying with all applicable provisions of this chapter, and any violation of this chapter or failure to comply with any provisions of this chapter shall be punishable as a Class B misdemeanor.
2. This section shall not be construed to require any person to obtain a license prior to doing business within the city if such requirement conflicts with applicable statutes of the United States or of this state. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 § 1, amended, 1984)

5.04.060 Separate license required for each branch, establishment, and type of business at same location.
A separate license shall be obtained for each branch establishment or location of the business transacted and carried on and for each separate type of business at the same location. Each license shall authorize the licensee to transact and carry on only the business licensed thereby at the location or in the manner designated in such license. Warehouses and distributing plants used in connection with and incidental to a business license under the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to be separate places of business or branch establishments. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 §5, amended, 1984)

5.04.070 Exemptions.
1. Nothing in this chapter shall be deemed or construed to apply to any person transacting and carrying on any business exempt, by virtue of the Constitution or applicable statutes of the United States or of this state, from the payment of fees prescribed by this chapter.
2. Any person claiming an exemption pursuant to this section shall file a verified statement with the business license clerk, stating facts upon which exemption is claimed.
3. The business license clerk shall, upon a proper showing contained in the verified statement, issue a license to such person claiming exemption under this section without payment to the city of the license fee required by this chapter.
4. The business license clerk, after giving notice and reasonable opportunity for hearing to a licensee, may revoke any license granted pursuant to the provisions of this section upon information that the licensee is not entitled to the exemption as provided herein.
5. Persons engaging in casual sales totaling less than $1,000.00 per calendar year are not required to pay the license fee or obtain a business license. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 § 6, amended, 1984)

5.04.080 Applications, issuance and contents.
Every person required to have a license under the provisions of this chapter shall make application for the same to the business license clerk of the city. Upon the payment of the prescribed license fee, the business license clerk shall issue to such person a license which shall contain:
1. The name of the person to whom the license is issued;
2. The business licensed;
3. The place where such business is to be transacted and carried on;
4. The date of the expiration of such license; and
5. Such other information as may be necessary for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 §7, amended, 1984)

5.04.090 Appeal from action.
Any person aggrieved by any decision of the business license clerk with respect to the issuance or refusal to issue any license may appeal first to the City Administrator and then, if necessary, to the city council by filing a notice of appeal with the clerk of the council. The city council shall thereupon fix a time and place for hearing such appeal. The clerk of the council shall give notice to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at his last known address. The city council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal. No such determination shall conflict with any substantive provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 §11, amended, 1984)

5.04.100 Transferability.
No license issued pursuant to this chapter shall be transferable except in those cases where a business is sold and the license proposed to be transferred. The grantee of such business shall present himself to the business license clerk and upon payment of the transfer fee established by the city council, the business license clerk shall transfer the business license. Where a license is issued authorizing a person to transact and carry on a business at a particular place, such licensee may, upon application therefor and paying a fee in an amount determined by the city council, have the license amended to authorize the transacting and carrying on of such business under such license at some other location to which the business is or is to be moved. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 §13, amended, 1984)

5.04.110 Duplicate license.
A duplicate license may be issued by the business license clerk to replace any license previously issued under this chapter which has been lost or destroyed, upon the licensee filing a statement of such fact, and at the time of filing such statement paying to the business license clerk a duplicate license fee as determined by the city council. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 §14, amended, 1984)

5.04.120 Posting of license.
All licenses shall be kept and posted in the following manner:
1. Any licensee transacting and carrying on business at a fixed place of business in the city shall keep a license posted in a conspicuous place upon the premises where such business is carried on.
2. Any licensee transacting and carrying on business but not operating a fixed place of business in the city shall keep a license upon his person at all times while transacting and carrying on such business. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 §15, amended, 1984)

5.04.130 License fees--When payable.
Unless otherwise specifically provided, all annual license fees required under the provisions of this chapter shall be due and payable in advance on January 1st of each year; provided, that license fees covering new operations commences after January 1st may be prorated on a monthly basis for the balance of the license period, but in no case shall the license fee be less than the minimum license fee as established by the municipal Council, and shall be due and payable on the first day said new operations commenced. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 §16, amended, 1984)

5.04.140 Failure to pay fee-- Penalty.
Business license fees are due on the first day of January, each year, for businesses existing on said date and become past due after the 31st day of January. If unpaid after the 31st day of January, the license clerk shall add a penalty of ten percent of said license fee per month; thereafter interest shall be added at the rate of one and one-half percent per month to past due accounts. Business license fees on business operations commencing after January 1st of any given year, shall be due and payable on the first day said new business operation commences and shall be past due and subject to the foregoing penalties 10 days thereafter. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 §17, amended, 1984)

5.04.150 Enforcement--Right of entry.
1. It shall be the duty of the business license clerk to enforce all of the provisions of this chapter. The chief of police shall render such assistance in the enforcement of this chapter as may from time to time be required by the business license clerk or the city council.
2. The business license clerk, in the exercise of the duties imposed upon him under this chapter, and acting through his deputies or duly authorized assistants shall examine or cause to be examined all places of business in the city to ascertain whether the provisions of this chapter have been complied with.
3. The business license clerk and each of his assistants and any police officer shall have the power and authority to enter, free of charge and at any reasonable time, any place of business required to be licensed under this chapter and demand an exhibition of its license certificate. It is unlawful for any person having any such license certificate in his possession under his control, to willfully fail to exhibit the same on demand. It shall be the duty of the business license clerk and each of his assistants to cause a criminal information to be filed against any person found to be violating any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 §18, amended, 1984)

5.04.160 Fee a debt to city.
The amount of any license fee and penalty imposed by the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed a debt to the city in any court of competent jurisdiction for the amount of any delinquent fee, penalties, and attorney fees, incurred by the city in collecting the debt. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 §19, amended, 1984)

5.04.170 Remedies cumulative.
All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative. The City is not precluded from exercising any of the remedies herein. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 § 19, amended, 1984)

5.04.180 Fee schedule.
Every person who engages in a business, trade, profession, calling or occupation within the city shall pay a license fee in the applicable amount set forth by resolution of the city council. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 106 §21, amended, 1984)

Chapter 5.05 CABLE TV NON-EXCLUSIVE FRANCHISE

Sections:
5.05.010     Grant of Franchise.
5.05.020     Definitions.
5.05.030     Franchise area and term.
5.05.040     Other Ordinances.
5.05.050     Authority Over Non-Cable Services.
5.05.060     Level Playing Field.
5.05.070     Significance of franchise.
5.05.080     Operation of the franchise.
5.05.090     Customer service.
5.05.100     Extension of network and programming.
5.05.110     Occupancy of street and public easements.
5.05.120     Rights reserved to the City.
5.05.130     Payments.
5.05.140     Subscriber privacy.
5.05.150     Acceptance of franchise.
5.05.160     Termination of franchise.
5.05.170     Liability and indemnification.

5.05.010 Grant of Franchise.
This ordinance identifies and defines the terms and conditions by which a non-exclusive franchise may be granted to erect, construct, operate and maintain, upon, along, across, above, over and under the streets, alleys, easements, public ways and public places in Lindon City, Utah, any poles, wires, cables and other conductors and fixtures necessary for the interception, sale and distribution of television signals and other services. This ordinance shall be incorporated by reference in any agreement granting a franchise for cable services within the Lindon City.

5.05.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms, phrases and words and their derivatives shall have the meaning specified herein. When not inconsistent with the context, the words used in the present tense include the future and words in the singular number include words in the plural number.
“Additional, other programming service or optional service” means information that an Operator makes available to all Subscribers generally.
“Affiliate” when used in relation to any person, means another person who owns or controls, is owned or controlled by, or is under common ownership or control with, such person.
“Basic service” means the lowest priced tier of Cable Service that includes the retransmission of local broadcast television signals.
“Cable Act” means the Title VI of the Communications Act of 1934 as currently established or as hereafter modified or amended.
“Cable Franchise Ordinance” shall mean this ordinance as approved or modified by the City Council of Lindon City.
“Cable Services” shall mean (1) the one-way transmission to Subscribers of (a) video programming, or (b) other programming service, and (2) Subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programing service.
“City” means Lindon City, Utah and such reorganized, consolidated, enlarged or reincorporated form as may exist during the term of a franchise. Any act to be performed by the City pursuant to this ordinance shall be deemed to be performed by authority of the City Council unless otherwise specifically designated or unless the City’s City Council shall specifically designate other individuals or governmental agencies to perform such acts.
    FCC. means the Federal Communications Commission and any legally appointed or elected successors.
“Franchise” means an initial authorization, or renewal thereof issued by the City, whether such authorization is designated as a Franchise, permit, license, resolution, contract, certificate, agreement or otherwise, which authorizes the construction or operation of a Cable System and includes the agreement between the City and any person or entity which incorporates and implements the privileges and covenants of this Franchise Ordinance.
“May” is permissive.
“Network or Cable System” means the facilities, consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception and control equipment that is designated to provide Cable Services which includes video programming and which is provided to multiple Subscribers within the Service Area and is authorized by this Franchise Ordinance.
“Operator” means any person or group of persons who provides Cable Service over a Cable System and directly or through one or more affiliates owns a significant interest in such Cable System, or who otherwise controls or is responsible for, through any arrangement, the management and operation of such a Cable System.
“Person” means any individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, trust, or governmental entity.
“Gross Revenues” means all revenues in whatever form, from any source, directly received by the Operator or Affiliate of the Operator that would constitute a Cable Operator of the Cable System under the Cable Act, derived from the operation of the Cable System to provide Cable Services in any manner that requires use of the Public Ways in the Service Area. Gross Revenues shall include, but are not limited to, basic, expanded basic and pay service revenues, revenues from installation, rental of converters, the applicable percentage of the sale of local and regional advertising time, cable Internet services to the extent this service is considered to be a Cable Service as defined by law, and any leased access revenues.
“Gross Revenues” do not include any fees or taxes which are imposed directly or indirectly on any Subscriber by any governmental unit or agency, and which are collected by the Grantee on behalf of a governmental unit or agency. Gross Revenues do not include franchise fees, or revenue which cannot be collected by the Grantee and are identified as bad debt; provided, that if revenue previously representing bad debt is collected, this revenue shall be included in Gross Revenues for the collection period.
“Service area” shall mean all geographical areas within the incorporated portions of the City and any area hereinafter incorporated into the City.
“Shall” and “Must” are mandatory and not merely directory.
“State” means the State of Utah.
“Street or Public Way” shall mean such of the following which have been or hereafter will be dedicated to the public or rights-of-way not dedicated to the public which the City uses or rights-of-way dedicated for compatible uses and maintained under public authority and located within the service area: streets, roadways, highways, avenues, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, easements, right-of-way and similar public ways and extensions and additions thereto, together with such other public property and areas that the City shall permit to be included within the definition of street from time to time which shall entitle the City and the Operator to the use thereof for the purpose of installing, operating, repairing, and maintaining the Cable System.
“Subscriber” shall mean any person who with the knowledge and permission of an Operator received either basic service or additional or optional service from the Operator.

5.05.030 Franchise area and term.
1. Franchise area. The franchise area shall include all of the service area.
2. Franchise term. A franchise may be granted for up to fifteen (15) years. The specific term of franchise together with the effective and expiration dates shall be specified in the franchise agreement.

5.05.040 Other Ordinances.
The Operator shall be subject to the terms of any lawfully adopted generally applicable local ordinance, to the extent that the provisions of the ordinance do not have the effect of limiting the benefits or expanding the obligations of the Operator that are granted by a Franchise. Neither the City nor the Operator may unilaterally alter the material rights and obligations set forth in a Franchise, provided however that the Operator agrees that it is subject to the lawful exercise of the police power of the City.

5.05.050 Authority Over Non-Cable Services.
To the extent allowed by law, the City shall retain the authority to regulate and receive compensation for Non-Cable Services. If the Operator is allowed by law and chooses to provide Non-Cable Services, the Operator and the City will negotiate the terms and fees in accordance with applicable law.

5.05.060 Level Playing Field.
The City shall not authorize or permit any Person providing video programming services to enter into the City’s Public Ways in any part of the Service Area on terms or conditions more favorable or less burdensome to such Person than those applied to an Operator pursuant to a Franchise, in order that one Operator not be granted an unfair competitive advantage over another, and to provide all parties equal protection under the law.

5.05.070 Significance of franchise.
1. Franchise non-exclusive. No franchise agreement shall be exclusive. The City reserves the right to grant a similar franchise to any person at any time in accordance with applicable law.
2. Authority granted. Execution of a franchise agreement between the City and an Operator shall grant to the Operator the right and privilege to construct, erect, operate, modify, and maintain in, upon, along, above, over and under the streets, alleys, easements (including all easements occupied by any utility operated by the City or any public easements which are occupied by utilities or other compatible uses), public ways and public places and on all poles or through such conduit as may exist, such towers, antennas, cable, electronic equipment, and other network appurtenances necessary for the operation of the network in the City; provided, however, that the exercise of such right and privilege shall not interfere with the use of such streets by the City and such others as designated by the City to use such streets and public ways, and provided that the exercise of such right and privilege shall not be in conflict with any ordinance, procedure, code or regulation of the City.
3. Consent prior to transfer of franchise. The franchise described herein is a privilege to be held for the benefit of the public. The franchise shall not be sold, transferred, leased, assigned or disposed of, including, but not limited to, by force or voluntary sale, merger, consolidation, receivership, foreclosure or other means without the express written consent of the City Council of the City; provided, however, that denial of such consent shall not be unreasonable, arbitrary or capricious. No such consent shall be required, however, for a transfer in trust, by mortgage, by other hypothecation, or by assignment of any rights, title, or interest of the Operator in the Franchise or Cable System in order to secure indebtedness. Within thirty (30) days of receiving a request for transfer, the City shall notify the Operator in writing of any additional information it reasonably requires to determine the legal, financial and technical qualifications of the transferee. If the City has not taken action on the Operator’s request for transfer within one hundred twenty (120) days after receiving such request, consent by the City shall be deemed given. In no event shall a transfer of ownership be effective without a successor in interest becoming a signatory to the franchise agreement by providing the City written acceptance of all provisions of this Franchise ordinance in a form acceptable to the City. Failure to provide acceptable written acceptance shall be cause for revocation of the franchise.
4. Mortgage or pledge of network. Nothing in this ordinance shall be deemed to prohibit the mortgage or the pledge of any franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance, or of the Network or any part thereof or a leasing by the Operator from another person of said Network or part thereof for financing purposes. However, any such mortgage, pledge or lease shall be subject to the rights of the City under this Ordinance and other applicable laws.
5. No right of property. Anything contained herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the award of any franchise shall not impart to any Operator any right of ownership of streets or City-owned property or ownership of easement.
6. Franchise binding. Upon execution of a franchise agreement, this ordinance shall be binding upon the Operator, its successors, lessees or assignees and the City. This ordinance shall be binding upon any entity which is controlled by, or under common control with, the Operator.
7. Compliance with laws, rules and regulations. The Operator, at its expense, shall comply with all laws, orders and regulations of federal, state and municipal authorities and with any direction of any public officer or officers pursuant to law who shall legally impose any regulations, orders or duties upon the Operator.

5.05.080 Operation of the franchise.
1. Operator rules and regulations. The Operator may adopt rules, regulations, terms, and conditions governing the conduct of its business as are reasonable necessary to enable the Operator to exercise its rights and perform its obligations under the franchise. Any such rules, regulations, terms and conditions shall be in compliance with this ordinance and with applicable state and federal laws, rules and regulations. Upon request by the City, copies of all rules, regulations, terms and conditions including subscriber agreements together with any amendments, additions, or deletions thereto, shall be kept currently on file with the city official designated to enforce provisions of the Franchise ordinance. Subscriber agreements shall give notice of the office or manager of the Operator to whom complaints shall be directed.
2. Transmission signals. The Operator shall be responsible for insuring that the Cable System is designed, installed and operated in a manner that is in compliance with the technical and performance standards of the FCC rules in Subpart K of Part 76 of Chapter I of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations as revised or amended from time to time. The Operator shall maintain tests and records in accordance with these rules and shall provide access to such documentation to the City upon reasonable request; however, the City has no authority, pursuant to federal law, to enforce compliance with such standards.
3. Signal disruption. Excluding conditions beyond its control, the Operator shall respond to subscriber outage or poor signal reception as expediently as reasonably possible after receipt of any subscriber complaint, and in any event within twenty-four (24) hours after the disruption becomes known. Service and technical employees of the Operator shall be clearly identified as employees of the Operator. Repairs to the network shall be made with as little interruption of service as possible. When possible, planned interruptions shall be scheduled at times of minimum subscriber viewing.
4. Complaint file–and reports. The Operator shall keep an accurate and comprehensive file of all complaints regarding the cable communications system and the Operator’s actions in response to those complaints. The Operator shall also maintain a log and summary of all service interruptions. The files shall be available for inspection by the City during normal business hours provided such inspection does not conflict with the privacy provisions of the Cable Act and this Ordinance.
5. Notification of access to property. The Operator shall provide reasonable notice to subscribers and property owners before it enters upon or crosses any private property in order to access a public easement or right of way. For any type of construction, reasonable notice shall include personal contact with the owner or resident (at least 18 years of age) at least three (3) days prior to the access. If personal contact cannot be made, reasonable notice shall include mailing or posting the property with a description of the work to be done, the purpose of the work, the date and time of the work, and the authority under which the Operator may have access. All notices whether written or in person shall include a telephone number that individuals may call to ask questions or obtain additional information.
6. Restoration by Operator. The Operator shall repair, refill, replace and otherwise restore at its own expense any private or public property disrupted or managed as a result of excavation, construction, maintenance, or repair that may be caused by it and shall leave all ways and places in as reasonable good condition as that prevailing prior to the Operator’s activities without affecting any electrical or telephone cable, wire, or attachments and poles.
7. Restoration by City–Reimbursement of costs. In the event of a failure by the Operator to complete within a reasonable period of time any restoration work required by this ordinance, or any other work required by City ordinance, within the time established and to the satisfaction of the City, the City shall give the Operator, by registered mail, five (5) working days’ notice to correct the failure. If the failure is not corrected within the five (5) day period, the City may cause such work to be done and the Operator shall reimburse the City the costs thereof within thirty (30) days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs.
8. Notification of change in service. The Operator shall provide reasonable notice to subscribers and the City of any changes in service including but not limited to changes in available channels, tiers of service, and costs of services. Reasonable notice shall include printed notice to all subscribers and a letter to the City which details the change in service distributed at least thirty (30) days prior to the effective date of the change.
9. Rates. The Operator shall establish rates for its services and shall apply those rates uniformly to all subscribers in the service area. The Operator may conduct promotional campaigns in which its rates are discounted or waived, or offer bulk discounts for multiple dwelling units, hotels, motels, and similar institutions. The City may regulate rates to the extent now or hereafter permitted by applicable law.
10. Compliance, Books and Records. The Operator shall allow the City, upon thirty (30) days written notice, to review such of its books and records at the Operator’s business office, during normal business hours and on a non-disruptive basis, as is reasonably necessary to ensure compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and/or the Franchise. Such notice shall specifically reference the Section of the Ordinance and/or Franchise which is under review, so that the Operator may organize the necessary books and records for easy access by the City. Alternatively, if the books and records are not easily accessible at the local office of the Operator, the Operator may, at its sole option, choose to pay the reasonable travel costs of the City’s representative to view the books and records at the appropriate location. The Operator shall not be required to maintain any books and records for compliance purposes longer than three (3) years. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth herein, the Operator shall not be required to disclose information which it reasonably deems to be proprietary or confidential in nature, nor disclose books or records of any affiliate which is not providing Cable Service in the Service Area. The City agrees to treat any information disclosed by the Operator as confidential and only to disclose it to employees, representatives, and agents thereof that have a need to know, or in order to enforce the provisions hereof. The Operator shall not be required to provide Subscriber information in violation of Section 631 of the Cable Act.
11. Availability of reports to the public. Such reports as required under this ordinance must be available to the public in the office of the Operator during normal business hours.
12. Legal proceedings. Operator shall notify the City in writing of any actions, suits, proceedings, or investigations at law or in equity before or by a Court, public board or body, pending or threatened against or affecting Operator, wherein a decision, finding or ruling would have a materially adverse effect on the Operator’s ability to construct or operate the network.

5.05.090 Customer service.
1. The Operator will maintain a local, toll-free or collect call telephone access line which will be available to Subscribers twenty-four hours a day, seven days a week.
    a. Trained representatives of the Operator will be available to respond to Subscriber telephone inquiries during Normal Business Hours.
    b. After Normal Business Hours, an access line will be available to be answered by a service or an automated response system, including a phone answering system. Inquiries received after Normal Business Hours must be responded to by a trained representative of the Operator on the next business day.
2. Under Normal Operating Conditions, telephone answer time by a customer representative, including wait time, will not exceed thirty seconds when the connection is made. If the call needs to be transferred, transfer time will not exceed thirty seconds. These standards will be met no less than ninety percent of the time under Normal Operating Conditions, as measured by the Operator on a quarterly basis.
3. The Operator shall not be required to acquire equipment or perform surveys to measure compliance with the telephone answering standards set forth above unless a historical record of complaints indicates a clear failure to comply with the standards.
4. Under Normal Operating Conditions, the Subscriber will receive a busy signal less than three percent of the time.
5. Customer service center and bill payment locations will be open during Normal Business Hours and will be conveniently located.
6. Notice to subscribers. At the time of entering into an agreement to provide service, once a year thereafter and at any time upon request, the Operator shall provide each subscriber with written information concerning:
    a. The procedures for making inquiries or complaints, including the name, address, and local telephone number of the employee or agent of the Operator to whom inquiries or complaints are to be directed, if applicable.
    b. Credit for interrupted service, policies and practices.
    c. The City official designated to be responsible for regulating the franchise, including the name and telephone number of the official.
    d. The Operator’s business hours, legal holidays, telephone number, and procedures for responding to inquiries after normal business hours.
    e. Products and services offered.
    f. Prices and options for services and conditions of subscription to programming and other services.
    g. Installation and service maintenance policies.
    h. Instructions on how to use the service.
    i. Channel positions of programming carried on the Cable System.
7. The costs associated with providing the annual notice shall be subject to the cost limitations of the 1984 Cable Act, or other applicable law.

5.05.100 Extension of network and programming.
1. Extension throughout service area. The Operator shall design and construct the cable communications system in such a manner as to pass by every single-family dwelling unit, multifamily dwelling unit, school, and public agency within the service area so long as it is financially and technically feasible. Service shall be extended to all properties where a minimum of ten (10) living units are occupied within a quarter linear mile of cable system. New construction shall be in accordance with an annual schedule accepted and approved by the City.
2. Non-discriminating service. Construction of the network shall be performed by the Operator in such a manner as to ensure that no group of potential subscribers is denied access to services because of the income level of the group or because of the relative cost of extending services into the particular area in which the group resides; provided however, that such extension may be denied based upon the density requirements stated above.
3. Service to public facilities. Upon request, the Operator shall provide one basic service outlet to all City buildings, fire houses, police stations, public or private schools, and libraries which are within the City and are passed by the Cable System. The Cable Service provided shall not be used for commercial purposes, and such outlets shall not be located in areas open to the public. The City shall take reasonable precautions to prevent any use of the Cable system in any manner that results in the inappropriate use thereof or any loss or damage to the Cable System. The City shall hold the Operator harmless from any and all liability or claims arising out of the provision and use of Cable Service required by this subsection. The Operator shall not be required to provide an outlet to such buildings where a non-standard installation is required, unless the City or building owner/occupant agrees to pay the incremental cost of any necessary Cable System extension and/or non-Standard Installation. An additional service outlet shall also be provided in each room or area where television reception is desired in any of the above-mentioned building, provided that the Operator shall be reimbursed its actual cost for labor and materials required in the installation of such service outlets which are additional to the main outlet, but no service or other charge will be made after installation.
4. Educational and governmental channels. The City shall have exclusive right to the use of dedicated channels for educational and governmental purposes, (the “City Access Channels”). The Operator shall make available one channel to be used for educational and governmental cablecast programming. When first-run programming on the first City Access Channel occupies fifty percent of the hours between 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m., for any twelve consecutive weeks, the City may request the use of one additional channel for the same purpose. The additional channel must maintain programming twenty-five percent (25%) of the hours between 11:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. for twelve consecutive weeks. If this level of programming is not maintained for any channel, that channel will return to the Operator for its use. The Operator also reserves the right to program the designated City Access Channel (2) during the hours not used by the City or other governmental entities. The channel(s) shall be shared with other municipalities receiving programming from the common headend receive site location. The City shall agree to indemnify, save and hold harmless the Operator from and against any liability resulting from the use of the aforementioned City Access Channel(s) by the City. The City may require as part of a Franchise authorization that the Operator prospectively provide a “Capital Contribution,” paid annually during the remaining term of the Franchise, to be used specifically for educational and governmental access. The City shall give the Operator ninety (90) days’ notice of such a requirement. The amount of the Capital Contribution payable by the Operator to the City shall be designated in the Franchise. The City agrees that all amounts due to the City by the Operator as the Capital Contribution may be added to the price of cable services, prorated monthly, and collected from the Operator’s Subscribers as “external costs,” as such term is used in 47 C.F.R. 76.922. In addition, all amounts paid as the Capital Contribution may be separately stated on Subscriber’s bills as permitted in 47 C.F.R. 76.985. The Capital Contribution will be payable by Operator to the City after;
    a. The approval of the City, if required to the inclusion of the Capital Contribution on Subscribers’ bills including any required approval pursuant to 47 C.F.R. 76.933;
    b. Notice to Operator’s Subscribers of the inclusion; and
    c. The collection of the Capital Contribution by the Operator from its subscribers. The “Capital Contributions” are not to be considered in the calculation of Franchise Fees pursuant to this Ordinance.

5.05.110 Occupancy of street and public easements.
1. Existing facilities. The Operator shall utilize existing poles, conduits, and other facilities whenever feasible and shall not construct or install any new, different, or additional poles, conduits, or other facilities whether on public or private property until the written approval of the City is obtained.
2. Underground installation. The facilities of the Operator shall be installed underground to the fullest extent possible. In areas where either telephone or electric utility facilities are installed aerially at the time of construction of the Network the Operator may install its facilities aerially with the understanding that at such time as both telephone and electrical facilities are relocated underground, the Operator shall likewise place its facilities underground. Previously installed aerial cable shall be relocated with other utilities at the Operator’s cost when the other utilities convert from aerial to underground construction. Any streets or sidewalks damaged or disturbed in the construction or operation of Operator’s poles, cable and other installations shall be promptly repaired and restored by the Operator at its expense and to the reasonable satisfaction of the City.
3. Location and condition. The Operator shall locate all transmission lines, equipment, and structures so as to cause minimum interference with the rights and reasonable convenience of property owners. The Operator shall install and maintain its lines, equipment and structures in accordance with the requirements of the National Electrical Safety Code promulgated by the National Bureau of Standards and the National Electrical Code of the National Board of Fire Underwriters.
4. Excavation permits. The Operator shall not open or disturb the surface of any street, sidewalk, driveway, or public place for any purpose without first obtaining a permit of general applicability to do so from the City. In addition, where existing conduit or backyard easements are not available for underground installation, the Operator shall design the network in such a manner as to permit construction behind and parallel with street curbing, in parking strips, or under the sidewalks where available, with a minimum of street excavation.
5. Easements. Prior to the installation of any of Operator’s facilities in a parking strip or public utility easements by Operator, Operator shall provide advance written notification to any property owners on whose property the easement is located. Such advance notification shall be delivered at least two (2) days prior to installation of such facilities. Such notification shall set forth the date during which Operator may be installing facilities in the public utility easement, and shall provide a telephone number where property owners may call Operator pertaining to any questions or complaints concerning use of the public utility easement by Operator. Upon commencement of installation of facilities in a public utility easement, the Operator shall proceed diligently to complete that installation. No trenches or otherwise uncovered areas shall be left open longer than necessary to complete the installation.
6. Changes required by public improvements. The Operator shall at its expense, temporarily disconnect, relocate or remove from the street or other public place any property of the Operator when required by the City by reason of traffic conditions, public safety, street vacation, street construction, street repair, installation or repair of sewer drains, water pipes, or any other type of structure or improvement by public agencies. If the City elects to change the grade of any street or public way, or to vacate or otherwise alter the same, the Operator shall relocate its poles and other installations at Operator’s expense.
7. Protection of facilities. Nothing contained in this section shall relieve the City of any person, company or corporation from liability arising out of the failure to exercise reasonable care to avoid damaging the Operator’s facilities while performing work connected with grading, regrading, or changing the line of any street or public place or with the construction or reconstruction of any sewer or water system.
8. Requests for removal or change. The Operator shall, at the request of any person holding a building or moving permit, temporarily raise or lower its wires to permit the building or moving to proceed.
The expense of such temporary removal, raising or lowering of wires shall be paid by the person requesting the action, and the Operator shall have the authority to require such payment in advance. The Operator shall be given no less than five (5) days written notice of any move contemplated to arrange for temporary wire changes.
9. Authority to trim trees. After receiving written consent from the City the Operator shall have the authority to trim trees, upon and overhanging streets, alleys, sidewalks, and other public places of the City so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming into contact with the wires and cables of the Operator. Provided, however, that in the event of an emergency, no consent shall be necessary to remedy the emergency. The same requirements for notice that are specified for access to private property shall be required prior to trimming trees.
10. Restoration or reimbursements. In the event of disturbance of any street or private property by the Operator, the Operator shall, at its own expense and in a manner approved by the city or the owner, replace and restore such street or private property in as reasonable good a condition as before the work was done. All restoration work shall be guaranteed by the Operator for a period of one year to be free from material defects. In the event there is any problem with restoration work, the Operator shall, upon written notice from the City, repair the defect within fifteen (15) days (weather permitting) of receiving notice unless otherwise agreed upon by the City. In the event Operator fails to perform such replacement or restoration, the City shall have the right to do so at the sole expense of Operator.
11. Emergency removal of network. If in the case of fire or disaster in the City it shall become necessary in the reasonable judgment of the City to cut or move any of the wires, cables, amplifiers or other such appurtenances to the Network of the Operator, such cutting or moving may be completed after a reasonable attempt to contact the Operator has been made. Any repairs rendered necessary thereby shall be made by the Operator at its sole expense.
12. Alternate routing of network. In the event continued use of a street or other easement or right-of-way is denied to the Operator by the City, the Operator shall provide service to the effected subscribers over alternate routes within a reasonable period of time agreed upon by the City so long as it is financially and technically feasible to do so.

5.05.120 Rights reserved to the City.
1. Operator agrees to the City’s right. The City reserves such rights and powers, including the lawful exercise of police power, which under applicable Federal, State or City law or regulations, the City must reserve and maintain. The Operator agrees to comply with all rules and regulations now in effect or hereafter adopted by the City, the Federal Communications Commission, the State of Utah and the United States Government.

5.05.130 Payments.
1. Franchise fee. The Operator shall pay to the City on a quarterly basis, on or before April 30, July 30, October 31, and January 31 of each year, a percent of the total Gross Revenues (as defined in this Ordinance) of the Operator during the immediate past quarter together with a financial statement listing the gross receipts and revenues of the Operator during that quarter. The percent of total Gross Revenues shall equal the percent in the Franchise and shall be consistent with applicable law. Notwithstanding anything contained herein to the contrary and in the event that the City is authorized by federal law to either increase or decrease the maximum permissible franchise fee amount, then the City shall have the right to change the franchise fee amount, without the consent of the Operator, provided that the Operator has received at least ninety (90) days prior written notice from the City of such change.
2. Verification. All books and records showing the Gross Revenues of the Operator shall be open at all reasonable times to the inspection of the City or agent appointed by the City in order to insure compliance with the terms of this Ordinance and/or the Franchise.
3. Additional compensation. In any payment amount is not made on or before the dates specified, the Operator shall pay interest on the amount due at the prime rate as listed in the Wall Street Journal on the date that the payment was due, compounded daily, calculated from the date the payment was originally due until the date the City receives the payment. The acceptance of any payment by the City may not be construed as a release or as an accord and satisfaction of any claim the City may have for further and additional sums payable as a franchise fee under this ordinance or for the performance of any other obligation of the Operator.
4. Pass-through fees. Any Operator “Pass-through” or itemization of franchise fee costs on subscribers’ bills shall be in accordance with applicable law.

5.05.140 Subscriber privacy.
An Operator shall fully comply with any provisions regarding the privacy rights of Subscribers contained in federal, state, and local law.

5.05.150 Acceptance of franchise.
1. Effective date of franchise. A franchise, together with the rights, privileges and authority granted thereby, shall take effect and being forced immediately upon adoption of the franchise agreement by the City Council of the City, and compliance by the Operator with the following:
    a. The Operator shall properly execute the franchise agreement.
    b. The Operator shall establish the surety bond as required by this section if such bond is required.
    c. The Operator shall file with the City a certificate of insurance as required by this section.
    d. The Operator shall advise the City in writing of its local office and its address for mail and official notifications from the City.
2. Surety bond. The City may upon execution of the franchise agreement, require the Operator to provide an irrevocable, non-canceling surety bond to the sole benefit of the City in the amount of ten thousand dollars ($10,000.00). The surety bond shall be in a form approved by the City and shall be maintained throughout the term of the franchise. The surety company shall be authorized to transact surety business in the State of Utah. Multiple and partial drawings on the bond shall be permitted. The surety bond shall be established as security to the City for the faithful performance of the Operator of all the provisions of this Ordinance and compliance with all orders, permits, and directions of any agency of the City having jurisdiction over the Operator’s acts or defaults under the franchise or any other provision of the City code. The bond shall also act as security to the City for the payment by the Operator of any claims, liens, and taxes due to the City that arise by reason of the construction, operation, or maintenance of the Network. No demands shall be made on the surety bond without providing the Operator opportunity to correct the default. Within thirty (30) days of notice that any amount has been demanded from the surety bond, the Operator shall restore the bond to the original amount.
3. Public liability insurance. Upon execution of the franchise agreement, the Operator shall provide proof of general comprehensive liability insurance coverage protecting the City against liability for loss or damage for personal injury, death, or property damage, occasioned by the operations of Operator under this ordinance in the amount of: (a) $500,000.00 for bodily injury or death to any one person, within the limits, however, of $1,000,000.00 for bodily injury or death resulting from any one accident, (b) $500,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident, and (c) worker’s compensation insurance coverage as may be required by the worker’s compensation insurance and safety laws of the State of Utah and amendments thereto. The insurance policies referred to above shall contain an endorsement stating that the policies are extended to cover the liability assumed by the Operator under the terms of this ordinance and shall contain the following endorsements:
It is hereby understood and agreed that this policy may not be canceled nor the amount of coverage thereof reduced until thirty (30) days after receipt by Lindon City by registered mail of written notice of such intent to cancel or reduce the coverage.
4. Evidence of insurance filed with city. Certificates of insurance for all insurance policies shall be filed and maintained with the City during the term of the franchise or any renewal thereof. Certified copies of the insurance policies shall be provided to the City upon reasonable request.
5. Inducements–Not offered. The Operator, by acceptance of the franchise agreement, acknowledges that it has not been induced to accept the franchise by any understanding or promise or other statement, whether verbal or written, by or on behalf of the City concerning any term or condition of the franchise.
6. Operator accepts terms of the franchise. The Operator, by acceptance of the franchise agreement, acknowledges that it has thoroughly examined, is familiar with, and agrees to be bound by the terms of conditions of this ordinance.

5.05.160 Termination of franchise.
1. Termination of franchise. The Operator may, at its option, terminate the franchise and surrender all rights and privileges associated with the franchise upon filing with the City a written notification of its intent to terminate the franchise and surrender all rights thereunder. Any such termination shall not become effective for a period of ninety (90) days from the date on which the Operator files notifications with the City. Operator shall remain liable for any breach of the franchise notwithstanding said termination.
2. Termination by city. A franchise may be terminated by the City for any material violation of the franchise but only after a hearing before the City Council. Prior to setting a termination hearing, the Operator shall be given at least sixty (60) days’ notice by certified mail that the Operator has violated a material provision of the franchise and that the City Council will consider setting a termination hearing. The notice shall include a description of the violation which is grounds for conducting a termination hearing. In the event that the Operator has not cured the matter which constitutes a material violation of the franchise within the sixty (60) days’ notice period, or has not commenced, in the opinion of the City, reasonable and diligent efforts to cure the matter, the City Council may set a public hearing to determine whether or not the franchise should be terminated. The City shall provide thirty (30) days written notice to the Operator of the date and time of the termination hearing. The hearing shall be a full public proceeding affording due process. The City Council shall consider the evidence and determine whether or not the franchise should be terminated. The Operator may appeal such determination to an appropriate court, which shall have the power to review the decision of the City de novo. Such appeal to the appropriate court must be taken within sixty (60) days of the issuance of the determination of the City.
3. Ownership of network. Upon termination of a franchise, the Operator shall retain ownership of the network and shall be entitled at its option and expense to transfer or abandon the network. Any transfer of franchise and any transfer of ownership of the network shall meet the conditions of section 4, paragraph D, the Cable Act, and other applicable law. Should Operator elect to remove the network, and/or any part thereof, upon termination of a franchise, Operator shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation that shall be made by it and shall leave all public ways and places in as good condition as that prevailing prior to Operator’s removal of the network, without affecting any electrical or telephone cables, wires, or attachments, and poles after removal. The liability insurance and indemnity as provided herein shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until substantial compliance by Operator with the terms and conditions of this subsection. In the event of a failure by Operator to complete any work required by this subsection or any other work required by this ordinance, the City may cause such work to be done and Operator shall reimburse the City the reasonable costs thereof within ninety (90) days after receipt of an itemized list of such costs.

5.05.170 Liability and indemnification.
1. Indemnification of City in franchise operation. The Operator shall fully indemnify, defend and hold harmless the City, its officers, boards, commissions, elected officials, agents, attorneys, representative, servants and employees against any and all costs, damages, expenses, claims, suits, actions, liabilities, and judgments for damages, including but not limited to, expenses for legal fees, whether suit be brought or not, whether meritorious or frivolous, and disbursements and liabilities incurred by the City and arising out of, directly or indirectly, or related to, the operation of the Operator’s cable television system including but not by way of limitation in connection with the following:
    a. Damage to persons or property, in any way arising out of or through the acts or omissions of the Operator, its servants, officials, agents, attorneys, representatives, or employees or to which the Operator’s negligence or that of its servants, agents, officials, attorneys, representative, or employees shall in any way contribute;
    b. Request for relief in connection with any programming carried on the operator’s cable system arising out of any claim for invasion of the right of privacy; for defamation of any person, firm or corporation; for the infringement or violation of any copyright, trademark, trade name, service mark or patent; or of any other right of any person, firm, or corporation;
    c. Any and all claims arising out of the Operator’s failure to comply with the provisions of this Franchise ordinance or any Federal, State, or local law, ordinance, or regulation applicable to the Operator of the Network.
2. Defense of the City. If suit for which the Operator has agreed to indemnify the city as set forth in the preceding subsection is brought or threatened against the City, either independently or jointly with the operator, or with any other person or municipality; the Operator, upon timely written notice given by the City, shall defend the City at the cost of the Operator. No right of indemnification shall be effective until such notice and a copy of the suit or other action for which indemnification is sought is provided to the Operator. If final judgment is obtained against the City either independently or jointly with the Operator or any of the defendants, the Operator shall indemnify the City and pay such judgment with all costs and satisfy and discharge the same as against the City in accordance with this section.
3. Cooperation in defense of City. In the event that the City elects to invoke its right of indemnification as set forth in this Ordinance, the City will cooperate with the reasonable requests of Operator in defending the City against any and all claims for which indemnification is sought. The Operator shall be subrogated to all rights of the City and, in defending the City, shall be entitled to assert any defense to any third-party claim which the City would be entitled to assert. The City may, in its sole discretion, elect to conduct its own defense at its own expense by giving the Operator written notice of the City’s intent to provide its own defense and, upon such election, the Operator shall have no further duty to indemnify the City for any costs or liabilities with respect to such claims.
4. Governmental immunity. The City is in no manner or means waiving any governmental immunity it may enjoy or any immunity for its agents, officials, servants, attorneys, representatives, and/or employees.
5. Notification of settlements. The Operator shall make no settlement in any matter identified above without the City’s written consent which shall not be unreasonably withheld. Failure to inform the City of settlement shall constitute a breach of this Franchise ordinance and the city may seek any redress available to it against the Operator whether set forth in this Franchise ordinance or under any other municipal, state or federal laws, or common law. In the event that the City fails to accept any bona fide settlement offer which the Operator is willing to accept and pay as full settlement of any claim or claims for which it is required to indemnify the City, the Operator’s indemnification liability to the City with respect to said claim or claims under this Ordinance shall be limited to the terms of the settlement offer and the Operator shall be excused from any further indemnification to, or incurring any additional costs on behalf of, the City with respect to said claim or claims.
6. Additional rights. All rights of the City pursuant to indemnification, insurance, surety bond, or performance bonds, as provided for by this Franchise ordinance, are in addition to all other rights the City may have under this Franchise Ordinance or any other Ordinance, rule, regulation, or law.
7. Exercise of rights. The City’s or the Operator’s exercise of or failure to exercise any rights pursuant to any section of this Franchise Ordinance shall not affect in any way the right of the City or the Operator subsequently to exercise any such rights or any other right of the City or the Operator under this Franchise Ordinance or any other ordinance, rule, regulation, or law.
8. Reasonable indemnification. It is the purpose of this section to provide reasonable indemnification to the City under the terms and conditions expressed and, in the event of a dispute, this section shall be construed (to the greatest extent permitted by law) to provide for the indemnification of the City by the Operator in accordance with its terms.
9. Validity of section. The provisions of this section shall not be dependent or conditioned upon the validity of this Franchise Ordinance or the validity of any of the procedures or agreements involved in the renewal of the franchise, but shall be and remain a binding right and obligation of the City and the Operator even if part or all of this Franchise Ordinance, or the grant or renewal of the franchise, is declared null and void in a legal or administrative proceeding. It is expressly the intent of the Operator and the City that the provisions of this section survive any such declaration and shall be a binding obligation of and inure to the benefit of the Operator and the City and their respective successors and assigns (if any) with respect to any claims arising out of or related to, directly or indirectly, the operation of the cable system.
10. An Operator shall not be held in default under, or in noncompliance with, the provisions of the Ordinance and/or Franchise, nor suffer any enforcement or penalty relating to noncompliance or default, where such noncompliance or alleged defaults occurred or were caused by circumstances reasonably beyond the ability of Operator to anticipate and control. This provision includes work delays caused by waiting for utility providers to service or monitor their utility poles to which the Operator’s Cable System is attached, as well as unavailability of materials and/or qualified labor to perform the work necessary.
11. It is not the City’s intention to subject an Operator to penalties, fines, forfeitures or revocation of a Franchise for violations of the Franchise where the violation was a good faith error that resulted in no or minimal negative impact on the Subscribers within the Service Area, or where strict performance would result in practical difficulties and hardship to the Operator which outweigh the benefit to be derived by the City and/or Subscribers.
12. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word of this ordinance is for any reason held invalid by the FCC or unconstitutional by any court or competent jurisdiction, such section, subsection, sentence, clause, phrase, or word shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof or of this Ordinance. The Operator shall not be bound by the provisions of any ordinances which are inconsistent with the terms of this Franchise Ordinance. (Ord. 2002-13, repealed and replaced, 2002; Ord. 14-94, amended, 1994)

Chapter 5.06 TELECOMMUNICATIONS RIGHTS-OF-WAY ORDINANCE

Sections:
5.06.010     Declaration of Finding and Intent.
5.06.020     Scope of Ordinance.
5.06.030     Excluded Activity.
5.06.040     Provisions Applicable to Excluded Providers.
5.06.050     Definitions.
5.06.060     Non – Exclusive Franchise.
5.06.070     Every Provider Must Obtain.
5.06.080     Nature of Grant.
5.06.090     Current Providers.
5.06.100     Nature of Franchise.
5.06.110     Regulatory Approval Needed.
5.06.120     Term.
5.06.130     Compensation.
5.06.140     Failure to pay fees or obtain permits.
5.06.150     Timing.
5.06.160     Fee Statement and Certification.
5.06.170     Future Costs.
5.06.180     Taxes and Assessments.
5.06.190     Interest on Late Payments.
5.06.200     No Accord and Satisfaction.
5.06.210     Not in Lieu of Other Taxes or Fees.
5.06.220     Continuing Obligation and Holdover.
5.06.230     Costs of Publication.
5.06.240     Franchise Application.
5.06.250     Application Criteria.
5.06.260     Franchise Determination.
5.06.270     General Requirement.
5.06.280     Quality.
5.06.290     Licenses and Permits.
5.06.300     Relocation of the System.
5.06.310     No Obstruction.
5.06.320     Safety Precautions.
5.06.330     Repair.
5.06.340     System Maintenance.
5.06.350     Trimming of Trees.
5.06.360     Notification of Sale.
5.06.370     Insurance, Indemnity, and Security.
5.06.380     Oversight.
5.06.390     Maintain Records.
5.06.400     Confidentiality.
5.06.410     Provider’s Expense.
5.06.420     Right of Inspection.
5.06.430     Enforcement and Remedies.
5.06.440     Extended Operation and Continuity of Services.
5.06.450     Removal or Abandonment of Franchise Property.
5.06.460     Publicizing Work.
5.06.470     Conflicts.
5.06.480     Severability.
5.06.490     New Developments.
5.06.500     Notices.
5.06.510     Exercise of Police Power.
5.06.520     Construction.
5.06.530     Ordinance Applicability.
5.06.540     Other Applicable Ordinances.
5.06.550     City Failure to Enforce.
5.06.560     Construed According to Utah Law.

5.06.010 Declaration of Finding and Intent.
1. Findings Regarding Rights-of-Way. The City of Lindon finds that the Rights-of-Way within the City:
    a. are critical to the travel and transport of persons and property in the business and social life of the City;
    b. are intended for public uses and must be managed and controlled consistent with that intent;
    c. can be partially occupied by the facilities of utilities and other public service entities delivering utility and public services rendered for profit, to the enhancement of the health, welfare, and general economic well-being of the City and its citizens; and
    d. are a unique and physically limited resource requiring proper management to maximize the efficiency and to minimize the costs to the taxpayers of the foregoing uses and to minimize the inconvenience to and negative effects upon the public from such facilities’ construction, placement, relocation, and maintenance in the Rights-of-Way.
2. Finding Regarding Compensation. The City finds that the City should receive fair and reasonable compensation for use of the Rights-of-Way.
3. Finding Regarding Local Concern. The City finds that while Telecommunications Systems are in part an extension of interstate commerce, their operations also involve Rights-of-Way, municipal franchising, and vital business and community service, which are of local concern.
4. Finding regarding Promotion of Telecommunications Services. The City finds that it is in the best interests of its taxpayers and citizens to promote the development of Telecommunications Services, on a nondiscrimination basis, responsive to community and public interest, and to assure availability for municipal, educational and community services.
5. Findings Regarding Franchise Standards. The City finds that it is in the interests of the public to Franchise and to establish standards for franchising Providers in a manner that:
    a. fairly and reasonably compensates the City on a competitively neutral and non-discriminatory basis as provided herein;
    b. encourages competition by establishing terms and conditions under which Providers may use the Rights-of-Way to serve the public;
    c. fully protects the public interests and the City from any harm that may flow from such commercial use of Rights-of-Way;
    d. protects the police powers and Rights-of-Way management authority of the City, in a manner consistent with federal and state law;
    e. otherwise protects the public interests in the development and use of the City infrastructure;
    f. protects the public’s investment in improvements in the Rights-of-Way; and
    g. ensures that no barriers to entry of Telecommunications Providers are created and that such franchising is accomplished in a manner that does not prohibit or have the effect of prohibiting Telecommunication Services, within the meaning of the Telecommunications Act of 1996 (“Act”) [P.L. No. 104-104].
6. Power to Manage Rights-of-Way. The City adopts this Telecommunications Ordinance pursuant to its power to manage the Rights-of-Way, pursuant to common law, the Utah Constitution and statutory authority, and receive fair and reasonable, compensation for the use of Rights-of-Way by Providers as expressly set forth by Section 253 of the Act.

5.06.020 Scope of Ordinance.
This Ordinance shall provide the basic local scheme for Providers of Telecommunications Services and Systems that require the use of the Rights-of-Way, including Providers of both the System and Service, those Providers of the System only, and those Providers who do not build the System but who only provide Services. This Ordinance shall apply to all future Providers and to all Providers in the City prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, whether operating with or without a Franchise as set forth in Section 5.06.530.

5.06.030 Excluded Activity.
1. Cable TV. This Ordinance shall not apply to cable television operators otherwise regulated by Chapter 5.05 (the “Cable Television Ordinance”).
2. Wireless Services. This Ordinance shall not apply to Personal Wireless Service Facilities.

5.06.040 Provisions Applicable to Excluded Providers.
Providers excused by other law that prohibits the City from requiring a Franchise shall not be required to obtain a Franchise, but all of the requirements imposed by this Ordinance through the exercise of the City’s police power and not preempted by other law shall be applicable.

5.06.050 Definitions.
“Gross Revenue” includes all revenues of a Provider that may be included as gross revenue within the meaning of Chapter 26, Title 11 Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended. In the case of any provider not covered within the ambit of Chapter 26 of Title 11 Utah Code, the definition of “Gross Revenue” shall be that set forth in the Franchise Agreement. (Ord. 2000-12, amended, 2000)

5.06.060 Non – Exclusive Franchise.
The City is empowered and authorized to issue non-exclusive Franchises governing the installation, construction, and maintenance of Systems in the City’s Rights-of-Way, in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance. The Franchise is granted through a Franchise Agreement entered into between the City and Provider.

5.06.070 Every Provider Must Obtain.
Except to the extent preempted by federal or state law, as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including any appeals, every Provider must obtain a Franchise prior to constructing a Telecommunications System or providing Telecommunications Services using the Rights-of-Way, and every Provider must obtain a Franchise before constructing an Open Video System or providing Open Video Services via an Open Video System. Any Open Video System or Service shall be subject to the customer service and consumer protection provisions applicable to the Cable TV companies to the extent the City is not preempted as ultimately interpreted by a court of competent jurisdiction, including any appeals. The fact that particular Telecommunications Systems may be used for multiple purposes does not obviate the need to obtain a Franchise for other purposes. By way of illustration and not limitation, a cable operator of a cable system must obtain a cable franchise, and, should it intend to provide Telecommunications Services over the same System, must also obtain a Telecommunications Franchise.

5.06.080 Nature of Grant.
A Franchise shall not convey title, equitable or legal, in the Rights-of-Way. A Franchise is only the right to occupy Rights-of-Way on a non-exclusive basis for the limited purposes and for the limited period stated in the Franchise; the right may not be subdivided, assigned, or subleased. A Franchise does not excuse a Provider from obtaining appropriate access or pole attachment agreements before collocating its System on the property of others, including the City’s property. This section shall not be construed to prohibit a Provider from leasing conduit to another Provider, so long as the Lessee has obtained a Franchise.

5.06.090 Current Providers.
Except to the extent exempted by federal or state law, any Provider acting without a Franchise on the effective date of this Ordinance shall request issuance of a Franchise from the City within 90 days of the effective date of this Ordinance. If such request is made, the Provider may continue providing service during the course of negotiations. If a timely request is not made, or if negotiations cease and a Franchise is not granted, the Provider shall comply with the provisions of Section 5.06.450.

5.06.100 Nature of Franchise.
The Franchise granted by the City under the provisions of this Ordinance shall be a nonexclusive Franchise providing the right and consent to install, repair, maintain, remove and replace its System on, over and under the Rights-of-Way in order to provide Services.

5.06.110 Regulatory Approval Needed.
Before offering or providing any Services pursuant to the Franchise, a Provider shall obtain any and all regulatory approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses for the offering or provision of such Services from the appropriate federal, state and local authorities, if required, and shall submit to the City upon the written request of the City evidence of all such approvals, permits, authorizations or licenses.

5.06.120 Term.
No Franchise issued pursuant to this Ordinance shall have a term of less than five (5) years or greater than fifteen (15) years. Each Franchise shall be granted in a nondiscriminatory manner.

5.06.130 Compensation.
As fair and reasonable compensation for any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance, a Provider shall have the following obligations:
1. Application Fee. At the time of application, a Provider shall pay, in addition to all other fees, permits or charges, a $500 non-refundable application fee to the City.
2. Franchise Fees. The Franchise fee, if any, shall be set forth in the Franchise Agreement, or as amended by ordinance or resolution. The obligation to pay a Franchise fee shall commence on the Completion Date. The franchise fee is offset by any annual or up-front fees referred to in the franchise agreement.
3. Excavation Permits. The Provider shall also pay fees required for an excavation permit as provided in Chapters 12.16 and 17.30. (Ord. 2000-12, amended, 2000)

5.06.140 Failure to pay fees or obtain permits.
Providers who fail to obtain the required permits or franchise, or to pay the required fees under this Ordinance shall be subject to a penalty of up to $5000 in addition to any other fees or penalties due Lindon City as provided for under this ordinance.

5.06.150 Timing.
Unless otherwise agreed to in the Franchise Agreement, all Franchise Fees shall be paid on a monthly basis within thirty (30) days of the close of each calendar month. (Ord. 2000-12, amended, 2000)

5.06.160 Fee Statement and Certification.
Each fee payment shall be accompanied by a statement showing the manner in which the fee was calculated and shall be certified as to its accuracy.

5.06.170 Future Costs.
The City may require a Provider to pay to the City or to third parties, at the direction of the City, an amount equal to the reasonable costs and reasonable expenses that the City incurs for the services of third parties (including but not limited to attorneys and other consultants) in connection with any Provider-initiated renegotiation, or amendment of this Ordinance or a Franchise, provided, however, that the parties shall agree upon a reasonable financial cap at the outset of negotiations, In the event the parties are unable to agree, either party may submit the issue to binding arbitration in accordance with the rules and procedures of the American Arbitration Association. Any costs associated with any work to be done by the Public Works Department of the city to accommodate Provider facilities shall be borne by the provider. (Ord. 2000-12, amended, 2000)

5.06.180 Taxes and Assessments.
To the extent taxes or other assessments are imposed by taxing authorities, other than the City on the use of the City property as a result of a Provider’s use or occupation of the Rights-of-Way, the Provider shall be responsible for payment of its pro rata share of such taxes, payable annually unless otherwise required by the taxing authority. Such payments shall be in addition to any other fees payable pursuant to this Ordinance.

5.06.190 Interest on Late Payments.
In the event that any payment is not actually received by the City on or before the applicable date fixed in the Franchise, interest thereon shall accrue from such date until received at the rate charged for delinquent state taxes.

5.06.200 No Accord and Satisfaction.
No acceptance by the City of any fee shall be construed as an accord that the amount paid is in fact the correct amount, nor shall such acceptance of such fee payment be construed as a release of any claim the City may have for additional sums payable.

5.06.210 Not in Lieu of Other Taxes or Fees.
The fee payment is not a payment in lieu of any tax, fee or other assessment except as specifically provided in this Ordinance, or as required by applicable law. By way of example, and not limitation, excavation permit fees and fees to obtain space on the City owned poles are not waived and remain applicable.

5.06.220 Continuing Obligation and Holdover.
In the event a Provider continues to operate all or any part of the System after the Term of the Franchise, such operator shall continue to comply with all applicable provisions of this Ordinance and the Franchise, including, without limitation, all compensation and other payment provisions throughout the period of such continued operation, provided that any such continued operation shall in no way be construed as a renewal or other extension of the Franchise, nor as a limitation on the remedies, if any, available to the City as a result of such continued operation after the term, including, but not limited to, damages and restitution.

5.06.230 Costs of Publication.
A Provider shall assume any publication costs associated with its Franchise that may be required by law.

5.06.240 Franchise Application.
To obtain a Franchise to construct, own, maintain or provide Services through any System within the City, to obtain a renewal of a Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance, or to obtain the City approval of a transfer of a Franchise, as provided in Subsection 5.06.360(2), granted pursuant to this Ordinance, an Application must be filed with City on the form attached to this Ordinance as Exhibit A, which is hereby incorporated by reference. The Application form may be changed by the City Administrator so long as such changes request information that is consistent with this Ordinance. Such Application form, as amended, is incorporated by reference.

5.06.250 Application Criteria.
In making a determination as to an Application filed pursuant to this Ordinance, the City may, but shall not be limited to, request or consider the following:
1. Obtaining an order from the PSC granting a Certificate of Convenience and Necessity.
2. Certification of the Provider’s financial ability to compensate the City for Provider’s intrusion, maintenance and use of the Rights-of-Way during the Franchise term proposed by the Provider;
3. Provider’s agreement to comply with the requirements of Sections 270-350 of this Ordinance
4. Prior to making any attachments to poles, the willingness to enter into a pole attachment agreement with the city. (Ord. 2000-12, amended, 2000)

5.06.260 Franchise Determination.
The City, in its discretion, shall determine the award of any Franchise on the basis of these and other considerations relevant to the use of the Rights-of-Way, without competitive bidding.

5.06.270 General Requirement.
No Provider shall receive a Franchise unless it agrees to comply with each of the terms set forth in Sections 270 through 350 governing construction and technical requirements for its System, in addition to any other reasonable requirements or procedures specified by the City or the Franchise, including requirements regarding locating and sharing in the cost of locating portions of the System with other Systems or with City utilities. A Provider shall obtain an excavation permit, pursuant to the excavation ordinance, before commencing any work in the Rights-of-Way.

5.06.280 Quality.
All work involved in the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade and removal of the System shall be performed in a safe, thorough and reliable manner using materials of good and durable quality. If, at any time, it is determined by the FCC or any other agency granted authority by federal law or the FCC to make such determination, that any part of the System, including, without limitation, any means used to distribute Signals over or within the System, is harmful to the public health, safety or welfare, or quality of service or reliability, then a Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, promptly correct all such conditions.

5.06.290 Licenses and Permits.
A Provider shall have the sole responsibility for diligently obtaining, at its own cost and expense, all permits, licenses or other forms of approval or authorization necessary to construct, maintain, upgrade or repair the System, including but not limited to any necessary approvals from Persons and/or the City to use private property, easements, poles and conduits. A Provider shall obtain any required permit, license, approval or authorization, including but not limited to excavation permits, pole attachment agreements, etc., prior to the commencement of the activity for which the permit, license, approval or authorization is required.

5.06.300 Relocation of the System.
1. New Grades or Lines. If the grades or lines of any Rights-of-Way are changed at any time in a manner affecting the System, then a Provider shall comply with the requirements of the excavation ordinance.
2. The City Authority to Move System in case of an Emergency. The City may, at any time, in case of fire, disaster or other emergency, as determined by the City in its reasonable discretion, cut or move any parts of the System and appurtenances on, over or under the Rights-of-Way of the City, in which event the City shall not be liable therefor to a Provider. The City shall notify a Provider in writing prior to, if practicable, but in any event as soon as possible and in no case later than the next business day following any action taken under this Section. Notice shall be given as provided in Section 5.06.500.
3. A Provider Required to Temporarily Move System for Third Party. A Provider shall, upon prior reasonable written notice by the City or any Person holding a permit to move any structure, and within the time that is reasonable under the circumstances, temporarily move any part of its System to permit the moving of said structure. A Provider may impose a reasonable charge on any Person other than the City for any such movement of its Systems.
4. Rights-of-Way Change - Obligation to Move System. When the City is changing a Rights-of-Way and makes a written request, a Provider is required to move or remove its System from the Rights-of-Way, without cost to the City, to the extent provided in the excavation ordinance. This obligation does not apply to Systems originally located on private property pursuant to a private easement, which property was later incorporated into the Rights-of-Way, if that private easement grants a superior vested right. This obligation exists whether or not the Provider has obtained an excavation permit.
5. Protect Structures. In connection with the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the System, a Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the City. A Provider shall obtain the prior written consent of the City to alter any water main, power facility, sewerage or drainage system, or any other municipal structure on, over or under the Rights-of-Way of the City required because of the presence of the System. Any such alteration shall be made by the City or its designee on a reimbursable basis. A Provider agrees that it shall be liable for the costs incurred by the City to replace or repair and restore to its prior condition in a manner as may be reasonably specified by the City, any municipal structure or any other Rights-of-Way of the City involved in the construction, maintenance, repair, upgrade or removal of the System that may become disturbed or damaged as a result of any work thereon by or on behalf of a Provider pursuant to the Franchise.

5.06.310 No Obstruction.
In connection with the construction, maintenance, upgrade, repair or removal of the System, a Provider shall not unreasonably obstruct the Rights-of-Way of fixed guide way systems, railways, passenger travel, or other traffic to, from or within the City without the prior consent of the appropriate authorities.

5.06.320 Safety Precautions.
A Provider shall, at its own cost and expense, undertake all necessary and appropriate efforts to prevent accidents at its work sites, including the placing and maintenance of proper guards, fences, barricades, security personnel and suitable and sufficient lighting, and such other requirements prescribed by OSHA and Utah OSHA. A Provider shall comply with all applicable federal, state and local requirements including but not limited to the National Electric Safety Code.

5.06.330 Repair.
After written reasonable notice to the Provider, unless, in the sole determination of the City, an eminent danger exists, any Rights-of-Way within the City which are disturbed or damaged during the construction, maintenance or reconstruction by a Provider of its System may be repaired by the City at the Provider’s expense, to a condition as good as that prevailing before such work was commenced. Upon doing so, the City shall submit to such a Provider an itemized statement of the cost for repairing and restoring the Rights-of-Ways intruded upon. The Provider shall, within thirty (30) days after receipt of the statement, pay to the City the entire amount thereof.

5.06.340 System Maintenance.
A Provider shall:
1. Install and maintain all parts of its System in a non-dangerous condition throughout the entire period of its Franchise.
2. Install and maintain its System in accordance with standard prudent engineering practices and shall conform, when applicable, with the National Electrical Safety Code and all applicable other federal, state and local laws or regulations.
3. At all reasonable times, permit examination by any duly authorized representative of the City of the System and its effect on the Rights-of-Way.

5.06.350 Trimming of Trees.
With prior written approval of the City, a Provider shall have the authority to trim trees, in accordance with all applicable utility restrictions, ordinance and easement restrictions, upon and hanging over Rights-of-Way so as to prevent the branches of such trees from coming in contact with its System.

5.06.360 Notification of Sale.
1. PSC Approval. When a Provider is the subject of a sale, transfer, lease, assignment, sublease or disposed of, in whole or in part, either by forced or involuntary sale, or by ordinary sale, consolidation or otherwise, such that it or its successor entity is obligated to inform or seek the approval of the PSC, the Provider or its successor entity shall promptly notify the City of the nature of the transaction. The notification shall include either:
    a. the successor entity’s certification that the successor entity unequivocally agrees to all of the terms of the original Provider’s Franchise Agreement, or
    b. the successor entity’s Application in compliance with Sections 240-260 of this Ordinance.
2. Transfer of Franchise. Upon receipt of a request to transfer a Franchise, the City designee, as provided in Article 8.1 of the Franchise Agreement, may send notice approving the transfer of the Franchise to the successor entity. Such approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. If the City has reason to believe that the successor entity may not comply with this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, it may require an Application for the transfer. The Application shall comply with Sections 240-260.
3. If PSC Approval is No Longer Required. If the PSC no longer exists, or if its regulations or state law no longer require approval of transactions described in Section 5.06.360(1) and the City has good cause to believe that the successor entity may not comply with this Ordinance or the Franchise Agreement, it may require an application. The Application shall comply with Sections 240-260.
4. The following events shall be deemed to be a sale, assignment or other transfer of the Franchise requiring compliance with Section 5.06.360(3);
    a. the sale, assignment or other transfer of all or a majority of a Provider’s assets to another Person;
    b. the sale, assignment or other transfer of capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity interests in a Provider by one or more of its existing shareholders, partners, members or other equity owners so as to create a new Controlling Interest in a Provider;
    c. the issuance of additional capital stock or partnership, membership or other equity interest by a Provider so as to create a new Controlling Interest in such a Provider; or
    d. the entry by a Provider into an agreement with respect to the management or operation of such Provider or its System. (Ord. 2000-12, amended, 2000)

5.06.370 Insurance, Indemnity, and Security.
Prior to the execution of a Franchise, a Provider will deposit with the City an irrevocable, unconditional letter of credit or surety bond as required by the terms of the Franchise and Section 5.05.130, and shall obtain and provide proof of the insurance coverage required by the Franchise and Section 5.05.130. A Provider shall also indemnify the City as set forth in the Franchise and Section 5.05.150.

5.06.380 Oversight.
The City shall have the right to oversee, regulate and inspect periodically the construction, maintenance, and upgrade of the System, and any part thereof, in accordance with the provisions of the Franchise and applicable law. A Provider shall establish and maintain managerial and operational records, standards, procedures and controls to enable a Provider to prove, in reasonable detail, to the satisfaction of the City at all times throughout the Term, that a Provider is in compliance with the Franchise. A Provider shall retain such records for not less than the applicable statute of limitations.

5.06.390 Maintain Records.
A Provider shall at all times maintain:
1. On file with the City, a full and complete set of plans, records and “as-built” hard copy maps and, to the extent the maps are placed in an electronic format, they shall be made in electronic format compatible with the City’s existing GIS system, of all existing and proposed installations and the types of equipment and Systems installed or constructed in the Rights-of-Way, properly identified and described as to the types of equipment and facility by appropriate symbols and marks which shall include annotations of all Rights-of-Ways where work will be undertaken. As used herein, “as-built” maps includes “file construction prints.” Maps shall be drawn to scale. “As-built” maps, including the compatible electronic format, as provided above, shall be submitted within 30 days of completion of work or within 30 days after completion of modification and repairs. “As-built” maps are not required of the Provider who is the incumbent local exchange carrier for the existing System to the extent they do not exist.
2. Throughout the term of the Franchise, a Provider shall maintain complete and accurate books of account and records of the business, ownership, and operations of a Provider with respect to the System in a manner that allows the City at all times to determine whether a Provider is in compliance with the Franchise. Should the City reasonably determine that the records are not being maintained in such a manner, a Provider shall alter the manner in which the books and/or records are maintained so that a Provider comes into compliance with this section. All financial books and records which are maintained in accordance with the regulations of the FCC and any governmental entity that regulates utilities in the State of Utah, and generally accepted accounting principles shall be deemed to be acceptable under this Section.

5.06.400 Confidentiality.
If the information required to be submitted is proprietary in nature or must be kept confidential by federal, state or local law, upon proper request by a Provider, such information shall be classified as a Protected Record within the meaning of the Utah Government Records Access and Management Act (“GRAMA”), making it available only to those who must have access to perform their duties on behalf of the City, provided that a Provider notifies the City of, and clearly labels the information which a Provider deems to be confidential, proprietary information. Such notification and labeling shall be the sole responsibility of the Provider.

5.06.410 Provider’s Expense.
All reports and records required under this Ordinance shall be furnished at the sole expense of a Provider, except as otherwise provided in this Ordinance or a Franchise.

5.06.420 Right of Inspection.
For the purpose of verifying the correct amount of the franchise fee, the books and records of the Provider pertaining thereto shall be open to inspection or audit by duly authorized representatives of the City at all reasonable times, upon giving reasonable notice of the intention to inspect or audit the books and records. The Provider agrees to reimburse the City the reasonable costs of an audit if the audit discloses that the Provider has paid ninety-five percent (95%) or less of the compensation due the City for the period of such audit. In the event the accounting rendered to the City by the Provider herein is found to be incorrect, then payment shall be made on the corrected amount within thirty (30) calendar days of written notice, it being agreed that the City may accept any amount offered by the Provider, but the acceptance thereof by the City shall not be deemed a settlement of such item if the amount is in dispute or is later found to be incorrect.

5.06.430 Enforcement and Remedies.
1. Enforcement - City Designee. The City is responsible for enforcing and administering this Ordinance, and the City or its designee, as appointed by the City Administrator, is authorized to give any notice required by law or under any Franchise Agreement.
2. Enforcement Provision. Any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall contain appropriate provisions for enforcement, compensation, and protection of the public, consistent with the other provisions of this Ordinance, including, but not limited to, defining events of default, procedures for accessing the Bond/Security Fund, and rights of termination or revocation.
3. Force Majeure. In the event a Provider’s performance of any of the terms, conditions or obligations required by this Ordinance or a Franchise is prevented by a cause or event not within a Provider’s control, such inability to perform shall be deemed excused and no penalties or sanctions shall be imposed as a result thereof. For the purpose of this section, causes or events not within the control of a Provider shall include, without limitation, acts of God, strikes, sabotage, riots or civil disturbances, failure or loss of utilities, explosions, acts of public enemies, and natural disasters such as floods, earthquakes, landslides, and fires.

5.06.440 Extended Operation and Continuity of Services.
1. Continuation after Expiration. Upon either expiration or revocation of a Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance, the City shall have discretion to permit a Provider to continue to operate its System or provide Services for an extended period of time not to exceed six (6) months from the date of such expiration or revocation. A Provider shall continue to operate its System under the terms and conditions of this Ordinance and the Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance.
2. Continuation by Incumbent Local Exchange Carrier. If the Provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall be permitted to continue to operate its System and provide Services while reasonable efforts are made to negotiate a renewal in good faith, but in no case longer than six (6) months after revocation or expiration of the franchise.

5.06.450 Removal or Abandonment of Franchise Property.
1. Abandoned System. In the event that (1) the use of any portion of the System is discontinued for a continuous period of twelve (12) months, and thirty (30) days after no response to written notice from the City to the last known address of Provider; (2) any System has been installed in the Rights-of-Way without complying with the requirements of this Ordinance or Franchise; or (3) the provisions of Section 5.06.100 are applicable and no Franchise is granted, a Provider, except the Provider who is an incumbent local exchange carrier, shall be deemed to have abandoned such System.
2. Removal of Abandoned System. The City, upon such terms as it may impose, may give a Provider written permission to abandon, without removing, any System, or portion thereof, directly constructed, operated or maintained under a Franchise. Unless such permission is granted or unless otherwise provided in this Ordinance, a Provider shall remove within a reasonable time the abandoned System and shall restore, using prudent construction standards, any affected Rights-of-Way to their former state at the time such System was installed, so as not to impair their usefulness. In removing its plant, structures and equipment, a Provider shall refill, at its own expense, any excavation necessarily made by it and shall leave all Rights-of-Way in as good condition as that prevailing prior to such removal without materially interfering with any electrical or telephone cable or other utility wires, poles or attachments. The City shall have the right to inspect and approve the condition of the Rights-of-Way cables, wires, attachments and poles prior to and after removal. The liability, indemnity and insurance provisions of this Ordinance and any security fund provided in a Franchise shall continue in full force and effect during the period of removal and until full compliance by a Provider with the terms and conditions of this Section.
3. Transfer of Abandoned System to City. Upon abandonment of any System in place, a Provider, if required by the City, shall submit to the City a written instrument, satisfactory in form to the City, transferring to the City the ownership of the abandoned System at no cost to the City.
4. Removal of Above-Ground System. At the expiration of the term for which a Franchise is granted, or upon its revocation or earlier expiration, as provided for by this Ordinance, in any such case without renewal, extension or transfer, the City shall have the right to require a Provider to remove, at its expense, all above-ground portions of a System from the Rights-of-Way within a reasonable period of time, which shall not be less than one hundred eighty (180) days. If the Provider is the incumbent local exchange carrier, it shall not be required to remove its System for a period of six (6) months if reasonable efforts are being made to negotiate a renewal in good faith.
5. Leaving Underground System. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary set forth in this Ordinance, a Provider may abandon any underground System in place if the City has determined that the abandoned system does not materially interfere with the use of the Rights-of-Way or with the use thereof by any public utility, cable operator or other Person, and the approval is granted in writing by the City.

5.06.460 Publicizing Work.
Before entering onto any private property, a Provider shall make a good faith attempt to contact the property owners in advance, and describe the work to be performed.

5.06.470 Conflicts.
In the event of a conflict between any provision of this Ordinance and a Franchise entered pursuant to it, the provisions of this Ordinance shall control.

5.06.480 Severability.
If any provision of this Ordinance is held by any federal, state or local court of competent jurisdiction, to be invalid as conflicting with any federal or state statute, or is ordered by a court to be modified in any way in order to conform to the requirements of any such law and all appellate remedies with regard to the validity of the Ordinance provisions in question are exhausted, such provision shall be considered a separate, distinct, and independent part of this Ordinance, and such holding shall not affect the validity and enforceability of all other provisions hereof. In the event that such law is subsequently repealed, rescinded, amended or otherwise changed, so that the provision which had been held invalid or modified is no longer in conflict with such law the provision in question shall return to full force and effect and shall again be binding on the City and the Provider, provided that the City shall give the Provider thirty (30) days, or a longer period of time as may be reasonably required for a Provider to comply with such a rejuvenated provision, written notice of the change before requiring compliance with such provision.

5.06.490 New Developments.
It shall be the policy of the City to liberally amend this Ordinance, upon Application of a Provider, when necessary to enable the Provider to take advantage of any developments in the field of Telecommunications which will afford the Provider an opportunity to more effectively, efficiently, or economically serve itself or the public.

5.06.500 Notices.
All notices from a Provider to the City required under this Ordinance or pursuant to a Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall be directed to the officer as designated by the City Administrator. A Provider shall provide in any Application for a Franchise the identity, address and phone number to receive notices from the City. A Provider shall immediately notify the City of any change in its name, address, or telephone number.

5.06.510 Exercise of Police Power.
To the full extent permitted by applicable law either now or in the future, the City reserves the right to adopt or issue such rules, regulations, orders, or other directives that it finds necessary or appropriate in the lawful exercise of its police powers.

5.06.520 Construction.
This Ordinance shall be construed in a manner consistent with all applicable federal and state statutes.

5.06.530 Ordinance Applicability.
This Ordinance shall apply to all Franchises granted or renewed after the effective date of this Ordinance. This Ordinance shall further apply, to the extent permitted by applicable federal or state law to all existing Franchises granted prior to the effective date of this Ordinance and to a Provider providing Services, without a Franchise, prior to the effective date of this Ordinance.

5.06.540 Other Applicable Ordinances.
A Provider’s rights are subject to the police powers of the City to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to the health, safety and welfare of the public. A Provider shall comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the City pursuant to its police powers. In particular, all Providers shall comply with the City zoning and other land use requirements.

5.06.550 City Failure to Enforce.
A Provider shall not be relieved of its obligation to comply with any of the provisions of this Ordinance or any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance by reason of any failure of the City to enforce prompt compliance.

5.06.560 Construed According to Utah Law.
This Ordinance and any Franchise granted pursuant to this Ordinance shall be construed and enforced in accordance with the substantive laws of the State of Utah.

Chapter 5.07 PERSONAL WIRELESS TELECOMMUNICATIONS FACILITIES

Sections:
5.07.010     Purpose and Interpretation.
5.07.020     Definitions.
5.07.030     Policy Statement.
5.07.040     Industry Site Selection Criteria.
5.07.050     City Site Selection Criteria.
5.07.060     Priorities.
5.07.070     Co-location: Use of Public Property.
5.07.080     Design criteria.
5.07.090     Other permitted uses.
5.07.100     Inspection requirements.
5.07.110     Landscaping/screening.
5.07.120     Non-use/abandonment.
5.07.130     Application requirements.
5.07.135     Business license requirement.
5.07.140     Third party review.
5.07.150     Remedies.
5.07.160     Severability.

5.07.010 Purpose and Interpretation.
1. The purpose of this chapter is to provide specific regulations for the placement, construction and modification of personal wireless telecommunications facilities. The provisions of this ordinance are not intended to and shall not be interpreted to prohibit or to have the effect of prohibiting the furnishing of personal wireless services, nor shall the provisions of this ordinance be applied in such a manner as to unreasonably discriminate between providers of functionally equivalent personal wireless services. To the extent that any provision or provisions of this ordinance are consistent or in conflict with any other provision of the Lindon City Municipal Code or any ordinance of Lindon City, the provisions of this ordinance shall be deemed to control.
2. In the course of reviewing any request for any approval required under this chapter made by an applicant to provide personal wireless service or to install personal wireless service facilities, the Planning Commission or the City Council, as the case may be, shall act within a reasonable period of time after the request is duly filed with the city, taking into account the nature and scope of the request, and any decision to deny a request shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record.
3. Should the application of this chapter have the effect of prohibiting a person or entity from providing personal wireless service to all or a portion of the city, such provider may petition the Planning Commission or the City Council for an amendment to this code. The Planning Commission or City Council, upon receipt of such a petition, shall promptly undertake review of the petition and shall make a determination on the petition within a reasonable period of time, taking into account the nature and scope of the petition, and any decision to deny such petition shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

5.07.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms shall have the meaning ascribed to them below:
“Antenna” shall mean any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves, including equipment attached to a tower or building, for the purpose of providing personal wireless services.
“Antenna Height” shall mean the vertical distance measured from the base of the antenna support structure at grade to the highest point of the structure even if said highest point is an antenna. Measurement of tower height shall include antenna, base pad, and other appurtenances and shall be measured from the finished grade of parcel. If the support structure is on a sloped grade, then the average between the highest and lowest grades shall be used in calculating the antenna height.
“Antenna Support Structure” shall mean any pole, telescoping mast, tower, tripod or other structure which supports an antenna.
“Cell Site” shall mean a tract or parcel of land that contains the cellular communications or personal wireless services antenna, its support structure, accessory building, and parking, and may include other uses associated with and ancillary to cellular communications or personal wireless services transmission.
“FAA” shall mean the Federal Aviation Administration.
“FCC” shall mean the Federal Communications Commission.
“Governing Authority” shall mean the governing authority of the city, namely the City Council.
“Personal Wireless Service” and “Personal Wireless Service Facilities,” as used in this ordinance, shall be defined in the same manner as in Title 47, U.S.C., Sec. 332(c)(7)(C), as it may be amended now or in the future.
“Tower” shall mean any structure that is designed and contrasted primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or multiple towers. The term encompasses personal wireless facilities including radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers or personal communications services towers, alternative tower structures, and the like.
“Tower (Stealth)” shall mean any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas in a manner that shall be camouflaging and constructed in a manner to avoid detection as a cell tower (i.e. flagpole, tree, etc.). (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

5.07.030 Policy Statement.
The Planning Commission and City Council have on numerous occasions and with increasing frequency been confronted with requests to site communications towers and antennas. The purpose of this chapter is to establish general guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this ordinance are to: (i) encourage the location of towers on public property and in non-residential areas and to minimize the total number of towers throughout the city, (ii) encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites, (iii) encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the city is minimal, (iv) encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas, and (v) enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services throughout the city quickly, effectively, and efficiently. Accordingly, the City Council finds that the promulgation of this ordinance is warranted and necessary:
1. To manage the location of towers and antennas in the city and encourage the use of public property for the placement thereof;
2. To protect residential areas and land users from potential adverse impacts of towers, including support structure failure and falling ice;
3. To minimize adverse visual impacts of towers through careful design, siting, landscape screening, and innovative camouflaging techniques;
4. To accommodate the growing need for towers;
5. To promote and encourage shared use/co-location of existing and new towers as a primary option rather than construction of additional single use towers, and to reduce the number of such structures needed in the future.
6. To consider the public health and safety of towers to the extent allowed by the Telecommunications Act of 1996,
7. To avoid potential damage to adjacent properties from antenna support structure failure and falling ice, through engineering and proper siting of antenna support structure.
New Uses: All towers existing on the date of passage of this ordinance shall be allowed to continue their usage as they presently exist. Routine maintenance shall be permitted on such existing towers. New construction, other than routine maintenance on existing towers, shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance. (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

5.07.040 Industry Site Selection Criteria.
In siting a new site, the industry requires a location that is technically compatible with the established network. General area is to be identified based upon engineering constraints and the desired area of service. Specific locations within that general area will be evaluated using the following criteria which are not listed in order of priority:
1. Topography as it relates to line of site transmissions for optimum efficiency in telephone service.
2. Availability of road access.
3. Availability of electric power.
4. Availability of land based telephone lines or microwave link capability.
5. Leasable lands, and landlords who want facilities to be located on their properties consistent with zoning regulations.
6. Screening potential of existing vegetation, structures and topographic features.
7. Zoning that will allow low power mobile radio service facilities.
8. Compatibility with adjacent land users.
9. The least number of sites to cover the desired area.
10. The greatest amount of coverage, consistent with physical requirements.
11. Opportunities to mitigate possible visual impact.
12. Availability of suitable existing structures for antenna mounting. (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

5.07.050 City Site Selection Criteria.
As a fundamental element of this chapter, the telecommunications company proposing to construct an antenna support structure or mount an antenna on an existing structure is required to demonstrate, using technological evidence, that the antenna must go where it is proposed in order to satisfy its function in the company’s grid system. Further, the company must demonstrate by technological evidence that the height requested is the minimum height necessary to fulfill the cell site’s function within the grid system.
Applications for necessary permits will only be processed when the applicant demonstrates that it is either an FCC licensed telecommunications provider or has in place agreements with an FCC licensed telecommunications provider for use or lease of the support structure.
Low power mobile radio service facilities should be located and designed to minimize any adverse effect that they may have on residential property values. Sites should be placed in locations where the existing topography, vegetation, buildings or other structures provide the greatest amount of screening. Sites should be located on bare ground without visual mitigation only in districts zoned C-G, LI, MU, HI, and R and B, based on the design standards articulated in this chapter.
Location and design of sites in all districts should consider the impact of the site on the surrounding neighborhood and the visual impact within the zone district. In residential districts and residential land use areas, the minimum lot size for commercial communications towers shall be three acres. (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

5.07.060 Priorities.
1. The following establishes the order of priorities for locating new communications facilities:
    a. Place antennas on appropriate existing structures, such as buildings, communications towers, water towers, and smokestacks in appropriately zoned districts.
    b. Place antennas and stealth towers on City property in the LI and HI and CG zone. A private property owner who leases space for a telecommunication tower is the only one who receives compensation even though numerous other property owners in the area, and the citizenry in general, are adversely affected. Requiring all telecommunication towers to be located on government property with all lease payments being paid to Lindon City instead of individual property owners evenly distributes the income from the lease payments to all the citizens of Lindon through increased government services, thus indirectly compensating all of the citizens of Lindon for the impact all citizens experience. The public policy objectives to reduce the proliferation of telecommunication towers and to mitigate their impact can best be facilitated by requiring the location of telecommunication and antenna support structures on property owned, leased or used by Lindon City as a highest priority whenever feasible. The City Council may waive the requirements of this subsection to allow antennas and towers to be placed on school district property. If based on technological or engineering data provided by the applicant, the City Council determines the location of telecommunication towers or antenna support structures on city or school district property is not feasible or practicable as required by this subsection, then the priorities set forth in the following subsections C through E, shall apply.
    c. Place antennas and towers on City property or, at the discretion of the City Council, on school district property in the MU and R&B zones.
    d. Place antennas and towers on other private non-residential property.
    e. Place antennas and towers in other residential districts only if locations for which a need has been demonstrated are not available on existing structures or in non-residential districts and only on or in existing churches, parks, utility facilities or other public facilities. An applicant for a new antenna support structure to be located in a residential zoning district shall demonstrate that a diligent effort has been made to locate the proposed communications facilities on a government structure, a private institutional structure, or other appropriate existing structures within a non-residential zoning district, and that due to valid considerations, including physical constraints and economic or technological feasibility, no appropriate location is available. The telecommunications company is required to demonstrate that it contacted the owners of tall structures within a one mile radius of the site proposed, asked for permission to install the antenna on those locations, and was denied for reasons other than economic ones. The information submitted by the applicant shall include a map of the area to be served by the tower, its relationship to other antenna sites in the applicant’s network, and an evaluation of existing buildings taller than twenty feet, communications towers and water tanks within one mile of the proposed tower.
2. Priority of Users-priority for the use of city-owned land for antennas and towers will be given to the following entities in descending order.
    a. Lindon City;
    b. Public safety agencies, including law enforcement, fire and ambulance services, which are not part of Lindon City (such as the Pleasant Grove Police Department) and private entities with a public safety agreement with Lindon City;
    c. Other governmental agencies, for uses which are not related to public safety; and
    d. Entities providing licensed commercial wireless telecommunication services, including cellular, personal communications services (PCS), specialized mobilized radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobilized radio (ESMR), paging, and similar services marketed to the general public.
3. Minimum Requirements-The placement of antennas or towers on city-owned property must comply with the following requirements:
    a. The antennas or tower will not interfere with the purpose for which the city-owned property is intended.
    b. The antennas or tower will have no adverse impact on surrounding private property. Therefore, all new towers that are constructed shall be stealth towers.
    c. The applicant is willing to obtain adequate liability insurance and commit to a lease agreement which includes equitable compensation for the use of public land and other necessary provisions and safeguards. The fees shall be established by the City Council after considering comparable rates in other cities, potential expenses, risks to the city, and other appropriate factors.
    d. The applicant will submit a letter of credit, performance bond, or other security acceptable to the city to cover the costs of antenna or tower removal.
    e. The antennas or tower will not interfere with other users who have a higher priority as discussed in Section 5.07.060(1).
    f. Removal may be required by the City, the terms and conditions of which will be determined on a lease by lease basis.
    g. The applicant must reimburse the city for any costs which it incurs because of the presence of the applicant’s antennas or tower.
    h. The user must obtain all necessary land use approvals, and
    i. The applicant will cooperate with the city’s objective to promote co-locations and thus limit the number of separate antenna sites requested.
4. Special Requirements-The use of certain city-owned property, such as water tower sites and parks, for antennas or towers brings with it special concerns due to the unique nature of these sites. The placement of antennas or towers on these special city-owned sites will be allowed only when the following additional requirements are met:
    a. Water Tower or Reservoir Sites - The city’s water towers and reservoirs represent a large public investment in water pressure stabilization and peak capacity reserves. Protection of the quality of the city’s water supply is of prime importance to the city. As access to the city’s water storage systems increases, so too increases the potential for contamination of the public water supply. For these reasons, the placement of antennas or towers on water tower or reservoir sites will be allowed only when the city is fully satisfied that the following requirements are met:
        i. The applicant’s access to the facility will not increase the risks of contamination to the city’s water supply;
        ii. There is sufficient room on the structure and/or on the grounds to accommodate the applicant’s facility.
        iii. The presence of the facility will not increase the water tower or reservoir maintenance cost to the city; and iv. The presence of the facility will not be harmful to the health of workers maintaining the water tower or reservoir.
    b. Parks - The presence of certain antennas and towers represent a potential conflict with the purpose of some city-owned parks. In no case shall towers be allowed in designated conservation areas unless they are to be installed in areas which currently contain tower facilities. Antennas or towers will be considered only in the following parks after the recommendation of the Parks, Recreation, and Arts Commission and approval of the City Council:
        i. Public Parks of a sufficient scale and character that are adjacent to an existing commercial or industrial use;
        ii. Commercial recreation areas and major play fields; and iii. Park maintenance facilities.
5. Application Process. All applicants who wish to locate an antenna or tower on city-owned property must submit to the city manager a completed application and detailed plan that complies with the submittal requirements of this chapter, the zoning ordinance, subdivision ordinance, comprehensive master plan and other regulations and ordinances of the city along with other pertinent information requested by the city. The applicant must also apply for a conditional use permit. All applications for conditional use permits require council review.
6. Termination. The City Council may terminate any lease if it determines that any one of the following conditions exist:
    a. A potential user with a higher priority cannot find another adequate location and the potential use would be incompatible with the existing use;
    b. A user’s frequency broadcast unreasonably interferes with other users of higher priority, regardless of whether or not this interference was adequately predicted in the technical analysis, or
    c. A user violates any of the standards in this ordinance or the conditions attached to the city’s lease or other authorization. Before taking any action, the city will provide notice to the user of the intended termination and the reasons for it, and provide opportunity for the user to address the City Council regarding the proposed action. This procedure need not be followed in emergency situations.
7. Reservation of right. Notwithstanding the above, the City Council reserves the right to deny, for any reason, the use of any or all city-owned property by any one or all applicants. (Ord. 2002-10, amended, 2002; Ord. 2000-14, amended, 2000)

5.07.070 Co-location: Use of Public Property.
To minimize adverse visual impacts associated with the proliferation of towers, co-location of antennas by more than one (1) carrier on existing or new towers and location of such antennas on public property shall take precedent over the construction of new single-use towers as indicated below:
1. Proposed antennas may, and are encouraged to, co-locate onto existing towers. Provided such co-location is accomplished in a manner consistent with the policy, site criteria, and landscape/screening provisions contained in this chapter, then such co-locations are permitted by right and new or additional special use approval is not required, except that any permit, license, lease, or franchise requirements must be satisfied.
2. The conditional use requirement for an antenna may be waived in non-residential zones if the applicant locates the antenna on an existing structure other than an existing tower and /or if the antenna is proposed to be located on suitable public property such as a water tower, government building, or other public tower or pole. Suitability of public property shall be determined in the city’s sole discretion. The applicant must submit detailed plans to the planning department for an administrative review to determine if the conditional use permit process and public hearing can be waived. No building permit will be issued until approval is granted through the administrative review.
3. The city may deny the application to construct a new tower if the applicant has not made a good faith effort to mount the antenna on an existing structure and/or public property.
4. In order to reduce the number of antenna support structures needed in the city in the future, any new proposed support structure shall be designed to accommodate antenna for more than one (1) user, unless the applicant demonstrates why such design is not feasible for economic, technical or physical reasons.
5. Unless co-location has been demonstrated to be infeasible, the site plan shall delineate an area near the base of the tower to be used for the placement of additional equipment buildings for other users. The site plan for towers in excess of one hundred (100) feet must propose space for two (2) comparable tower users while the site plan for towers under one hundred (100) feet must propose space for one (1) comparable tower user. To provide further incentive for co-location as a primary option, an existing tower may be modified or reconstructed to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna provided the additional antenna shall be of the same type as that on the existing tower. This is permitted by right for existing towers in all zoning districts, subject to the following criteria being met:
    a. Height. An existing tower may be modified or rebuilt to a taller height, not to exceed twenty (20) feet over the tower’s existing height, to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna. The height change may occur only once per tower.
    b. Onsite Location. A tower which is being rebuilt to accommodate the co-location of an additional antenna may be moved onsite within fifty (50) feet of its existing location so long as it remains within the same zone and complies with the other provisions of this chapter. After the tower is rebuilt to accommodate co-location, only one (1) tower may remain on site. (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

5.07.080 Design criteria.
1. As provided above, new towers shall be designed to accommodate antenna for more than one (1) user, unless the applicant demonstrates why such design is not feasible for economic, technical, or physical reasons.
2. Facilities should be architecturally compatible with the surrounding buildings and land uses in the zoning district or otherwise integrated, through location and design, to blend in with the existing characteristics of the site to the extent practical. Therefore, all new towers that are constructed shall be stealth towers, unless the applicant justifies to the council, in its sole discretion, that a stealth tower is not technically feasible.
    a. Setback. Tower setbacks shall be measured from the base of the tower to the property line of the parcel on which it is located. Unless there are unusual geographical limitations as determined in the city’s sole discretion, in residential districts and residential land use areas, where permitted, towers shall be set back from all property lines a distance equal to three hundred percent (300%) of tower height as measured from ground level. Towers shall comply with the minimum setback requirements of the area in which they are located in all other zoning districts.
    b. Color. Towers shall have a color generally matching the surroundings or background that minimizes their visibility and must be approved by the city, unless a different color is required by FCC or FAA.
    c. Lights, Signals and Signs. No signals, lights or signs shall be permitted on towers unless required by the FCC or FAA. Should lighting be required, at the time of construction of the tower in cases where there are residential users located within a distance which is three hundred percent (300%) of the height of the tower from the tower, then approval of dual mode lighting shall be requested from the FAA.
    d. Equipment Structures. Ground level equipment and buildings and the tower base shall be screened from public streets and residentially zoned properties. The standards for the equipment and buildings are as follows:
        i. The maximum floor area is three hundred (300) feet and the maximum height is twelve (12) feet.
        ii. Ground level buildings shall be screened from adjacent properties by landscape plantings, fencing or other appropriate means, as specified herein or in the City Code.
        iii. Equipment buildings mounted on a roof shall have a finish similar to the exterior building walls. Equipment for roof mounted antenna may also be located within the building on which the antenna is mounted. Equipment buildings, antenna and related equipment shall occupy no more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total roof area of a building. Antenna or equipment buildings not meeting these standards require a special exception. The use must be approved on a comprehensive sketch plan or final development plan, as applicable.
3. Federal Requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this chapter shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within three (3) months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for removal of the tower or antenna at the owner’s expense.
4. Building Code; Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards in applicable City building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronics Industries Association (“EIA”), as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the city concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within the thirty (30) days, the city may remove the tower at the owner’s expense.
5. Structural Design. Towers shall be constructed to the EIA Standards, which may be amended from time to time, and all applicable construction or building codes. Further, any improvements or additions to existing towers shall require submission of site plans stamped and verified by a professional engineer which demonstrate compliance with EIA Standards and all other good industry practices in effect at the time of said improvement or addition. The plans shall be submitted to and reviewed at the time building permits are requested.
6. Fencing. A well-constructed masonry or stone wall, or chain link fence in all zones, not less than eight (8) feet in height from finished grade shall be provided around each tower. Access to the tower shall be through a locked gate.
7. Antenna height. The applicant shall demonstrate that the antenna is the minimum height required to function satisfactorily. No antennas that is taller than this minimum height shall be approved.8. Antenna support structure safety: The applicant shall demonstrate that the proposed antenna and support structure are safe and the surrounding areas will not be negatively affected by support structure failure, falling ice or other debris or interference. All support structures shall be fitted with anti-climbing devices, as approved by the manufacturers.
8. Required parking. If the cell site is fully automated, adequate parking shall be required for maintenance workers. If the site is not fully automated, arrangements for adequate off-street parking shall be made and documentation thereof provided to the city. Security fencing should be colored or should be of a design which blends into the character of the existing environment.
9. Antenna Criteria. Antenna on or above a structure shall be subject to the following:
    a. The antenna must be architecturally compatible with the building and wall on which it is mounted and designed and located so as to minimize any adverse aesthetic impact.
    b. The antenna shall be mounted on a wall of an existing building in configuration as flush to the wall as technically possible and shall not project above the wall on which it is mounted unless for technical reasons the antenna needs to project above the roof line. In no event shall an antenna project more than ten (10) feet above the roofline.
    c. The antenna shall be constructed, painted or fully screened to match as closely as possible the color and texture of the building and wall on which it is mounted.
    d. The antenna may be attached to an existing conforming mechanical equipment enclosure which projects above the roof of the building, but may not project any higher than the enclosure.
    e. If an accessory equipment shelter is present, it must blend with the surrounding buildings in architectural character and color.
    f. The structure must be architecturally and visually (color, size, bulk) compatible with surrounding existing buildings, structures, and vegetation or uses or those likely to exist under the terms of the underlying zoning. Such facilities will be considered architecturally and visually compatible if they are camouflaged to disguise the facility.
    g. Site location and development shall preserve the pre-existing character of the site as much as possible. Existing vegetation should be preserved or improved, and disturbance of the existing topography of the site should be minimized, unless such disturbance would result in less visual impact of the site on the surrounding area. The effectiveness of visual mitigation techniques must be evaluated by City, in City’s sole discretion, taking into consideration the site as built.
    h. On buildings thirty (30) feet or less in height, the antenna may be mounted on the roof if the following conditions are satisfied:
    i. The city finds that it is not technically possible or aesthetically desirable to mount the antenna on a wall.
        ii. No portion of the antenna or base station causes the height of the building to exceed the limitations set forth herein.
        iii. The antenna or antennas and related base stations cover no more than an aggregate total of twenty-five percent (25%) of the roof area of a building.
        iv. Roof mounted antennae and related base stations are completely screened from view by materials that are consistent and compatible with the design, color, and materials of the building.
        v. No portion of the antenna may exceed ten (10) feet above the height of the existing building.
        i. If a proposed antenna is located on a building or a lot subject to a site review, approval is required prior to issuance of a building permit.
    j. No antenna shall be permitted on property designated as an individual landmark or as part of a historic district, unless such antenna has been approved in accordance with the city code.
    k. No antenna owner or lessee or officer or employee thereof shall fail to cooperate in good faith to accommodate other competitors in their attempts to use the same building for other antennas. If a dispute arises about the feasibility of accommodating another competitor, the city administrator may require a third party technical study, at the expense of either or both parties, to resolve the dispute.
    l. No antenna owner or lessee shall fail to assure that the antenna complies at all times with the then current applicable American National Standards Institute or FCC standards, whichever is more stringent. After installation, but prior to putting the antenna in service, each antenna owner shall provide a certification by an independent professional engineer to that effect.
    m. No antenna shall cause localized interference with the reception of any other communications signals including, but not limited to public safety signals, and television and radio broadcast signals.
    n. No person shall locate an antenna or tower on any lot or parcel except as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

5.07.090 Other permitted uses.
In all zoning districts, antenna and associated unmanned equipment buildings are permitted as a matter of right subject to the requirements of this ordinance and the following standards:
1. The antenna is attached to the roof or sides of a building at least thirty (30) feet in height, an existing tower, and water tank, or a similar structure;
2. The following antenna are permitted under the provisions of this section:
    a. Omni-directional or whip antenna no more than seven inches (7") in diameter and extending no more than ten (10) feet above the structure to which they are attached; or
    b. Panel antenna no more than two (2) feet wide and six (6) feet long, extending above the structure to which they are attached by no more than ten (10) feet.
3. Antenna, antenna array and support structures not on publicly-owned property which shall not extend more than ten (10) feet above the highest point of the structure on which it is mounted. The antenna, antennas array, and its support structure shall be mounted so as to blend with the structure to which the antenna is attached. The antenna and its support structure shall be designed to withstand a wind force of one hundred (100) miles per hour without the use of supporting guy wires. The antenna, antenna array, and its support structure shall be a color that blends with the structure on which they are mounted.
4. Setback from street. No such antenna, antenna array, or its support structure shall be erected or maintained closer to any street than the minimum setback for the zone in which it is located.
5. Guy wires restricted. No guy or other support wires shall be used in connection with such antenna, antenna array, or its support structure except when used to anchor the antenna, antenna array, or support structure to an existing building to which such antenna, antenna array, or support structure is attached. (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

5.07.100 Inspection requirements.
Each year after a facility become operational, the facility operator shall conduct a safety inspection in accordance with the EIA and FCC Standards and within 60 days of the inspection, file a report with the city administrator. (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

5.07.110 Landscaping/screening.
Landscaping, as described herein, shall be required to screen as much of the support structure as possible, the fence surrounding the support structure and any other ground level features (such as a building), and in general soften the appearance of the cell site. The city may permit any combination of existing vegetation, topography, walls, decorative fences or other features instead of landscaping, if they achieve the same degree of screening as the required landscaping. If the antenna is mounted flush on an existing building, and other equipment is housed inside an existing structure, landscaping shall not be required.
Screening. The visual impacts of a tower shall be mitigated through landscaping or other screening materials at the base of the tower and ancillary structures. The following landscaping and buffering of towers shall be required around the perimeter of the tower and accessory structures, except that the standards may be waived by the city for those sides of the proposed tower that are located adjacent to undevelopable lands and lands not in public view. Landscaping shall be installed on the outside of fences. Further, existing vegetation shall be preserved to the maximum extent practicable and may be used as a substitute for or in supplement towards meeting landscaping requirements.
1. A row of evergreen trees a minimum of ten (10) feet tall at planting a maximum of six (6) feet apart shall be planted around the perimeter of the fence;
2. A continuous hedge at least thirty-six inches (36") high at planting capable of growing to at least forty-eight inches (48") in height within eighteen (18) months shall be planted in front of the tree line referenced above. (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

5.07.120 Non-use/abandonment.
In the event the use of any tower has been discontinued for a period of sixty (60) consecutive days, the tower shall be deemed to be abandoned. Determination of the date of abandonment shall be made by the City which shall have the right to request documentation and/or affidavits from the tower owner/operator regarding the issue of tower usage. Upon such abandonment, the owner/operator of the tower shall have an additional sixty (60) days within which to:
1. Reactivate the use of the tower or transfer the tower to another owner/operator who makes actual use of the tower; or
2. Dismantle and remove the tower. If such tower is not removed within said sixty (60) days, the City may remove such tower at the owner’s expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all uses cease using the tower. At the earlier of sixty (60) days from the date of abandonment without reactivation or upon completion of dismantling and removal, City approval for the tower shall automatically expire. (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

5.07.130 Application requirements.
Application submission for special use, variance, and building permit request may utilize any combination of site plans, surveys, maps, technical reports or written narratives necessary to convey the following information:
1. A scaled site plan clearly indicating the locations, type and height of the proposed tower, on-site land uses and zoning, adjacent land uses and zoning, adjacent roadways, proposed means of access, setbacks from property lines, elevation drawings of the proposed tower, and any other proposed structures;
2. A current map and aerial as provided by the City Assessor’s office showing the location of the proposed tower;
3. Legal description of the parcel, if applicable;
4. If not within the separation distance from residential areas, approximate distance between the proposed tower and the nearest residential unit, platted residentially zoned properties, and unplatted residentially zoned properties. If within the separation distance requirements, then exact distances, locations and identifications of said properties shall be shown on an updated City map;
5. A landscape plan showing specific landscape materials;
6. Method of fencing, and finished color and, if applicable, the method of camouflage and illumination;
7. A notarized letter signed by the applicant stating the tower will comply with all EIA Standards and all applicable federal and state laws and regulations and the City Code including specifically FAA regulations:
8. A statement by the applicant as to whether construction of the tower will accommodate co-location of additional antenna for future users;
9. Certification that the antenna usage will not interfere with other adjacent or neighboring transmission or reception functions;
10. The telecommunications company must demonstrate that it is licensed by the FCC;
11. The applicant, if not the telecommunications service provider, shall submit proof of lease agreements with an FCC licensed telecommunications provider;
12. A full site plan shall be required for all cell sites, showing the antenna, antenna support structure, building, fencing, buffering, access, and all other items required in this chapter. The site plan shall not be required if the antenna is to be mounted on an existing structure;
13. At the time of site selection, the applicant should demonstrate how the proposed site fits into its overall network within the City;
14. This Ordinance shall apply to all applications which were filed prior to the effective date hereof and which have not been approved by the City Council as of the effective date of this Ordinance, and to applications filed thereafter. (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

5.07.135 Business license requirement.
Each separate antenna array on a given pole, tower, building or other structure shall be considered as a separate use, and an annual business license shall be required for each such facility. The amount of the business license fee shall be set by the council be resolution. Failure to comply with any of the requirements of this code, any applicable ordinance of this city, or any state or federal law or regulation constitutes grounds to revoke the business license of the facility. (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

5.07.140 Third party review.
The personal wireless service providers use various methodologies and analysis tools, including geographically based computer software, to determine the specific technical parameters of personal wireless services and low power mobile radio service facilities, such as expected coverage area, antenna configuration, topographic constraints that affect signal path, etc. In certain instances there may be a need for expert review by a third party of the technical data submitted by the personal wireless services or low power mobile radio service provider. The city council or the planning commission may require such a technical review, to be paid for by the applicant for the personal wireless services or low power mobile radio service facilities. The selection of the third party expert may be by mutual agreement among the applicant and city, or at the discretion of the city, with a provision for the applicant and interested parties to comment on the proposed expert and review its qualification. The expert review is intended to be a site-specific review of technical aspects of the personal wireless services or low power mobile radio services facilities and not a subjective review of the site selection. Such a review should address the accuracy and completeness of the technical data, whether the analysis techniques and methodologies are legitimate, the validity of the conclusions and any specific technical issues outlined by the city council, planning commission, city staff, or interested parties. Based on the results of the third party review, the city may require changes to the application for the personal wireless services or low power mobile radio service facilities that comply with the recommendations of the expert. The expert review of the technical submission shall address the following:
1. The accuracy and completeness of submissions;
2. The applicability of analysis techniques and methodologies;
3. The validity of conclusions reached;
4. Any specific technical issues designated by the city. (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

5.07.150 Remedies.
It is a Class B misdemeanor for any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions or terms of this chapter for each day during which the offense continued. In addition to receiving any monetary remuneration, the city shall have the right to seek injunctive relief for any and all violations of this chapter and all other remedies provided at law or in equity. (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

5.07.160 Severability.
Should any section, paragraph, sentence, clause, phrase or word of this ordinance be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court or agency of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses, phrases or words of this ordinance, all of which shall remain in full force and effect. This ordinance is necessary to protect the public health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city and covers matters of local concern. The city council finds that an emergency exists due to the need for wireless telecommunications services to be provided to potential customers, who are residents and property owners of Lindon City. Accordingly, the city council orders that this ordinance be effective immediately upon its passage, approval and publication as provided by law. (Ord. 2000-14, adopted, 2000)

Chapter 5.08 ALCOHOL SALES AND LICENSING

Sections:
5.08.010     Definitions.
5.08.020     Business license required for all alcohol-related businesses.
5.08.030     Off-premise beer retailer license.
5.08.040     Written consent to applications for state issued retail alcohol license.
5.08.050     Employment of minors by a bar establishment licensee prohibited.
5.08.060     License – Transfer.
5.08.070     License – Application fee – Expiration date.
5.08.080     Inspection of licensed premises.
5.08.090     Violation – Penalty.

5.08.010 Definitions.
The following words and phrases used in this chapter shall have the following meanings unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context:
“Alcohol-related business” means any enterprise, business, or operation that allows a person to hold, store, possess, or consume an alcoholic product on the premises of the business such as a restaurant, association, bar or any similar business which is required to obtain and maintain a state issued license as defined in this chapter and any off-premise beer retailer as defined by this chapter.
“Alcohol training and education seminar” means a seminar required by Title 32B, Chapter 5, Part 4, Alcohol Training and Education Act, of the Utah State Code and as described in Section 62A-15-401.
“Alcoholic beverage” means beer or liquor.
“Alcoholic product” means a product that:
    a. Contains at least one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume; and
    b. Is obtained by fermentation, infusion, decoction, brewing, distillation, or other process that uses liquid or combinations of liquids, whether drinkable or not, to create alcohol in an amount equal to or greater than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume.
    c. “Alcoholic product” includes an alcoholic beverage.
    d. “Alcoholic product” does not include any of the following common items that otherwise come within the definition of an alcoholic product:
        i. An extract, except an extract containing alcohol obtained by distillation when it is used as flavoring in the manufacturing of an alcoholic product;
        ii. Vinegar;
        iii. Cider;
        iv. Essence;
        v. Tincture;
        vi. Food preparation; or
        vii. An over-the-counter medicine.
“Bar establishment license” means a license issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B, Chapter 5, Retail License Act, and Chapter 6, Part 4, Bar Establishment License, of the Utah Code.
    a. “Bar establishment license” includes licenses designated by the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission as:
        i. A dining club license;
        ii. An equity license;
        iii. A fraternal license; or
        iv. A bar license.
“Beer” means any beverage containing not less than one-half of one percent (0.5%), but not more than four percent (4%), of alcohol by volume, or three and two-tenths percent (3.2%) weight and is obtained by the alcoholic fermentation of an infusion or decoction of any malted grain or similar products.
    a. Beer may or may not contain hops or other vegetable products.
    b. Beer includes beverages referred to as beer, ale, stout, lager, and porter.
    c. Beer includes malt or malted beverages but does not include a flavored malt beverage.
    d. Beer does not include heavy beer.
“Beer-only restaurant license” means a license issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B, Chapter 5, Retail License Act, and Chapter 6, Part 9, Beer-Only Restaurant License, of the Utah Code.
“Beer retailer” means a business that:
    a. Is engaged, primarily or incidentally, in the retail sale of beer to a patron, whether for consumption on or off the business premises; and:
        i. Is licensed as an off-premise beer retailer by Lindon City; or
        ii. Is licensed by the Utah Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control as an on-premise beer retailer.
“Beer wholesaling license” means a license issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B, Chapter 13, Beer Wholesaling License Act, of the Utah Code.
“Brewery manufacturing license” means a license issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B, Chapter 11, Part 5, Brewery Manufacturing License, of the Utah Code.
“Church” means a building set apart for worship in which religious services are held and with which clergy is associated, and that is tax exempt under the laws of the state of Utah.
“Community location” means a:
    a. Public or private school.
        i. For purposes of this chapter, “school” means a building used primarily for the general education of minors and does not include an educational facility as defined in this chapter;
    b. A church;
    c. A public library;
    d. A public playground; and
    e. A public park.
“Convention center” means a facility that is in total at least thirty thousand (30,000) square feet and as may be further defined by rules adopted by the Utah Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control.
“Distillery manufacturing license” means a license issued by the Utah Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control in accordance with Title 32B of the Utah Code, Chapter 11, Part 4, Distillery Manufacturing License.
“Education facility” includes a nursery school, an infant day care center, and a trade or technical school, but does not include a public or private school as defined by this chapter.
“Flavored malt beverage” means a beverage that contains at least one-half of one percent (0.5%) alcohol by volume and as is further defined in Section 32B-1-102 of the Utah Code.
    a. For purposes of this chapter, “flavored malt beverage” is considered a liquor.
“Full-service restaurant license” means a license issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B, Chapter 5, Retail License Act, and Chapter 6, Part 2, Full-Service Restaurant License, of the Utah Code.
“Heavy beer” means beer, as defined herein, containing more than four percent (4%) alcohol by volume.
    a. For purposes of this chapter, “heavy beer” is considered a liquor.
“Hotel license” means a license issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B, Chapter 5, Retail License Act, and Chapter  8b, Hotel License Act, of the Utah Code.
“Identification card” means an identification card issued under Title 53, Chapter 3, Part 8, Identification Card Act, of the Utah Code.
“Intoxicated” means that a person is significantly impaired as to the person’s mental or physical functions as a result of the use of an alcoholic product, a controlled substance, or a substance having the property of releasing toxic vapors; and exhibits plain and easily observed outward manifestations of behavior or physical signs produced by the overconsumption of an alcoholic product, the abovementioned substances, or a combination of the same.
“Limited-service restaurant license” means a license issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B, Chapter 4, Retail License Act, and Chapter 6, Part 3, Limited-Service Restaurant License, of the Utah Code.
“Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license” means a license issued by Lindon City in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
“Liquor” means a liquid that:
    a. Is alcohol, alcoholic, spirituous, vinous, fermented, malt, or other liquid or combination of liquids, a part of which is spirituous, vinous, or fermented, and all other drinks or drinkable liquids containing more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume; and all mixtures, compounds or preparations, whether liquid or not, which contain more than one-half of one percent (0.5%) of alcohol by volume, and which are capable of human consumption.
    b. “Liquor” includes:
        i. Flavored malt beverages;
        ii. Heavy beer; and
        iii. Wine.
    c. “Liquor” does not include beer.
“Liquor warehousing license” means a license issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B, Chapter 12, Liquor Warehousing License Act, of the Utah Code.
“Manufacture” means to distill, brew, rectify, mix, compound, process, ferment, or otherwise make an alcoholic product for personal use or for sale or distribution to others.
“Minor” means an individual under the age of twenty-one (21) years.
“Off-premise beer retailer” means a beer retailer who is licensed by Lindon City, in accordance with this chapter and by the Utah Department of Alcoholic Beverage Control in accordance with Title 32B, Chapter 7, Off-Premise Beer Retailer Act, of the Utah Code, and who is engaged in the retail sale of beer to a patron for consumption off of the beer retailer’s premises.
    a. “Off-premise beer retailer” does not include an on-premise beer retailer.
“On-premise banquet license” means a license issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B of the Utah Code, Chapter 5, Retail License Act, and Chapter 6, Part 6, On-Premise Banquet License.
“On-premise beer retailer” means a beer retailer who is authorized to sell, offer for sale, or furnish beer under a license issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B, Chapter 5, Retail License Act, and Chapter 6, Part 7, On-Premise Beer Retailer License, of the Utah Code, and who is engaged in the sale of beer for consumption on the licensed premises.
“Proof of age” means an identification card.
    a. “Proof of age” includes the following, provided they include the date of birth and have a picture affixed:
        i. A valid driver license issued by the state of Utah;
        ii. A valid driver license from any other state;
        iii. A military identification; or
        iv. A valid passport.
    b. “Proof of age” does not include a driving privilege card issued pursuant to Section 53-3-207 of the Utah Code.
“Reception center” means a business that operates facilities that are at least five thousand (5,000) square feet; and has as its primary purpose the leasing of the facilities to a third party for the third party’s event.
“Reception center license” means a license issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B of the Utah Code, Chapter 5, Retail License Act, and Chapter 6, Part 8, Reception Center License.
“Resort license” means a license issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B of the Utah Code, Chapter 5, Retail License Act, and Chapter 8, Resort License Act.
“Responsible alcohol service plan” means a written set of policies and procedures that outlines measures to prevent employees from over-serving alcoholic beverages to customers, serving alcoholic beverages to customers who are intoxicated, and serving alcoholic beverages to minors as required by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
“Sell” or “to sell,” when used in this chapter, means to solicit, or to receive an order for, to keep or expose for sale, to deliver for value or gratuitously, to peddle, to possess with intent to sell, to traffic in, for any consideration promised or obtained directly or indirectly or under any pretext or by any means whatsoever to procure or allow to be procured for any other person, and “sale” when so used shall include every act of selling as above defined.
“Special use permit” means a permit issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B, Chapter 10, Special Use Permit Act, of the Utah Code.
“State issued retail alcohol license” means any of the following licenses as defined in this chapter:
    a. A bar establishment license;
    b. A beer-only restaurant license;
    c. A beer wholesaling license;
    d. A brewery manufacturing license;
    e. A distillery manufacturing license;
    f. A full-service restaurant license;
    g. A hotel license;
    h. A limited-service restaurant license;
    i. A liquor warehousing license;
    j. A state off-premise beer retailer license;
    k. An on-premise banquet license;
    l. A reception center license;
    m. A resort license;
    n. A special use permit;
    o. A temporary beer event permit; and
    p. A winery manufacturing license.
“State off-premise beer retailer license” means a state license issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B, Chapter 7, Part 4, Off-Premise Beer Retailer State License, of the Utah Code.
“Temporary beer event permit” means a permit issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B, Chapter 9, Part 4, Temporary Beer Event Permit, of the Utah Code.
“Wine” means an alcoholic product obtained by the fermentation of the natural sugar content of fruits, plants, honey, or milk, or other like substance, whether or not another ingredient is added.
    a. For purposes of this chapter, “wine” is considered a liquor.
“Winery manufacturing license” means a license issued by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B, Chapter 11, Part 3, Winery Manufacturing License, of the Utah Code. (Ord. 2018-11 §1, amended, 2018; Ord. 126 §3, amended, 1985; Prior code §6-2; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000)

5.08.020 Business license required for all alcohol-related businesses.
1. Business License Required. It is unlawful for any person or entity to own or operate an alcohol-related business within the corporate limits of the city without first having procured a business license therefor from Lindon City as hereinafter provided.
2. State Issued Retail Alcohol License/Lindon City Off-Premise Beer Retailer License Required. No business license shall be issued to an alcohol-related business until a separate, corresponding, state issued retail alcohol license, or Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license, has been secured by the owner of the alcohol-related business and proof thereof is provided to Lindon City.
    a. If an applicant is required to show proof of a city business license in order to secure a state issued retail alcohol license, the business license clerk may issue a temporary alcohol-related business license that shall be valid for thirty (30) days, provided the applicant meets all other requirements of this section.
    b. If an applicant, who has been issued a temporary business license under this section, fails to provide proof of a state issued retail alcohol license to the city within thirty (30) days of the issuance of the temporary business license, the application for a business license shall automatically be deemed to have been withdrawn, and of no further effect.
        i. The right to operate an alcohol-related business within the city shall cease without further action or notice from Lindon City.
        ii. Each day the alcohol-related business continues to operate after a temporary business license has lapsed under this section shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter.
3. Qualifications of Licensee. A business license may not be granted for an alcohol-related business:
    a. Unless the licensee is of good moral character, over twenty-one (21) years of age, and lawfully present in the United States;
    b. To anyone who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
    c. To any partnership, association, or corporation if any member, director, or officer lacks the qualifications set forth in this chapter.
4. Written Disclosures. An application for an alcohol-related business license shall be accompanied by written disclosures and information verifying the qualifications of the licensee and shall include:
    a. Proof of the applicant’s identification and lawful presence in the United States;
    b. A completed BCI background check.
        i. To the extent permitted by state and/or federal law, all BCI background checks will remain confidential and protected as a private record not available for public inspection;
    c. The city may consult any and all publicly available sources for information on the applicant including but not limited to databases for any outstanding warrants, protective orders, or civil judgments and may require additional disclosures as may be necessary to ensure the good moral character of any applicant;
    d. Partnerships, associations, and corporations applying for an alcohol-related business license shall provide the required written disclosures for each individual member, director, and officer;
    e. A copy of the applicant’s responsible alcohol service plan; and
    f. A map showing proximity of the proposed alcohol-related business to community locations and verification that state issued retail alcohol license holders comply with the proximity requirements of Section 32B-1-202 of the Utah Code.
        i. Applicants for a Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license must show compliance with the proximity to community locations requirements as required by Section 5.08.030(5).
5. License Fee. All applicants for an initial alcohol-related business license shall pay a license fee in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300), or in the amount as may be amended by the Lindon City Council and set forth in the Lindon City fee schedule.
    a. An alcohol-related business must be renewed on an annual basis and shall pay a renewal fee as set forth in Section 5.08.070.
6. License Does Not Constitute Written Consent. A business license issued under this chapter shall not constitute the written consent of Lindon City to an application to the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission for a retail license as required by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
7. Display of License. Both the business license and the state issued retail alcohol license or Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license shall at all times be conspicuously displayed in the place to which it shall refer or for which it shall be issued.
8. Separate Locations.  A business license shall be required for each place of sale or service of alcohol.
9. Revocation of Alcohol-Related Business License. All alcohol-related business license holders shall comply with all applicable provisions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act of Utah and the established regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission at all times in the operations and maintenance of their alcohol-related businesses, including alcohol training and education seminars for employees. If at any time such a license holder fails to comply with such regulations or if the state issued retail alcohol license or Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license is revoked or denied, the business license may be revoked and declared null and void by the business license clerk.
    a. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the business license clerk with respect to the revocation of a business license based on a finding of noncompliance with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act may appeal to the Lindon City Council.
        i. The appeal must be filed within ten (10) days of the business license clerk issuing the finding of noncompliance.
        ii. Upon receipt of the written notice of appeal, a time and place for hearing such appeal shall be set within thirty (30) days and notice shall be given to such person of the time and place of the hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at their last known address.
        iii. The city council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal by a preponderance of the evidence.
    b. The revocation of a state issued retail alcohol license by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission shall be a per se reason for revocation of the corresponding business license for which there is no right of appeal.
    c. In the event that a state issued retail alcohol license is reinstated after a corresponding business license has been revoked by Lindon City, the owner of an alcohol-related business must apply for and secure a new business license from the city before resuming operations of the alcohol-related business. (Ord. 2018-11 §1, amended, 2018; Ord. 2004-7, amended, 2004; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §6-1)

5.08.030 Off-premise beer retailer license.
1. Lindon City Off-Premise Beer Retailer License Required. It is unlawful for any person within the limits of Lindon City to engage in the business of the retail sales of beer to a patron for consumption off of the retailer’s premises without first obtaining a Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license from Lindon City.
2. State Off-Premise Beer Retailer License Required. No Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license shall be issued to an off-premise beer retailer until a separate state off-premise beer retailer license has been obtained from the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission in accordance with Title 32B, Chapter 7, Part 4 of the Utah Code.
3. Qualifications of Licensee. A Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license may not be granted:
    a. Unless the licensee is of good moral character, over twenty-one (21) years of age, and lawfully present in the United States;
    b. To anyone who has been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude; or
    c. To any partnership, association, or corporation if any member, director, or officer lacks the qualifications set forth in this chapter.
4. Written Disclosures. An application for a Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license shall be accompanied by written disclosures and information verifying the qualifications of the licensee and shall include:
    a. Proof of the applicant’s identification and lawful presence in the United States;
    b. A completed BCI background check.
        i. To the extent permitted by state and/or federal law, all BCI background checks will remain confidential and protected as a private record not available for public inspection;
    c. The city may consult any and all publicly available sources for information on the applicant including but not limited to databases for any outstanding warrants, protective orders, or civil judgments and may require additional disclosures as may be necessary to ensure the good moral character of any applicant;
    d. Partnerships, associations, and corporations applying for an alcohol-related business license shall provide the required written disclosures for each individual member, director, and officer;
    e. A floor plan of the premises that outlines the location of each beer display;
    f. A copy of the applicant’s responsible alcohol service plan;
    g. A map showing the proximity of the proposed off-premise beer retail location and community locations;
    h. A signed consent form stating that the applicant will permit an authorized representative of Lindon City or any law enforcement officer to have unrestricted right to enter the licensed premises.
5. Proximity to Community Locations. No Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license may be issued if on the date the application is submitted there is a community location within six hundred feet (600') of the proposed retail location, as measured from the nearest entrance of the proposed retail location by following the shortest route of ordinary pedestrian travel to the property boundary of the community location, or within three hundred feet (300') of the proposed retail location, measured in a straight line from the nearest entrance of the proposed retail location to the nearest property boundary of the community location.
    a. The city council may grant a variance or waiver of the proximity requirements of this section if an applicant can show that there are special circumstances unique to the proposed retail location which do not generally apply to other similar retail locations and that granting the variance or waiver would not be detrimental to the public health, peace, safety, or welfare of the community.
        i. The burden of proving special circumstances and of showing that the requested variance or waiver will not be detrimental to the public health, peace, safety, or welfare of the community rests upon the applicant. The decision to grant or deny a request for a variance or waiver under this section constitutes a legislative action by the city council and is subject to a reasonably debatable standard.
    b. An off-premise beer retailer operating prior to June 30, 2018, may continue to operate within proximity to the community locations as they existed at the time the original license was issued; provided, that there has been no lapse in the use of the property as an off-premise beer retailer.
        i. This right to continue operations as an off-premise beer retailer under previous proximity requirements shall not be terminated based on change in ownership of the off-premise beer retailer or ownership of the real property on which the off-premise beer retailer is located.
6. Lindon City Off-Premise Beer Retailer License for a Brewery Manufacturing License. The owner of a properly issued brewery manufacturing license may apply for and receive a Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license; provided, that the retail portion of such facility complies with the requirements of this chapter and the owner follows and complies with the requirements of this chapter and with the provisions of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
7. License Fee. All applicants for a Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license shall pay a license fee in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300) or in the amount as may be amended by the Lindon City Council and set forth in the Lindon City fee schedule.
    a. A Lindon City off-premise business license must be renewed on an annual basis and an applicant shall pay a renewal fee as set forth in Section 5.08.070.
8. Separate Locations. A separate Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license shall be required for each place or location of off-premise beer retail sales.
9. Separation of Beer from Nonalcoholic Beverages and Notice to Consumers. All beer sold by an off-premise beer retailer shall be displayed in an area that is visibly separate and distinct from locations in which nonalcoholic beverages are displayed and sold.
    a. Display areas containing beer shall be labeled with a sign that is prominent and easily readable by a consumer and meets the requirements of the Off-Premise Beer Retailer Act found in Title 32B, Chapter 7 of the Utah State Code and informs the consumer that the beverages contain alcohol.
10. Alcohol Training and Education. All off-premise beer retailers shall ensure that all staff selling beer, or supervising the sale of beer, are properly trained pursuant to the requirements of the Alcohol Training and Education Act as set forth in Title 32B, Chapter 5, Part 4 of the Utah Code.
    a. An individual hired with the responsibility to sell beer, or supervise the sale of beer, for an off-premise beer retailer shall complete an alcohol training and education seminar within thirty (30) days of the date on which they begin such employment if they do not have a valid record of previously completing such training.
    b. Lindon City shall immediately suspend the license of an off-premise beer retailer that allows an individual to work as a supervisor or manager of the sale of beer without having a valid record that the individual completed an alcohol training and education seminar.
11. Staff Authorized to Sell Beer/Maintenance of Records. 
    a. A minor may not sell beer to consumers unless:
        i. The minor is at least sixteen (16) years of age;
        ii. Has been properly trained pursuant to the requirements of the Alcohol Training and Education Act; and
        iii. Is directly supervised by a person twenty-one (21) years of age or older who has been properly trained pursuant to the requirements of the Alcohol Training and Education Act.
    b. All off-premise beer retailers shall identify and maintain identifying information of all staff who directly sell or supervise the sale of beer to patrons for consumption off the premises pursuant to the requirements of the Off-Premise Beer Retailer Act found in Title 32B, Chapter 7 of the Utah Code and shall make such records available for immediate inspection by a peace officer or other city representative upon request.
    c. Any off-premise beer retailer who is found to have failed to maintain the records as required by this chapter and/or by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Act shall be subject to a fine of up to two hundred fifty dollars ($250) for each employee for whom the records are not correctly maintained.
12. Penalties Related to Sales to Minors. 
    a. In addition to any criminal penalty that might be imposed, Lindon City shall impose the following sanctions upon an off-premise beer retailer if an individual who, while on duty as staff of an off-premise beer retailer, is found in violation of the law involving the sale of an alcoholic product to a minor:
        i. Upon the first violation, a written warning shall be issued against the off-premise beer retailer;
        ii. Upon a second violation, a civil fine of two hundred fifty dollars ($250) shall be imposed against the off-premise beer retailer;
        iii. Upon a third violation, an off-premise beer retailer shall pay a civil fine of five hundred dollars ($500);
        iv. Upon a fourth violation, an off-premise beer retailer shall pay a civil fine of five hundred dollars ($500), have off-premise beer retailer license suspended for thirty (30) days and be placed on probation for one (1) year;
        v. Any violation occurring during the probationary period will result in immediate revocation of the off-premise beer retailer license for a period of at least six (6) months and an additional civil fine of five hundred dollars ($500);
        vi. Any violation occurring after an off-premise beer retailer has had their license revoked for at least a six (6) month period will result in the permanent revocation of the off-premise beer retailer license; and
        vii. Failure to pay the fines imposed pursuant to this chapter within thirty (30) days of the day on which the fine is imposed is grounds for suspension of the license until the payment is made.
    b. In addition to any criminal penalty that might be imposed, an individual who, while on duty as staff of an off-premise beer retailer and after having completed an alcohol training and education seminar, is found in violation of the law involving the sale of an alcoholic product to a minor is subject to the following administrative sanctions:
        i. Upon a first violation, the individual may not sell or directly supervise a sale of beer to any customer until the individual retakes and completes an alcohol training education seminar;
        ii. Upon a second violation, an individual may not sell or directly supervise the sale of beer for the longer of a period of ninety (90) days or until the individual retakes and completes an alcohol training education seminar and completes any additional training that may be required by Lindon City;
        iii. Upon a third violation, an individual may not sell or directly supervise the sale of beer for a period of one (1) year and must again complete the alcohol and training education seminar and any other additional training that Lindon City may require.
    c. Any off-premise beer retailer found to be allowing an individual to sell or supervise the sale of beer while being suspended pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall immediately have their Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license suspended.
    d. Prior to imposing any sanction provided for under this section, Lindon City shall hold an administrative hearing administered by the city administrator, or a hearing officer appointed by the city administrator, if requested by the off-premise beer retailer or the employee alleged to have violated the law regarding the sale of alcohol to a minor.
        i. Upon a request for an administrative hearing, the city administrator, or the appointed hearing officer, shall give notice of the hearing and provide an opportunity to be heard within thirty (30) days of the request.
        ii. The prescribed sanction may be imposed only if the city administrator, or the appointed hearing officer, finds by a preponderance of the evidence that the violation occurred.
13. Revocation of Lindon City Off-Premise Beer Retailer License. All Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license holders shall comply with all applicable provisions of this chapter, the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act found in Title 32B of the Utah Code, and the established regulations of the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission, including alcohol training and education seminars for employees.
    a. The city recorder may suspend or revoke a Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license if:
        i. At any time a license holder fails to comply with the provisions of this chapter, the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act found in Title 32B of the Utah Code, or the established regulations of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission, including alcohol training and education seminars for employees;
        ii. The state off-premise beer retailer license is revoked or denied by Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission;
        iii. The applicant knowingly made a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the application for the license, or in any amendment or report to be made thereunder; or
        iv. Continuance of the license would be inconsistent with public health, safety or general welfare of the residents of Lindon City.
    b. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city administrator, or the appointed hearing officer, with respect to the revocation of a Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license based on a finding of noncompliance with this chapter or with the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, may appeal to the Lindon City Council by filing a notice of appeal with the city recorder.
        i. The appeal must be filed within ten (10) days of the city administrator, or the appointed hearing officer, issuing the decision to revoke the Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license.
        ii. Upon receipt of the written notice of appeal, a time and place for hearing such appeal shall be set within thirty (30) days and notice shall be given to such person of the time and place of the hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at their last known address.
        iii. The city council shall have authority to determine all questions raised on such appeal.
    c. The revocation of the corresponding state issued off-premise beer retailer license by the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission shall be a per se reason for the revocation of a Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license for which there is no right of appeal.
    d. In the event that there is a reinstatement of a state issued off-premise beer retailer license, the off-premise beer retailer must reapply for and secure a new Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license.
        i. Lindon City shall consider and weigh all circumstances and conditions related to the suspension and reinstatement of the state issued off-premise beer retailer license and may deny an application for a Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license if the city is not satisfied that the circumstances leading to the original suspension have not be adequately addressed or remedied. (Ord. 2018-11 §1, amended, 2018; Ord. 2004-7, amended, 2004; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §6-3)

5.08.040 Written consent to applications for state issued retail alcohol license.
With the exception of off-premise beer retailers, the licensing of alcohol-related businesses is reserved to the Utah Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission. However, as part of the state licensing process, applicants seeking a state issued retail alcohol license for a facility or event in Lindon City are required to obtain the written consent of Lindon City for such license or permit. The process for issuing Lindon City’s written consent shall be as follows:
1. Requirements to Issue Written Consent. The city recorder is authorized to issue Lindon City’s written consent to an application for a state issued retail alcohol license, upon finding that an applicant has satisfied the following requirements:
    a. That the applicant meets the required qualifications of a licensee as set forth in Section 5.08.020(2);
    b. That the applicant has provided Lindon City with all written disclosures required in Section 5.08.020(4);
    c. That the location of the proposed alcohol-related business meets the respective requirements for proximity to community locations as set forth in this chapter and in the Utah Alcohol Control Act;
    d. That the applicant has paid the business license fee set forth in Section 5.08.020(5); and
    e. That the applicant has not had any state issued retail alcohol licenses or a Lindon City off-premise beer retailer license revoked or suspended within the last six (6) months.
2. Issuance of Consent or Denial. The city recorder shall issue the written consent to a request for a state issued retail alcohol license, or a written denial of such request if the city recorder finds that any of the requirements set forth in this subsection have not been satisfied, within thirty (30) days of receiving the request for written consent.
3. Appeal of a Denial to Issue Written Consent. Any person aggrieved by any decision of the city recorder with respect to the denial of a request for written consent may appeal to the Lindon City Council by filing a written notice of appeal.
    a. Any appeal must be filed within ten (10) days of the city recorder issuing the written denial of the request for consent.
    b. Upon receipt of the written notice of appeal, a time and place for hearing the appeal shall be set within thirty (30) days and notice shall be given to such person of the time and place of hearing by serving it personally or by depositing it in the United States Post Office, postage prepaid, addressed to such person at their last known address.
    c. The city council shall have the authority to determine all questions raised on the appeal by a preponderance of the evidence. (Ord. 2018-11 §1, amended, 2018; Ord. 2004-7, amended, 2004; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §6-4)

5.08.050 Employment of minors by a bar establishment licensee prohibited.
Pursuant to the authority granted by Section 32B-6-406 of the Utah Code, no bar establishment licensee shall employ any minor to work on the premises where an alcohol product is served. (Ord. 2018-11 §1, amended, 2018; Ord. 2004-7, amended, 2004; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §6-5)

5.08.060 License – Transfer.
All licenses issued under this chapter shall not be transferable and upon revocation thereof the fee paid by the licensee to the city for said license shall be forfeited to the city. (Ord. 2018-11 §1, renumbered, 2018; Ord. 2004-7, amended, 2004; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §6-6. Formerly 5.08.100)

5.08.070 License – Application fee – Expiration date.
1. Applications provided for in this chapter shall be accompanied by the fees established by this code and as may be modified by the city council and set forth in the Lindon City fee schedule.
2. All alcohol-related business licenses issued hereunder shall expire on the thirty-first day of December, unless canceled sooner, and must be renewed annually on or before January 1st.
    a. A fee for the renewal of an alcohol-related business license shall be paid in an amount established by the Lindon City Council and set forth in the Lindon City fee schedule. (Ord. 2018-11 §1, renumbered, 2018; Ord. 2004-7, amended, 2004; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §6-7. Formerly 5.08.110)

5.08.080 Inspection of licensed premises.
All premises licensed under this chapter shall be subject to inspection by any officer, agent, or peace officer of the city or the Alcoholic Beverage Control Commission, or the State Board of Health, and every licensee shall, at the request of the city, State Board or Utah County Health Department, furnish to them samples of beer which the licensee shall have for sale. (Ord. 2018-11 §1, renumbered, 2018; Ord. 2004-7, amended, 2004; Ord. 2002-3, amended, 2002; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 133 §1, amended, 1985; Ord. 126 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §6-12. Formerly 5.08.150)

5.08.090 Violation – Penalty.
In addition to any administrative penalties provided for in this chapter, it is unlawful for any person to violate any provision of this chapter. Unless otherwise provided herein, any person convicted of violating any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Each day that any violation or failure to perform an act required under this chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2018-11 §1, renumbered, 2018; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 2002-3, amended, 2002; Ord. 133 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §6-9. Formerly 5.08.160)

Chapter 5.10 ALCOHOL BEVERAGE CONTROL ACT

Sections:
5.10.010     Adoption of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.

5.10.010 Adoption of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act.
The “Alcoholic Beverage Control Act” as contained in Title 32A, U.C.A., 1953 as amended and constituted in 2004, is hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Ordinances of Lindon City. Where a citation, information, or complaint is issued under Title 32A of Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended, as adopted herein, it shall be sufficient to use the section number of the Utah Code to designate the section number of the City Code which has been violated. Those portions of the Alcoholic Beverage Control Act, as adopted herein, referring to or dealing with felonies which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, or punishments associated with felonies which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, are not part of the adopted Code of Lindon City. Those portions of the above-referenced Utah Code provisions which are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Ordinances of Lindon City referring to or dealing with Class “A” misdemeanors which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City are hereby specifically excepted, and are not part of the adopted Code of Lindon City. (Ord. 95-1, amended, 1995; Ord. 93-18, amended, 1993; Ord. 2005-4, amended, 2005; Ord. 2000-15, amended, 2000; Ord. 99-1, amended, 2000; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000)

Chapter 5.12 AMUSEMENT DEVICES

Sections:
5.12.010     License--Required.
5.12.020     License--Application.
5.12.030     Inspection.
5.12.040     License--Revocation.

5.12.010 License--Required.
It is unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to carry on the business of keeping, maintaining or offering for rent or any other compensation or amusement any tables or devices on which or by means of which any game of cards or other similar game can be played without first obtaining a license therefor as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-33)

5.12.020 License--Application.
Any person desiring a license to operate any table or device described in the next preceding section shall file with the recorder of the city application in writing stating the number and kind of such table or device, the names of all persons operating or to be interested in such business or enterprise, the exact street address of each place where such tables or devices are to be kept or used, the game or games which will be permitted to be played upon or by means of such tables or devices and the rental or fees to be charged therefor. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-34)

5.12.030 Inspection.
Every person owning, operating or in any way connected with any of the activities or the keeping, maintaining or operation of any of the devices hereinbefore mentioned shall at all times during which activities are carried on or the devices are being used, keep the rooms, building or other place in which the activities are carried on or such devices used well-lighted and open to inspection at any time by any police officer and shall not curtain or otherwise obscure vision through the windows of such room, building or other place, nor keep a lookout, guard or any mechanical warning device to warn occupants of such place of the approach of any person whomsoever. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-35)

5.12.040 License--Revocation.
The license herein provided for may be refused or revoked, after notice and hearing, by the city council of the city if the city finds that:
1. The licensee fails to comply with the ordinances of the city; or
2. The licensee has violated any of the provisions of this chapter; or
3. The licensee has been convicted of a crime, if the crime is substantially related to the qualifications, functions, or duties of the licensee for which the license has been issued; or
4. The licensee has committed any act involving dishonesty, fraud or deceit with intent to substantially benefit himself or another, or substantially injure another; or
5. The licensee knowingly made a false statement of fact required to be revealed in the application for the license, or in any amendment or report to be made thereunder; or
6. Continuance of the license would be inconsistent with public health, safety or general welfare. (Ord. 127 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §4-36; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000)

Chapter 5.14 BURGLAR, ROBBERY AND FIRE ALARMS

Sections:
5.14.010     Purpose and Scope.
5.14.020     Definitions.
5.14.030     Businesses and Users; Registration and Permit Required.
5.14.040     Alarm Users Responsibilities.
5.14.050     Alarm System Monitoring Companies Responsibilities.
5.14.060     Unlawful Activation or Report of Alarm.
5.14.070     Determination of False Alarm; Rebuttable Presumption.
5.14.080     False Alarms: Penalty.
5.14.090     Right to Hearing and Appeal.
5.14.100     City Liability Limitations.
5.14.110     Violation - Penalties.

5.14.010 Purpose and Scope.
1. The purpose and scope of this ordinance is to protect the limited public safety resources and services of the city from misuse.
2. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply to all alarm users, alarm businesses, employees of alarm businesses, and alarm systems which are installed, connected, operated or maintained on or prior to the date on which the ordinance codified in this Chapter became effective, and subsequent thereto.

5.14.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this ordinance, the following words have the meanings respectively ascribed to them in this Section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning.
“Alarm system” means a mechanical or electrical device designed, installed or used for the purpose of giving notice of a burglary, robbery or fire alarm or other breach of security.
“Alarm system monitoring company” means any individual, partnership, corporation or other form of associations that engages in the business of monitoring security alarm systems and reporting any activation of such alarm systems to the public safety department.
“Alarm user” means any individual, partnership, corporation, or other form of association that owns, leases or rents a security alarm system or on whose premises a security alarm system is maintained for the protection of the premises.
“Chief of police” means the Chief of the Police of the police department serving Lindon City and the Chief’s designee.
“Department” means the Public Safety Department, including police and fire, serving Lindon City.
“Dispatch or response” means the discretionary decision whether to direct police or fire units to a location where there has been a request, made by whatever” means, for police or fire assistance or investigation. There is not duty to dispatch under any circumstances, including to answer an alarm signal, and all dispatch decisions are made subject to competing priorities and available police or fire resources.
“False alarm” means an alarm signal eliciting notification to and a response by the Department when there is no evidence of a crime or fire or other activity that warrants a call for immediate Department assistance and no person who was on or near the property or has viewed a video communication from the property call for Department assistance. “False Alarm” does not include an alarm signal caused by violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances beyond the control of the alarm use.
“Security alarm system” means any system, device, or mechanism for the detection and reporting of any unauthorized entry or attempted entry or property damage upon premises protected by the system that may be activated by sensors or other techniques and, when activated, automatically transmits a telephone message or emits an audible, visible, or electronic signal that can be heard, seen, or received by person outside of the protected premises and is intended to summon Department assistance.

5.14.030 Businesses and Users; Registration and Permit Required.
1. Licensing. It is unlawful for any person to engage in the practice of an alarm business, alarm company or alarm agent in the city as defined in Utah Code Section 58-55-102 (1953) as amended, without a valid license therefore issued in accordance with the provisions of the Utah Burglar Alarm Security and Licensing Act, Sections 58-55-101 et. Seq., or the Utah Code (1953), as amended.
2. Owner Permit. No alarm business, alarm company or alarm agent shall install any alarm system in the city unless the owner, lessee, or lawful occupant of the premises on which the alarm system is to be installed has a valid alarm permit issued by the city.
3. User Permit. Every alarm user shall obtain from the Department an alarm user’s permit for each system prior to any installation of an alarm system. An application for a burglary, robbery or fire alarm user’s permit and an initial twenty-five dollar ($25.00) fee shall be filed with the Department. The permit shall be physically upon the premises using the alarm system and shall be available for inspection by the city.
4. Permit Application. The alarm user’s permit application shall set forth the full name, address and telephone number of both the owner or lessee on whose premises the system will be installed, operated or maintained and the name of the person or licenses alarm business or company responsible for maintaining the alarm system.

5.14.040 Alarm Users Responsibilities.
An Alarm User shall:
1. Maintain the premises and security alarm system in a manner that will minimize or eliminate false alarms;
2. Review all alarm system operating instructions, including those for verification of an alarm;
3. Notify the alarm system monitoring company of a false alarm activation as soon as the user is aware of the false alarm; and
4. Not manually activate an alarm except when needing an immediate police or fire response to an emergency.

5.14.050 Alarm System Monitoring Companies Responsibilities.
An Alarm System Monitoring Company engaging in business in the city shall:
1. Obtain all necessary business licenses as required by the city and the State of Utah.
2. Maintain a current record, accessible to the Public Safety Director or designee at all times, which includes the names of the alarm users serviced by the company, the addresses of the protected properties; the type of alarm system, original installation date and subsequent modifications, if any, for each protected property; and a record of the false alarms at each property.
3. Provide the Public Safety Director or designee such information as the Director requests regarding; the nature of the company’s security alarms; the company’s method of monitoring the alarms; the company’s program for preventing false alarms, including educational programs for alarm users; and the company’s method for disconnecting audible alarms.
4. Provide each of its alarm system users with operating instructions for the alarm system, including an explanation of the alarm company’s alarm verifications process; a telephone number to call for assistance in operating the system; and a summary of the provisions of this ordinance relating to penalties for false alarms and the possibility of no response from the Department to alarm systems experiencing excessive false alarms.
5. Maintain a verification process, for all monitored security alarm systems in order to prevent unnecessary Department dispatches resulting from false alarms.
6. Communicate requests for cancellations of the Department response in a manner specified by the Director or designee.
7. Maintain a record of all requests for Department responses to an alarm, including the date and time of the alarm and request for Department response; the alarm system user’s name and address; evidence of the company’s attempt to verify the alarm; and, to the best of its knowledge, an explanation of the cause of any false alarm, and
8. Work cooperatively with the alarm system user and the Department in order to determine the cause of any false alarms and to prevent reoccurrences.

5.14.060 Unlawful Activation or Report of Alarm.
1. No person shall activate a security alarm system for the purpose of summoning the Department except in the event of fire, an unauthorized entry, robbery, or other crime being committed or attempted on the premises, or if the person needs immediate assistance in order to avoid injury or serious bodily harm.
2. Any person who notifies the Department of an activated alarm and has knowledge that such activation was apparently caused by an electrical or other malfunction shall at the same time notify the Department of the apparent malfunction.

5.14.070 Determination of False Alarm; Rebuttable Presumption.
For the purposes of this ordinance, there is a rebuttable presumption that the following determinations made by the Department personnel dispatched to the premises reporting an alarm signal are correct:
1. There is no evidence of a fire, crime or other activity that would warrant a call for immediate fire or police assistance at the premises.
2. No individual who was on or near the premises or who has viewed a video communication from the premises called for a fire or police dispatch or verified a need for an immediate Department response, and
3. There is no evidence that violent conditions of nature or other extraordinary circumstances beyond the control of the alarm user caused the activation of the alarm.

5.14.080 False Alarms: Penalty.
1. The penalty for a false alarm is a civil infraction, and the alarm system user shall be penalized by an administrative service fee to the city according to the following schedule:
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| • First false alarm in a calendar year: | Written warning               |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| • Second false alarm:                   | Fifty dollars ($50.00)        |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| • Third false alarm:                    | Seventy-five dollars ($75.00) |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+
| • Fourth and subsequent false alarms:   | One Hundred dollars ($100.00) |
+-----------------------------------------+-------------------------------+
2. All administrative service fees assessed under this ordinance shall be paid to the city within thirty (30) days of the date that notice of the assessment of the service fee is mailed to the alarm user. If any service fee is not paid within the time set forth above, a $35.00 late fee shall be assessed for each month thereafter that the fee remains unpaid.
3. The city may use all available legal remedies to collect delinquent service fees and late penalties. If the delinquent service fee is owed by a business, payment of the fee and late penalties may be required prior to the renewal of the alarm user’s Business or Alcoholic Beverage License.
4. An alarm permit shall be suspended for any failure by the alarm user to pay any administrative service fee and applicable late penalties imposed pursuant to this chapter within 120 days of the date that notice of the assessment of the service fee is mailed to the alarm user. The Public Safety Director may also suspend any alarm permit if the Director determines that the alarm system in question has a history of unreliability, which unreliability shall be presumed upon the occurrence of five (5) false alarms within a ninety (90) day period.
5. A suspension for unreliability may be lifted upon a showing that the conditions which caused the false alarms have been corrected. An alarm user whose alarm permit is suspended by the Director shall pay a reinstatement fee of fifty dollars ($50) to the city before such permit shall be reinstated.
6. It shall be unlawful, and the basis for revocation of an alarm monitoring system company’s business license, to knowingly provide services to an alarm user which has been ordered to be disconnected from service pursuant to the provisions of this section.
7. Any person who uses, maintains, operates or is in control of any operational alarm system in the city while the alarm permit for such alarm system is suspended shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor.
8. To discourage false alarms, the Department shall adopt a process of providing written notice to an alarm user, who has more than one false alarm in a calendar year, of the consequences of excessive false alarms, the need to take corrective action, and the prospect that four (4) false alarms in a six (6) month period may result in the Department disregarding any future alarms from the premises unless independent information that verifies the need for an immediate response is provided.
9. Prior to determining not to respond to a premises, the Director shall provide written notice to the user that:
    a. Four (4) false alarms have been received from the property within a six month period;
    b. The remedies authorized in this chapter as noted above are to be instituted;
    c. The alarm system user may request a hearing before the Director or designee and explain why the city should not take the proposed action;
    d. If no hearing is requested, the Department will after ten (10) days from the delivery of the notice disregard alarms from the premises unless there is an in-person call or other independent information that verifies the need for an immediate response; and
    e. A requirement of an in-person communication or other verification shall remain in effect until notified otherwise.

5.14.090 Right to Hearing and Appeal.
1. An alarm user shall have the right to request a hearing to contest the imposition of any penalty under this chapter including: the imposition of any fee, suspension of any permit, or the determination of a false alarm. A written request for a hearing must be files by the alarm user with the Department within ten (10) business days of the date of mailing of the notice of imposition of the penalty. Notice of the imposition of a penalty shall be considered satisfied if sent by regular mail to the alarm user’s address listed in the alarm user’s information card. The request for a hearing shall include the alarm user’s name, address, telephone number, and a statement of the reasons for disputing the imposition of the penalty. A timely request for a hearing shall stay the imposition of any penalty until the hearing is decided. The Department’s determination of a false alarm, the imposition of an administrative service fee, or suspension of a permit shall be considered final if the alarm user fails to request a hearing within the time period set forth above.
2. The Director or designee shall conduct any hearings requested by the alarm user and shall affirm, modify, or vacate the imposition of the penalty after considering all of the evidence presented. An alarm shall be presumed to be a false alarm unless the alarm user can establish the existence of an emergency or other hazard at the time of the alarm by a preponderance of the evidence. The burden of proving the existence of an emergency shall be upon the alarm user. Hearings shall be conducted informally.
3. An alarm user may appeal the decision of the Director of designee to the City Administrator by filing a written request for a hearing with the City Administrator within ten (10) business days of the decision rendered in the initial hearing. If no request for an appeal hearing is made within the ten day period, the decision rendered in the initial hearing shall be considered final. The appeal hearing shall be conducted by the City Administrator or designee. The City Administrator, or designee, shall affirm, reverse, or modify the decision rendered in the initial hearing and the action taken in the appeal hearing shall be final.

5.14.100 City Liability Limitations.
Nothing in this chapter shall create or be construed to create a duty upon the Department of Public Safety or the city to respond to any alarm whether or not the alarm is false. An alarm, like any other request for service from the Department of Public Safety, may be responded to within the resources of the Department in light of other responses required by the Department at the time of the alarm.

5.14.110 Violation - Penalties.
1. An alarm system monitoring company’s failure to comply with any of the requirements of this ordinance shall be a civil infraction, punishable by a fine of up to two hundred and fifty dollars ($250.00). Each day of noncompliance shall constitute a separate offense.
2. Violations of the other sections of this ordinance shall be a Class C misdemeanor unless otherwise specified. (Ord. 2003-14, adopted, 2003)

Chapter 5.16 AUCTIONEERS

Sections:
5.16.010     Definition.
5.16.020     License--Bond execution and Approval Required.
5.16.030     Time of sale.
5.16.040     Applicability of charitable functions.
5.16.050     False representation unlawful.
5.16.060     Auction house--Defined.
5.16.070     Auction house--License required.
5.16.080     Auction house--Bond required.
5.16.090     Transient auction house owner Designation-- Applicability of chapter.
5.16.100     Transient auction house owner--License and bond--Required.
5.16.110     Permit--Required.
5.16.120     Sale of jewelry.
5.16.130     License--Revocation.
5.16.140     Receipt for goods.
5.16.150     Conduct of auction sales-Generally.

5.16.010 Definition.
An “auctioneer,” as contemplated in this chapter is a person who conducts a public competitive sale of property by outcry to the highest bona fide bidder. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-l)

5.16.020 License--Bond execution and Approval Required.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of auctioneer within the city without first procuring a license to do so. Such auctioneer shall execute a bond to the city with corporate surety in the sum of five hundred dollars ($500) conditional for the faithful observance of all laws and ordinances of the city and the honest performance of all duties required by ordinance and the protection of all persons dealing with such auctioneer against all fraud, deception and imposition; said bond to be approved by the city council and filed with the city recorder. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-l)

5.16.030 Time of sale.
All sales of goods, wares or merchandise by public auction in the city must be made between the hours of seven a.m. and seven p.m. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-2)

5.16.040 Applicability of charitable functions.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any auction held for charitable or benevolent purposes nor for any church fair, festival or bazaar. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-3)

5.16.050 False representation unlawful.
It is unlawful for any auctioneer when selling or offering for sale at public auction any goods/wares or merchandise under the provision of this chapter, while describing said goods, wares or merchandise with respect to character, quality, kind or value or otherwise, to make any fraudulent, misleading, untruthful or unwarranted statements tending in any way to mislead bidders or to substitute an article sold for another. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-4)

5.16.060 Auction house--Defined.
An “auction house,” as contemplated in this chapter, is a place where personal property is sold at auction by an auctioneer. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-5)

5.16.070 Auction house--License required.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in the business of, or to keep, conduct or operate an auction house within the city without first obtaining a license so to do (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-5)

5.16.080 Auction house--Bond required.
An applicant for an auction house license, who is not a transient auction house dealer, shall execute a corporate surety bond in the sum of $500 in favor of the city and of any person injured or damaged by false or fraudulent representations in dealing with said auction house, conditioned for the faithful observance of all-laws and ordinances of the city, the honest conduct of the business engaged in, and for the payment of damages of all persons injured or damaged by fraud or false or fraudulent representations in dealing with said auction house; said bond to be approved by the city council and filed with the city recorder. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-5)

5.16.090 Transient auction house owner Designation-- Applicability of chapter.
Any person, or any agent, servant or employee of any person who shall sell, or offer for sale at auction any goods, wares, merchandise or articles of value in or from any hotel, rooming house, dwelling house, boarding house, store, storeroom, stall, tent, building, structure, stand or other place indoors or outdoors within the city, and who shall occupy said place for the purpose of conducting a temporary business therein, shall be deemed a transient auction house owner for the purpose of this chapter; and the person, or any agent, servant or employee thereof so engaged shall not be relieved from the provisions of this chapter by reason of association temporarily with any licensed dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such temporary transient business in connection with or as part of or in the name of any other licensed dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-6)

5.16.100 Transient auction house owner--License and bond--Required.
No transient auction house owner shall be entitled to a license under any other provisions of the code of the city or as an auction house owner under the provisions of this chapter and said transient auction house owner shall file a corporate surety bond in like manner and for the same amount as an auction house owner. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-7)

5.16.110 Permit--Required.
It is unlawful for any auctioneer, or person/ to sell or offer to sell at public auction in the city, any stock or stocks of merchandise in whole or in part, or to keep, conduct or operate an auction house or a transient auction house in the city for the purpose of selling or offering for sale any stock of merchandise in whole or in part, without first obtaining from the city council of the city a permit in writing so to do and the city council will not issue a permit for any sale until it is satisfied by proof by the applicant or otherwise that neither fraud nor deception of any kind is contemplated or will be practiced, and that neither the sale, the reasons given there for, nor the goods to be sold have been or will thereafter be fraudulently or falsely advertised or in any way whatsoever misrepresented as far as said public auction is concerned; and said application for said permit shall be by verified petition, stating the name of the applicant, his residence, the street and number of the proposed place of sale, and shall set forth in detail the goods to be sold and what statements or representations are to be made or advertised regarding the same, and the length of time for which the permit is desired, and whether or not said business was previously in operation, designating the place where the same was conducted and furnishing the city council with such further evidence as shall be deemed necessary to establish the truth of the statements made in said petition. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-8)

5.16.120 Sale of jewelry.
The city council will not issue any permit to sell at public auction or to conduct or operate a public auction house for the purpose of selling any jewelry, diamonds or other precious stones, watches, gold and silver ware, gold and silver plated ware, bric-a-brac or articles of value, and other like merchandise after the 30th day of September and up to and including the 31st day of December of each and every year, except upon payment in advance of the license fee required to be paid by a transient auction house owner. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-9)

5.16.130 License--Revocation.
Licenses issued under this chapter may be revoked by the city council whenever it shall have been made to appear to its satisfaction upon a proper hearing that the licensee has violated any of the terms or provisions of this chapter or of the licensee’s bond. Upon revocation the right of the licensee shall cease and the unearned portion of the license fee shall be forfeited to the city. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-10)

5.16.140 Receipt for goods.
It shall be the duty of all licensed auctioneers to receive all articles which may be offered them for sale at auction, upon satisfactory proof of ownership and give receipts therefor; and at the close of any sale, which must be made as the owner directs, the auctioneer shall deliver a fair account of such sale, and pay the amount received for such articles to the person entitled thereto, deducting therefrom a commission not to exceed ten percent on the amount of such sale. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-11)

5.16.150 Conduct of auction sales-Generally.
All auctioneers are forbidden to conduct their sales in such manner as to cause people to gather in crowds on the sidewalks so as to obstruct the same; nor shall they use immoral or indecent language crying their sales; or make or cause to be made noisy acclamations such as ringing of bells, blowing of whistles or otherwise, though not enumerated here, through the streets in advertising their sales; and no bellman or crier, drum or fife, or other musical instrument or noise-making means of attracting the attention of passers-by, except the customary auctioneer’s flags shall be employed or suffered to be used at or near any place of sale or at or near any auction room or near any auction whatsoever. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-12)

Chapter 5.20 BILLIARD AND POOL HALLS

Sections:
5.20.010     Minors--Posting of regulations.
5.20.020     Minors--Use prohibited--Exception.
5.20.030     Minors--Use allowed-- When.
5.20.040     Closing hours.

5.20.010 Minors--Posting of regulations.
It is unlawful for any person to operate any pool or billiard hall in the city where games of cards are permitted to be played, or beer, as defined in this code, is kept, sold or consumed, without first making a regulation and enforcing the same and keeping posted in a conspicuous place, terms of such regulation which shall read as follows: No person under 21 years of age permitted in these premises. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §12-6(a))

5.20.020 Minors--Use prohibited--Exception.
It is unlawful for any person in charge of or employed in such pool or billiard hall to permit any person under the age of 21 years of age to enter upon or remain in any of such premises, or for any person under the age of 21 years to enter upon or remain in said premises for any purpose except to make deliveries or carry messages to the proprietor thereof and depart therefrom immediately. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §12-6(b))

5.20.030 Minors--Use allowed-- When.
Pool and billiard halls may be kept open to minors over the age of 16 years where no beer, as herein defined, is kept or consumed, or card playing is permitted or devices of any character which may be used for gambling are kept. In all such places regulations shall be maintained and enforced which shall read as follows:
No person under the age of 16 years allowed in these premises and notice thereof posted in a conspicuous place at all times. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §12-6(c))

5.20.040 Closing hours.
It is unlawful for the owner keeper, manager of, or employee in, any public billiard hall or pool hall in this city, to allow permit such billiard hall or pool hall to be or remain open for business between the hours of eleven p.m. of any day and seven a.m. of the following day (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §12-7)

Chapter 5.24 CIGARETTE VENDING MACHINES

Sections:
5.24.010     Cigarettes and tobacco and psychotoxic chemical solvents.
5.24.020     Violation.

5.24.010 Cigarettes and tobacco and psychotoxic chemical solvents.
Section 76-10-101 through 76-10-112 of the August 1, 1999, Utah Code, attached, are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Lindon City Code. Where a citation, information, or complaint is issued under these state statutes, it shall be sufficient to use the section number of the Utah Code to designate the section number of the city code which has been violated. (Ord. 99-21, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000)

5.24.020 Violation.
In addition to any other penalty provided by this chapter, violation of this chapter by a business shall constitute cause for the revocation of the businesses’ business license. (Ord. 99-21, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000)

Chapter 5.28 DANCE HALLS

Sections:
5.28.010     Definitions.
5.28.020     License--Required.
5.28.030     License--Issuance conditions.
5.28.040     License--Revocation.
5.28.050     Unlawful conduct.

5.28.010 Definitions.
“Public dance,” as used in this chapter shall mean any dance to which admission can be had by payment directly or indirectly of a fee or any dance to which the public generally may gain admission with or without the payment of a fee.
“Public dance hall,” as used herein, shall mean any room, place or space in which a public dance shall be held or in which classes in dancing are held and instruction in dancing is given for hire. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-28)

5.28.020 License--Required.
It is unlawful to hold or conduct any public dance in any dance hall or other place within the limits of the city until such dance hall or other place in which the same may be held shall first have been duly licensed. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-25)

5.28.030 License--Issuance conditions.
No license for a public dance hall shall be issued until it shall be found that the place for which it is issued complies with and conforms to all laws, ordinances, health and fire regulations applicable thereto and is properly ventilated and supplied with separate and sufficient toilet conveniences for each sex and is a safe and proper place for which it shall be used. Every person to whom a dance hall license is issued shall post the same in a conspicuous place in the dance hall covered by such license. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-25)

5.28.040 License--Revocation.
The license of any public dance hall may be revoked for the violation of any provision of this or any other ordinance or law relating to such places or rules or regulations promulgated thereunder. If at any time the license of a public dance hall shall be revoked, at least three months shall elapse before another license or permit shall be granted to the manager, owner or lessee of such dance hall. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-26)

5.28.050 Unlawful conduct.
It is unlawful for any person to whom a dance hall license is issued to allow or permit the following conduct:
1. Abusive language which creates a risk of assault; or
2. Exposure of the private parts of any person; or
3. Gambling; or
4. Prostitution. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-27; Ord. 128 §1, amended, 1985)

Chapter 5.32 PAWNBROKERS

Sections:
5.32.010     Definition.
5.32.020     Posting of regulations-- Required.
5.32.030     Right of redemption of forfeited articles.
5.32.040     Records required-- Contents.
5.32.050     Ticket-Contents.
5.32.060     Ticket--Disposition.
5.32.070     Records--Inspection.
5.32.080     Ticket--Issuance-- Misdemeanors designated.
5.32.090     Redemption and disposition.
5.32.100     Unlawful to deal with drunkards, thieves, insane or minors.
5.32.110     Employees under 16 years of age.
5.32.120     Hours.
5.32.130     Liability.
5.32.140     Violation--Penalty.

5.32.010 Definition.
“Pawnbroker” means any person within the limits of the city who loans money on deposit on personal property or deals in the purchase or possession of personal property on condition of selling the same back again to the pledger or depositor or who loans or advances money on personal property by taking chattel mortgage security thereon and takes or receives such personal property in his possession. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-16)

5.32.020 Posting of regulations-- Required.
It is unlawful for any person to conduct or transact a pawn broking business unless he shall keep posted in a conspicuous place in his place of business a copy of all ordinances relating to pawnbrokers. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-17)

5.32.030 Right of redemption of forfeited articles.
It is unlawful in all cases in which articles pledged have been forfeited for a sale or other disposition thereof to be made by the pledgee within the period of three months after such forfeiture, during such time the pledger shall have the first right to redeem such articles at no greater advance than ten percent upon the amount when the forfeiture occurred. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-18)

5.32.040 Records required-- Contents.
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker or his or her agents or employees to fail to keep a permanent record of each loan, purchase or receipt of personal property. Said record shall be legibly written in ink and in the English language at the time of the transaction. No such record or any portion thereof shall be erased, obliterated or defaced. The record shall contain the following information with regard to each transaction:
1. The date of the transaction;
2. The name and address of the pledger (if the pledged property is jointly owned, each joint owner must be designated);
3. An accurate description of the goods, articles or things pawned, including the serial number of the article if any, the name of the manufacturer if available, and the dimensional description if applicable;
4. The amount of money loaned or advanced thereon or paid therefor;
5. The date and time of the day of the pledging, purchasing and receiving such goods, articles or things, and the period of time within which the pledge must be honored; and
6. The serial number of the pawn ticket. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 101 §A, amended, 1983)

5.32.050 Ticket-Contents.
In connection with each article pawned, the pawnbroker shall make out a serially numbered three-part ticket concerning any person(s) pawning property, in a form previously approved by the police department, and shall contain the following information:
1. The following information concerning the pledger:
    a. The last, first, and middle name,
    b. The signature of the pledger,
    c. The street address, city, state, and zip code,
    d. Phone number,
    e. Sex (male or female),
    f. Date of birth,
    g. Height,
    h. Weight,
    i. Race,
    j. Scars/marks,
    k. Identification used and pertinent numbers,
    l. Right thumb print;
2. The name of the person accepting the pledged property for the pawnbroker;
3. A signed statement certifying that the described property has not been obtained by any illegal means and is the pledger’s property and is free and clear of any encumbrances and that the pledger has a legal right to sell the pledged property. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 101 §B, amended, 1983)

5.32.060 Ticket--Disposition.
The disposition of each three-part ticket shall be made as follows:
1. The original shall be retained by the pawnbroker (pledges);
2. The first copy retained by the person (pledger) pawning the articles and
3. The second copy shall be maintained on the pawnbroker’s premises and delivered to any representative of the city police department upon request during regular business hours. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 101 §C, amended, 1983)

5.32.070 Records--Inspection.
All of the required records and information set out in Sections 5.32.040 through 5.32.060 shall be open to the inspection of any police officer during regular business hours. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 101 §D, amended, 1983)

5.32.080 Ticket--Issuance-- Misdemeanors designated.
It is a misdemeanor for a pawnbroker or his or her agent or employee to issue any pawn ticket which is not serially numbered in sequence and shown in the ledger book referred to in Section 5.32.040, or to intentionally falsify any information on either the ledger or the three-part pawn ticket. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 101 §E, amended, 1983)

5.32.090 Redemption and disposition.
1. It is unlawful for any pawnbroker, or his or her agents or employees to deliver or to sell or to otherwise dispose of any pawned item for a period of 60 days from the date of receiving same to any person other than the pledger.
2. If requested to do so by a police officer, all goods, articles or things pawned, pledged, sold or delivered to a pawnbroker or his or her agents or employees shall be released to the city police department upon proof that the item was not owned by the pledger. The police department shall hold the article until such time as criminal proceedings concerning the article are fully resolved. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 101 §F, amended, 1983)

5.32.100 Unlawful to deal with drunkards, thieves, insane or minors.
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive any goods, articles or things in pawn or pledge from a person who is intoxicated or known to be a habitual drunkard, a thief or an insane person or a person under the age of 21 years. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-21)

5.32.110 Employees under 16 years of age.
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to employ any clerk or person under the age of 16 years to receive any pledge or make any loan. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-22)

5.32.120 Hours.
It is unlawful for any pawnbroker to receive any goods by way of pawn or pledge before seven a.m. or after nine p.m., or on Sunday. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-23)

5.32.130 Liability.
The holder of a pawnbroker’s license is liable for any and all acts of his employees and for any violation by them of any of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-24)

5.32.140 Violation--Penalty.
Violation of the provisions of Section 5.32.010 through 5.32.120 shall be punished as a misdemeanor pursuant to the provisions of those sections. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 101 §H, amended, 1983)

Chapter 5.36 SECONDHAND AND JUNK DEALERS

Sections:
5.36.010     Definitions.
5.36.020     Dealing with minors.
5.36.030     Records.

5.36.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
“Junk dealer” means any person engaged in buying and selling old metals, glass, rags, rubber, paper or other junk.
“Secondhand dealer” means any person who keeps a store, office or place of business for the purchase or sale of secondhand clothing or garments of any kind, or secondhand goods, wares or merchandise, except books, musical instruments and curiosities, or who engages in the business of dealing in secondhand goods. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §§4-29)

5.36.020 Dealing with minors.
It is unlawful for any secondhand dealer by himself, his agents or servants to purchase or receive any personal property of or from any minor under the age of 18 years. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-31)

5.36.030 Records.
It is unlawful for any secondhand or junk dealer to fail to keep a substantial and well-bound book in which he shall enter at the time of purchase in the English language: first, a true and accurate description of every article purchased by him; second, the name, age and residence of the vendor; third, the amount paid; fourth, the date and hour of purchase. All entries shall be made in ink in a legible manner. All records of secondhand dealers and junk dealers shall be open to inspection by any peace officer at any time. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §4-32)

Chapter 5.40 RESIDENTIAL SOLICITATION

Sections:
5.40.010     Purpose.
5.40.020     No Other City License or Approval Required.
5.40.030     Definitions.
5.40.040     Exemptions from Chapter.
5.40.050     Solicitation Prohibited.
5.40.060     Registration of Solicitors.
5.40.070     Application Form.
5.40.080     Written Disclosures.
5.40.090     When Registration Begins.
5.40.100     Issuance of Certificates.
5.40.110     Form of Certificate and Identification Badge.
5.40.120     Maintenance of Registry.
5.40.130     Non-Transferability of Certificates.
5.40.140     Denial, Suspension or Revocation of a Certificate of Registration.
5.40.150     Appeal.
5.40.160     Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited.
5.40.170     “No Solicitation” Notice.
5.40.180     Duties of Solicitors.
5.40.190     Time of Day Restrictions.
5.40.200     Buyer’s Right to Cancel.
5.40.210     Penalties.
5.40.220     Severability.

5.40.010 Purpose.
1. Residents of Lindon City have an inalienable interest in their personal safety, well-being, and privacy in their residences, as well as their ability to provide or receive information regarding matters of personal belief, political or charitable activities, and goods and services lawfully in commerce. The City has a substantial interest in protecting the well-being, tranquility, personal safety, and privacy of its citizens, which includes the ability to protect citizens from unwanted intrusions upon residential property. The City also has a substantial interest in protecting citizens from fraud or otherwise unfair consumer sales practices as well as criminal activity.
2. There must be a balance between these substantial interests of the City and its citizens, and the effect of the regulations in this Chapter on the rights of those who are regulated. Based on the collective experiences of City officials derived from regulating business activity, protecting persons and property from criminal conduct, responding to the inquiries of citizens regarding Door-to-Door Solicitation, the experience of its law enforcement officers and those affected by Door-to-Door canvassing and solicitation, as well as judicial decisions outlining the boundaries of constitutional protections afforded and denied persons seeking to engage in Door-to-Door Solicitation, the City adopts this Chapter to promote the City’s substantial interests in:
    a. respecting citizen’s decisions regarding privacy in their residences;
    b. protecting persons from criminal conduct;
    c. providing equal opportunity to Advocate for and against Religious Belief, Political Position, or Charitable Activities; and
    d. permitting truthful and non-misleading Door-to-Door Solicitation regarding lawful Goods or Services in intrastate or interstate commerce.
3. The City finds that the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in this Chapter are narrowly tailored to preserve and protect the City interests referred to herein while at the same time balancing the rights of those regulated.
4. Commercial residential solicitation generally represents a greater intrusion upon residential privacy than political, religious, or other noncommercial door-to-door solicitation involving the dissemination of ideas. Commercial residential solicitation generally entails a higher incidence of consumer fraud and unfair sales practices than political, religious, or other noncommercial door-to-door solicitation involving the dissemination of ideas. Substantial numbers of city residents do not desire to listen to or otherwise receive commercial solicitations. Additionally, some residents are particularly vulnerable to consumer fraud and unfair consumer sales practices by commercial residential solicitors.
5. As highlighted by recent serious crimes perpetrated in an adjoining municipality by a door-to-door solicitor, the transient nature of the business of residential solicitation makes it difficult to prosecute or to obtain redress for intrusions upon residential privacy and fraudulent or otherwise unfair consumer sales practices by residential solicitors because such solicitors are typically nonresidents of the City and often leave the City immediately upon completion of their commercial solicitation in the City. Furthermore, many companies that employ residential solicitors do not conduct accurate, thorough, and timely criminal background checks on prospective solicitors.
6. Because commercial residential solicitation (a) involves the attempt to complete an economic transaction with the hearer, and (b) may include aggressive, deceptive, factually unbalanced, or otherwise unfair tactics in an effort to complete an economic transaction, commercial residential solicitation entails a heightened risk of intrusion upon residential privacy, consumer fraud, and unfair consumer sales practices, albeit by a minority of those engaged in this business. The City wishes to reassure residents, to the extent reasonably possible and consistent with the First Amendment, that the residential commercial solicitors who work within the City have not been the subject of criminal actions, consumer protection actions, or other legal orders or actions reasonably related to the risk of such solicitors’ intruding upon residential privacy or committing consumer fraud or other unfair consumer sales practices, by instituting a residential solicitation registration procedure.
7. The Council finds that the potential and actual harm to citizens from residential solicitation is real, and that the provisions hereinafter set forth will, to a material degree, alleviate and avoid such harm. The Council has determined that the means chosen, as hereinafter stated, are reasonable and are closely fitted to achieve the desired objective of protecting citizens from intrusions upon residential privacy, consumer fraud, and unfair consumer sales practices, while simultaneously preserving the rights of others to engage in speech protected by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution and relevant state constitutional provisions. The regulations adopted herein are narrowly drawn and in the judgment of the Council are not more extensive than necessary to serve and protect the interests stated herein. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.020 No Other City License or Approval Required.
1. Registered Solicitors and persons exempt from Registration need not apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or registration from the City to engage in Door-to-Door Solicitation.
2. Any Business licensed by the City under another City Ordinance that uses employees, independent contractors, or agents for Door-to-Door Solicitation in an effort to provide any tangible or intangible benefit to the Business, shall be required to have such Solicitors obtain a Certificate, unless otherwise exempt from Registration.
3. Those Responsible Persons or Entities associated with Registered Solicitors need not apply for, nor obtain, any other license, permit, or registration from the City, provided they do not establish a temporary or fixed place of business in the City.
4. Nothing herein is intended to interfere with or supplant any other requirement of federal, state, or other local law regarding any license, permit, or certificate that a Registered Solicitor is otherwise required to have or maintain. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.030 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following definitions shall apply:
“Advocating” means speech or conduct intended to inform, promote, or support Religious Belief, Political Position, or Charitable Activities.
“Appeals Officer” means the City Council or designee of the City responsible for receiving the information from the City and Appellant regarding the denial or suspension of a Certificate and issuing a decision as required by this Chapter.
“Appellant” means the person or entity appealing the denial or suspension of a Certificate, either personally as an Applicant or registered Solicitor, or on behalf of the Applicant or Registered Solicitor.
“Applicant” means an individual who is at least sixteen (16) years of age and not a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful entity who applies for a Certificate permitting Door-to-Door Solicitation.
“Application Form” means a standardized form provided by the City to an Applicant to be completed and submitted as part of Registration.
“B.C.I.” means an original or copy, dated no older than 180 days prior to the date of the Application, of either: (1) a verified criminal history report for the Applicant from the Utah Department of Public Safety Bureau of Criminal Identification; or (2) verification by the Utah Department of Public Safety Bureau of Criminal Identification that no criminal history rising to the level of a Disqualifying Status exists for the Applicant.
“Business” means a commercial enterprise licensed by the City as a person or Entity under this Title, having a fixed or temporary physical location within the City.
“Certificate” means a temporary, annual, or renewal Certificate permitting Door-to-Door Solicitation in the City, applied for or issued pursuant to the terms of this Chapter.
“Charitable Activities” means Advocating by persons or Entities that either are, or support, a Charitable Organization.
“Charitable Organization” includes any person, joint venture, partnership, limited liability company, corporation, association, group, or other Entity:
    a. that is:
        i. a benevolent, educational, voluntary health, philanthropic, humane, patriotic, religious or, social welfare or advocacy, public health, environmental or conservation, or civic organization;
        ii. for the benefit of a public safety, law enforcement, or firefighter fraternal association; or
        iii. established for any charitable purpose; and
    b. That is tax exempt under applicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 as amended, and qualified to solicit and receive tax deductible contributions from the public for charitable purposes.
    c. Charitable Organization includes a chapter, branch, area, or office, or similar affiliate or any person soliciting contributions within the state for a Charitable Organization that has its principal place of business outside the City or State of Utah. (Charitable Solicitation Act, Utah Code Ann. § 13-22-2(1)(a) and (b)).
“Competent Individual” means a person claiming or appearing to be at least eighteen (18) years of age and of sufficiently sound mind and body to be able to engage in rational thought, conversation, and conduct.
“Completed Application” means a fully completed Application Form, a B.C.I, two copies of the original identification relied on by the Applicant to establish Proof of Identity, and the tendering of Fees.
“Criminally Convicted” means the final entry of a conviction, whether by a plea of no contest, guilty, entry of a judicial or jury finding of guilt, which has not been set aside on appeal or pursuant to a writ of habeas corpus. The criminal conviction is that offense of which the Applicant or Registered Solicitor was convicted, without regard to the reduced status of the charge after completion of conditions of probation or parole, and charges dismissed under a plea in abeyance or diversion agreement.
“Disqualifying Status” means anything specifically defined in this Chapter as requiring the denial or suspension of a Certificate, and any of the following:
    a. The Applicant or Registered Solicitor has been Criminally Convicted of: (i) felony homicide, (ii) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, (iii) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or (iv) sexual assault of any kind.
    b. Criminal charges currently pending against the Applicant or Registered Solicitor for: (i) felony homicide, (ii) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, (iii) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or (iv) sexual assault of any kind.
    c. The Applicant or Registered Solicitor has been Criminally Convicted of a felony within the last ten (10) years;
    d. The Applicant or Registered Solicitor has been incarcerated in a federal or state prison within the past five (5) years;
    e. The Applicant or Registered Solicitor has been Criminally Convicted of a misdemeanor within the past five (5) years involving a crime of: (i) moral turpitude, or (ii) violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property.
    f. A Final Civil Judgment been entered against the Applicant or Registered Solicitor within the last five (5) years indicating that: (i) the Applicant or Registered Solicitor had either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or (ii) that a debt of the Applicant or Registered Solicitor was non-dischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 U.S.C. § 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19);
    g. The Applicant or Registered Solicitor is currently on parole or probation to any court, penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest or subject to a tracking device;
    h. The Applicant or Registered Solicitor has an outstanding arrest warrant from any jurisdiction; or
    i. The Applicant or Registered Solicitor is currently subject to a protective order based on physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
“Door to Door Solicitation” means the practice of engaging in or attempting to engage in conversation with any person at a Residence, whether or not that person is a Competent Individual, while making or seeking to make or facilitate a Home Solicitation Sale, or attempting to further the sale of Goods and or Services.
“Entity” includes a corporation, partnership, limited liability company, or other lawful entity, organization, society or association.
“Fees” means the cost charged to the Applicant or Registered Solicitor for the issuance of a Certificate and/or Identification Badge, which shall not exceed the reasonable costs of processing the application and issuing the Certificate and//or Identification Badge.
“Final Civil Judgment” means a civil judgment that would be recognized under state law as a judgment to which collateral estoppel would apply.
“Goods” means one or more tangible items, wares, objects of merchandise, perishables of any kind, subscriptions, or manufactured products offered, provided, or sold.
“Home Solicitation Sale” means to make or attempt to make a Sale of Goods or Services by a Solicitor at a Residence by means of Door-to-Door Solicitation, regardless of
    a. the means of payment or consideration used for the purchase;
    b. the time of delivery of the Goods or Services; or
    c. the previous or present classification of the Solicitor as a solicitor, peddler, hawker, itinerant merchant, or similar designation.
“Licensing Officer” means the City employee(s) or agent(s) responsible for receiving from an Applicant or Registered Solicitor the Completed Application and either granting, suspending, or denying the Applicant’s Certificate.
“No Solicitation Sign” means a reasonably visible and legible sign that states “No Soliciting,” “No Solicitors,” “No Salespersons,” “No Trespassing,” or words of similar import.
“Political Position” means any actually held belief, or information for, against, or in conjunction with any political, social, environmental, or humanitarian belief or practice.
“Registered Solicitor” means any person who has been issued a current Certificate by the City.
“Registration” means the process used by the City Licensing Officer to accept a Completed Application and determine whether or not a Certificate will be denied, granted, or suspended.
“Religious Belief” means any sincerely held belief, or information for, against, or in conjunction with, any theistic, agnostic, or atheistic assumption, presumption or position, or religious doctrine, dogma, or practice regardless of whether or not the belief or information is endorsed by any other person or public or private entity.
“Residence” means any living unit contained within any building or structure that is occupied by any person as a dwelling consistent with the zoning laws of the City, together with the lot or other real property on which the living unit is located. This does not include the sidewalk, public street or public rights of way.
“Responsible Person or Entity” means that person or Entity responsible to provide the following to an Applicant, Registered Solicitor, and the Competent Individual in a Residence to whom a Sale of Goods or Services is made or attempted to be made by means of a Home Solicitation Sale:
    a. maintaining a state sales tax number, a special events sales tax number, computing the sales taxes owing from any Sale of Goods or Services, paying the sales taxes, and filing any required returns or reports;
    b. facilitating and responding to requests from consumers who desire to cancel the sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or law; and
    c. refunding any monies paid or reversing credit card charges to those persons who timely rescind any sale pursuant to applicable contractual rights or law.
“Sale of Goods or Services” means the conduct and agreement of a Solicitor and the Competent Individual in a Residence regarding a particular Good(s) or Service(s) that entitles the consumer to rescind the same within three days under any applicable federal, state, or local law.
“Services” means those intangible goods or personal benefits offered, provided, or sold to a Competent Individual of a Residence.
“Soliciting” or “Solicit” or “Solicitation” means any of the following activities:
    a. Seeking to obtain Sales or orders for the exchange of goods, wares, merchandise or perishables of any kind, for any kind of remuneration or consideration, regardless of whether advance payment is sought;
    b. Seeking to obtain prospective customers to apply for or to purchase insurance, subscriptions to publications, or publications;
    c. Seeking to obtain contributions of money or any other thing of value for the benefit of any person or Entity;
    d. Seeking to obtain orders or prospective customers for Goods or Services.
    e. Seeking to engage an individual in conversation at a Residence for the purpose of promoting or facilitating the receipt of information regarding Religious Belief, Political Position, Charitable Conduct, or a Home Solicitation Sale.
    f. Other activities falling within the commonly accepted definition of Soliciting, such as hawking or peddling.
“Solicitor” or “Solicitors” means a person(s) engaged in Door-to-Door Solicitation.
“Submitted in Writing” means the information for an appeal of a denial or suspension of a Certificate, submitted in any type of written statement to the City offices by certified, registered, priority, overnight or delivery confirmation mail, facsimile, or hand delivery.
“Substantiated Report” means an oral, written, or electronic report:
    a. That is submitted to and documented by the City;
    b. By any of the following:
        i. A Competent Individual who is willing to provide law enforcement or other City employees with publicly available identification of their name, address, and any other reliable means of contact;
        ii. City law enforcement or Licensing Officer; or
        iii. Any other regularly established law enforcement agency at any level of government;
    c. That provides any of the following information regarding a Registered Solicitor:
        i. Documented verification of a previously undisclosed Disqualifying Status of a Registered Solicitor;
        ii. Probable cause that the Registered Solicitor has committed a Disqualifying Status which has not yet been determined to be a Disqualifying Status;
        iii. Documented, eye-witness accounts that the Registered Solicitor has engaged in repeated patterns of behavior that demonstrates failure by the Registered Solicitor to adhere to the requirements of this Chapter; or
        iv. Probable cause that continued licensing of the Registered Solicitor creates exigent circumstances that threaten the health, safety, or welfare of any individuals or entities within the City.
“Waiver” means the written form provided to Applicant by the City wherein Applicant agrees that the City may obtain a name/date of birth BCI background check on the Applicant for licensing purposes under this Chapter, and which contains Applicant’s notarized signature. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.040 Exemptions from Chapter.
Individuals that qualify for exemption under this Chapter need not Register as required by this Chapter. Those Persons exempt from Registration are not exempt from the duties and prohibitions outlined in Sections 5.40.170, 5.40.180 and 5.40.190 while Advocating or Soliciting. The following are exempt from Registration under this Chapter:
1. Persons specifically invited to a Residence by a Competent Individual prior to the time of the person’s arrival at the Residence. An invited solicitation shall not include the circumstance where the resident invites back a solicitor who initiated the contact with the resident at the residence. A resident’s failure to post a “No Soliciting” may not be construed as an invitation to solicitation by such resident, or as an expression of such resident’s desire to hear or receive solicitations;
2. Persons whose license, permit, certificate or registration with the State of Utah permits them to engage in Door to Door Solicitation to offer Goods or Services to an occupant of the Residence;
3. Persons delivering goods to a Residence pursuant to a previously made order, or persons providing Services at a Residence pursuant to a previously made request by a Competent Individual;
4. Persons advocating or disseminating information for, against, or in conjunction with, any Religious Belief, or Political Position regardless of whether Goods, Services, or any other consideration is offered or given, with or without any form of commitment, contribution, donation, pledge, or purchase; and
5. Solicitation on behalf of a charitable organization as defined by Utah Code Ann. §13-22-2(1), or an organization listed in Utah Code Ann. §13-22-8(1). This charitable exemption shall apply to students Soliciting contributions to finance extracurricular social, athletic, artistic, scientific or cultural programs, provided that the Solicitation has been approved by the school administration. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.050 Solicitation Prohibited.
Unless otherwise authorized, permitted, or exempted pursuant to the terms and provisions of this Chapter, the practice of being in and upon a private Residence within the City by Solicitors, for the purpose of Home Solicitation Sales or to provide Goods or Services, is prohibited and is punishable as set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.060 Registration of Solicitors.
1. Unless otherwise exempt under this Chapter, all persons desiring to engage in Door-to-Door Solicitation within the City, prior to doing so, shall submit a Completed Application to the Licensing Officer and obtain a Certificate.
2. The executed original of this Certificate of Registration shall be maintained by the Licensing Officer, and a legible copy shall be maintained on Registered Solicitor’s person at all times while soliciting in the City and shall be produced for inspection upon the request of any resident being solicited or any Peace Officer.
3. Unless a person is a Registered Solicitor and has a Certificate of Registration and identification badge in their possession as required in this Chapter, or is otherwise exempt from registration under the provisions of this Chapter, it is a violation of this Chapter for said person to be present in or at a residence within the City for the purpose of engaging in solicitation. Violations of this subsection shall be punishable as set forth in this Chapter. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.070 Application Form.
The Licensing Officer shall provide a standard Application Form for use for the Registration of Solicitors. Upon request to the Licensing Officer, or as otherwise provided, any person or Entity may obtain in person, by mail, or facsimile, a copy of this Application Form. Each Application Form shall require disclosure and reporting by the Applicant of the following information, documentation, and fee:
1. Review of Written Disclosures. An affirmation that the Applicant has received and reviewed the disclosure information required by this Chapter.
2. Contact Information.
    a. Applicant’s true, correct and legal name, including any former names or aliases used during the last ten (10) years;
    b. Applicant’s telephone number, home address and mailing address, if different and the address and telephone number where the applicant can be contacted locally;
    c. If different from the Applicant, the name, address, and telephone number of the Responsible Person or Entity; and
    d. The address by which all notices to the Applicant required under this Chapter are to be sent.
3. Proof of Identity. An in-person verification by the Licensing Officer of the Applicant’s true identity by use of any of the following which bear a photograph of said Applicant:
    a. A valid driver’s license issued by any State and authorized by such state to be used as a valid form of identification;
    b. A valid passport issued by the United States;
    c. A valid identification card issued by any State;
    d. A valid identification issued by a branch of the United States military.
    Upon verification of identity, the original identification submitted to establish Proof of Identity shall be returned to the Applicant.
4. Proof of Registration with Department of Commerce. The Applicant shall provide proof that either the Applicant, or the Responsible Person or Entity, has registered with the Utah State Department of Commerce;
5. Special Events Sales Tax Number. The Applicant shall provide a special events sales tax number for either the Applicant, or for the Responsible Person or Entity for which the Applicant will be soliciting;
6. Marketing Information.
    a. The Goods or Services offered by the Applicant, including any commonly known, registered or trademarked names;
    b. Whether the Applicant holds any other licenses, permits, registrations, or other qualifications required by federal or state law to promote, provide, or render advice regarding the offered Goods or Services.
7. BCI Background Check. The Applicant shall provide:
    a. An original or a copy of a BCI background check as defined in 5.40.030; and
    b. A signed Waiver, including names and date of birth, whereby Applicant agrees to allow the City to obtain BCI background check on Applicant for purposes of enforcement of this Chapter.
8. Responses to Questions Regarding “Disqualifying Status.” The Applicant shall be required to affirm or deny each of the following statements on the Application Form:
    a. Has the Applicant been Criminally Convicted of: (i) felony homicide, (ii) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, (iii) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or (iv) sexual assault of any kind.
    b. Are any criminal charges currently pending against the Applicant for: (i) felony homicide, (ii) physically abusing, sexually abusing, or exploiting a minor, (iii) the sale or distribution of controlled substances, or (iv) sexual assault of any kind.
    c. Has the Applicant been Criminally Convicted of a felony within the last ten (10) years;
    d. Has the Applicant been incarcerated in a federal or state prison within the past five (5) years;
    e. Has the Applicant been Criminally Convicted of a misdemeanor within the past five (5) years involving a crime of: (i) moral turpitude, (ii) theft or burglary, or (iii) violent or aggravated conduct involving persons or property.
    f. Has a Final Civil Judgment been entered against the Applicant within the last five (5) years indicating that:
        i. the Applicant had either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or
        ii. that a debt of the Applicant was non-dischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 U.S.C. § 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19);
    g. Is the Applicant currently on parole or probation to any court, penal institution, or governmental entity, including being under house arrest or subject to a tracking device;
    h. Does the Applicant have an outstanding arrest warrant from any jurisdiction; or
    i. Is the Applicant currently subject to a protective order or stalking injunction based on physical or sexual abuse issued by a court of competent jurisdiction.
9. Fee. The Applicant shall pay such fees as determined applicable by the City, which shall not exceed the reasonable cost of processing the application and issuing the Certificate and/or Identification Badge.
10. Execution of Application. The Applicant shall execute the Application Form, stating upon oath or affirmation, under penalty of perjury, that based on the present knowledge and belief of the Applicant, the information provided is complete, truthful and accurate. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.080 Written Disclosures.
The Application Form shall be accompanied by written disclosures notifying the Applicant of the following:
1. The Applicant’s submission of the Application authorizes the City to verify information submitted with the Completed Application including:
    a. the Applicant’s address;
    b. the Applicant’s and/or Responsible Person or Entity’s state tax identification and special use tax numbers, if any;
    c. the validity of the Applicant’s Proof of Identity;
2. The City may consult any publicly available sources for information on the Applicant, including but not limited, to databases for any outstanding warrants, protective orders, or civil judgments.
3. Establishing Proof of Identity is required before Registration is allowed;
4. Identification of the fee amount that must be submitted by Applicant with a Completed Application;
5. The Applicant must submit a BCI background check with a Completed Application;
6. To the extent permitted by State and/or federal law, the Applicant’s BCI background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not available for public inspection;
7. The City will maintain copies of the Applicant’s Application Form, Proof of Identity, and Identification Badge. These copies will become public records available for inspection on demand at the City offices whether or not a Certificate is denied, granted, or renewed.
8. The criteria for Disqualifying Status, denial, or suspension of a Certificate under the provisions of this Chapter.
9. That a request for a temporary Certificate will be granted or denied as soon as practical, but which shall be no later than the first full business day after a Completed Application is submitted. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.090 When Registration Begins.
The Licensing Officer shall not begin the Registration process unless the Applicant has submitted a Completed Application. The original identification submitted to establish Proof of Identity shall be returned after the Licensing Officer verifies the Applicant’s identity. A copy of the identification shall be retained by the Licensing Officer. If an original B.C.I. background check is submitted by the Applicant, the Licensing Officer shall make a copy of the B.C.I. and return the original to the Applicant. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.100 Issuance of Certificates.
The Licensing Officer shall review the Completed Application submitted by the Applicant and issue a Certificate in accordance with the following:
1. Temporary Certificate. A temporary Certificate shall issue allowing the Applicant to begin Door-to-Door Solicitation upon the following conditions:
    a. Applicant’s submission of a Completed Application;
    b. Applicant’s submission of the required fee;
    c. Applicant establishes Proof of Identity pursuant to the requirement of this chapter;
    d. the Applicant’s representations on the Application Form do not affirmatively show a Disqualifying Status;
    e. the B.C.I. does not affirmatively show a Disqualifying Status; and
    f. the Applicant has not previously been denied a Certificate by the City, or had a Certificate revoked for grounds that constitute a Disqualifying Status under this Chapter.
    A temporary Certificate will automatically expire after twenty-five (25) calendar days from issuance, or upon the granting or denial of an annual Certificate, whichever period is shorter.
2. Annual Certificate. Within twenty-five (25) calendar days of the issuance of a temporary Certificate the City shall:
    a. Take any and all actions it deems appropriate to verify the truthfulness and completeness of the information submitted by the Applicant, including, but not limited to those disclosed with the Application Form.
    b. Issue written notice to the Applicant and the Responsible Person or Entity, if any, that the Applicant either:
        i. will be issued an Annual Certificate, eligible for renewal on an annual basis; or
        ii. will not be issued an Annual Certificate for reasons cited in Section 5.40.140 of this Chapter.
3. Renewal Certificate. An annual Certificate shall be valid from the date of issuance of the temporary Certificate and shall expire at midnight on December 31st of the year in which the certificate is issued. Any annual Certificate that is not suspended or revoked may be renewed upon the request of the Registered Solicitor and the submission of a new Completed Application and payment of the Fee, unless any of the conditions for the denial, suspension or revocation of a Certificate are present as set forth in section 5.40.140, or a Disqualifying Status is present. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.110 Form of Certificate and Identification Badge.
1. Certificate Form. Should the Licensing Officer determine that the Applicant is entitled to a Certificate, the Licensing Officer shall issue a Certificate to the Applicant. The Certificate shall list the name of the Registered Solicitor and the Responsible Person or Entity, if any, and the date on which the Certificate expires. The Certificate shall be dated and signed by the License Officer. The Certificate shall be carried by the Registered Solicitor at all times while Soliciting in the City.
2. Identification Badge. With both the temporary and annual Certificates, the City shall issue each Registered Solicitor an Identification Badge that shall be worn prominently on his or her person while Soliciting in the City. The Identification Badge shall bear the name of the City and shall contain:
    a. the name of the Registered Solicitor;
    b. address and phone number of the Registered Solicitor, or the name, address, and phone number of the Responsible Person or Entity;
    c. a recent photograph of the Registered Solicitor;
    d. the date on which the Certificate expires; and
    e. The statement “THE CITY OF LINDON MAKES NO CERTIFICATION AS TO THE WORTHINESS OF ANY ORGANIZATION, ITS PRODUCTS OR SERVICES, ON WHOSE BEHALF A SOLICITATION IS MADE OR AS TO THE MORAL CHARACTER OF THE REGISTERED SOLICITOR.”. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.120 Maintenance of Registry.
The Licensing Officer shall maintain and make available for public inspection a copy or record of every Completed Application received and the Certificate or written denial issued by the City. The Applicant’s BCI background check shall remain a confidential, protected, private record not available for public inspection. The Licensing Officer may furnish to the head of the City’s law enforcement agency a listing of all Applicants, those denied, and those issued a Certificate. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.130 Non-Transferability of Certificates.
Certificates shall be issued only in the name of the Applicant and even though a Responsible Party or Entity, if any, shall be listed on the Certificate, it shall not be deemed to be issued to that Responsible Party or Entity. The Certificate shall be non-transferable. A Registered Solicitor desiring to facilitate or attempt to facilitate Home Solicitation Sales with different goods or services or to solicit for another Responsible Person or Entity, from those designated in the originally submitted Completed Application, shall submit a new application to the Licensing Officer. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.140 Denial, Suspension or Revocation of a Certificate of Registration.
1. Denial. Upon review, the Licensing Officer shall refuse to issue a Certificate to an Applicant for any of the following reasons:
    a. Denial of Temporary Certificate. 
        i. the Application Form is not complete;
        ii. the Applicant fails to (1) establish Proof of Identity, (2) provide a B.C.I. or (3) pay the Fees;
        iii. the Completed Application or B.C.I. indicates that the Applicant has a Disqualifying Status; or
        iv. The Applicant has previously been denied a Certificate by the City, or has had a Certificate revoked for grounds that still constitute a Disqualifying Status under this chapter.
2. Denial of Annual Certificate. 
    i. The information submitted by the Applicant at the time of the granting of the temporary Certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
    ii. Since the submission of the Completed Application, the Applicant is subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown Disqualifying Status;
    iii. Failure to complete payment of the Fees;
    iv. Since the submission of the Application, the City has received a Substantiated Report regarding the past or present conduct of the Applicant that would result in a disqualified status;
    v. The City or other governmental entity has either Criminally Convicted or obtained a civil injunction against the Applicant for violating this Chapter or similar Federal, State, or municipal laws in a manner rising to the level of a Disqualifying Status; or
    vi. Since the submission of the Application, a Final Civil Judgment has been entered against the Applicant indicating that: (i) the Applicant had either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or (ii) that a debt of the applicant was non-dischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 U.S.C. § 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
    c. Denial of Annual Certificate Renewal. 
        i. The information submitted by the Applicant when seeking renewal of a Certificate is found to be incomplete or incorrect;
        ii. Since the submission of the renewal Application, the Applicant is subject to a previously undisclosed or unknown Disqualifying Status;
        iii. Failure to complete payment of the Fees;
        iv. Since the submission of the Application or granting of a Certificate, the City has received a Substantiated Report regarding the past or present conduct of the Solicitor;
        v. The City or other governmental entity has either Criminally Convicted or obtained a civil injunction against the Applicant for violating this Chapter or similar Federal, State, or municipal laws in a manner rising to the level of a Disqualifying Status; or
        vi. Since the submission of the Application, a Final Civil Judgment has been entered against the Applicant indicating that: (i) the Applicant had either engaged in fraud, or intentional misrepresentation, or (ii) that a debt of the applicant was non-dischargeable in bankruptcy pursuant to 11 U.S.C. § 523(a)(2), (a)(4), (a)(6), or (a)(19).
3. Suspension or Revocation. The City shall either suspend or revoke a Certificate when any of the reasons warranting the denial of a Certificate occurs.
4. Notice of Denial or Suspension. Upon determination of the Licensing Officer to deny an Applicant’s Completed Application or to suspend a Registered Solicitor’s Certificate, the City shall cause written notice to be sent to the Applicant or Registered Solicitor by the method indicated in the Completed Application. The Notice shall specify the grounds for the denial or suspension, the documentation or information the City relied on to make the decision, the availability of the documentation for review by Applicant upon one (1) business day notice to the City, and the date upon which the denial or suspension of the Certificate shall take effect. It shall further state that the Applicant or Registered Solicitor shall have ten (10) business days from the receipt of the notice of denial or suspension to appeal the same. The denial or suspension of the Certificate shall be effective no sooner than two (2) calendar days from the date the notice is sent, unless that suspension is because of exigent circumstances outlined in Section 5.40.030 Substantiated report, item (c)(iv), in which case, the suspension is effective immediately. The denial or suspension shall remain effective unless and until the order is rescinded, overturned on appeal, or determined by a court to be contrary to equity or law. Failure to appeal the suspension of a Certificate automatically results in its revocation. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.150 Appeal.
An Applicant or Registered Solicitor who’s Certificate has been denied or suspended shall have the right to appeal to the City Council or its designee. Any appeal must be submitted by either the Applicant, the Responsible Person or Entity, or legal counsel for either who: (a) documents the relationship with the Applicant or Responsible Person or Entity; or (b) is licensed or authorized by the State of Utah to do so, and makes the assertion of an agency relationship. The following procedures and requirements shall apply:
1. Any appeal must be Submitted in Writing to the City Recorder with a copy to the License Officer within ten (10) business days of the decision from which the appeal is taken. Such appeal shall describe in detail the nature of the appeal, the action complained of and the grounds for appeal.
2. Upon request of the Applicant or Registered Solicitor, within one business day, the City will make available any information upon which it relied in making the determination to either deny or suspend the Certificate.
3. The Appeals Officer shall review, de novo, all written information submitted by the Applicant or Registered Solicitor to the Licensing Officer, any additional information relied upon by the Licensing Officer as the basis for denial, suspension or revocation, and any additional information supplied by the City, Applicant or Registered Solicitor. Any additional information submitted by any party to the appeal to the Appeals Officer shall be simultaneously submitted to the opposing party. If desired, any party shall have three (3) business days to submit rebuttal documentation to the Appeals Officer regarding the additional information submitted by the opposing party.
4. The Appeals Officer will render a decision no later than fifteen (15) calendar days from the date the appeal was taken, unless an extension of time is agreed upon by the parties. In the event that any party to the appeal submits rebuttal information as allowed in this Section, the fifteen (15) calendar days shall be extended to include the additional three (3) days for rebuttal.
5. The denial or suspension of the Certificate shall be reversed by the Appeals Officer if upon review of the written appeal and information submitted, the Appeals Officer finds that the Licensing Officer made a material mistake of law or fact in denying or suspending the Applicant or Registered Solicitor’s Certificate.
6. If the written appeal and information submitted indicates that the Licensing Officer properly denied or suspended the certificate of the Applicant or Registered Solicitor, the denial or suspension of the Certificate shall be affirmed and constitute a determination that the suspended Certificate is revoked.
7. The decision of the Appeals Officer shall be delivered to the Applicant or Registered Solicitor by the means designated in the completed Application, or as otherwise agreed upon when the Appeal was filed.
8. Nothing herein shall impede or interfere with the Applicant’s, Solicitor’s, or City’s right to seek relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.160 Deceptive Soliciting Practices Prohibited.
1. No Solicitor shall intentionally make any materially false or fraudulent statement in the course of Soliciting.
2. A Solicitor shall immediately disclose to the consumer during face-to-face Solicitation; (i) the name of the Solicitor; (ii) the name and address of the entity with whom the Solicitor is associated; and (iii) the purpose of the Solicitor’s contact with the person and/or Competent Individual. This requirement may be satisfied through the use of the Badge and an informational flyer.
3. No Solicitor shall use a fictitious name, an alias, or any name other than his or her true and correct name.
4. No Solicitor shall represent directly or by implication that the granting of a Certificate of Registration implies any endorsement by the City of the Solicitor’s Goods or Services or of the individual Solicitor. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.170 “No Solicitation” Notice.
1. Any occupant of a Residence may give notice of a desire to refuse Solicitors by displaying a “No Solicitation” sign which shall be posted on or near the main entrance door or on or near the property line adjacent to the sidewalk leading to the Residence.
2. The display of such sign or placard shall be deemed to constitute notice to any Solicitor that the inhabitant of the Residence does not desire to receive and/or does not invite Solicitors.
3. It shall be the responsibility of the Solicitor to check each Residence for the presence of any such Notice.
4. The provisions of this Chapter shall apply also to Solicitors who are exempt from Registration pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.180 Duties of Solicitors.
1. Every person Soliciting or Advocating shall check each Residence for any “No Soliciting” sign or placard or any other notice or sign notifying a solicitor not to solicit on the premises, such as, but not limited to, “No Solicitation” signs. If such sign or placard is posted such Solicitor shall desist from any efforts to solicit at the Residence or dwelling and shall immediately depart from such property. Possession of a Certificate of Registration does not in any way relieve any solicitor of this duty.
2. It is a violation of this Chapter for any person Soliciting or Advocating to knock on the door, ring the doorbell, or in any other manner attempt to attract the attention of an occupant of a Residence that bears a “No Solicitation” sign or similar sign or placard for the purpose of engaging in or attempting to engage in Advocating, a Home Solicitation Sale, Door-to-Door Soliciting, or Soliciting.
3. It is a violation of this Chapter for any Solicitor through ruse, deception, or fraudulent concealment of a purpose to Solicit, to take action calculated to secure an audience with an occupant at a Residence.
4. Any Solicitor who is at any time asked by an occupant of a Residence or dwelling to leave shall immediately and peacefully depart.
5. The Solicitor shall not intentionally or recklessly make any physical contact with, or touch another person without the person’s consent;
6. The Solicitor shall not follow a person into a Residence without their explicit consent;
7. The Solicitor shall not continue repeated Soliciting after a person and/or Competent Individual has communicated clearly and unequivocally their lack of interest in the subject, Goods or Services of the Solicitor;
8. The Solicitor shall not use obscene language or gestures. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.190 Time of Day Restrictions.
It shall be unlawful for any person, whether licensed or not, to solicit at a Residence before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. Mountain Time, unless the Solicitor has express prior permission from the resident to do so. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.200 Buyer’s Right to Cancel.
In any Home Solicitation Sale, unless the buyer requests the Solicitor to provide Goods or Services without delay in an emergency, the seller or Solicitor shall present to the buyer and obtain buyer’s signature to a written statement which informs the buyer of the right to cancel within the third business day after signing an agreement to purchase. Such notice of “Buyer’s right to cancel” shall be in the form required by § 70C-5-103, Utah Code Annotated, 1953, or a current version thereof or any State or Federal law modifying or amending such provision. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.210 Penalties.
Any person who violates any term or provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a Class B Misdemeanor and shall be punished by a fine of not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or a jail sentence of not to exceed six (6) months. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

5.40.220 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is held by a court of competent jurisdiction to be unconstitutional or for any reason invalid, such ruling or decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions, which are adopted separately and independently and shall remain in force and effect. (Ord. 2009-6, adopted, 2009; Ord. 2006-13, repealed, 2006; Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 9 §6, amended, 1963)

Chapter 5.42 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITY BUSINESS LICENSE

Sections:
5.42.010     Purpose.
5.42.020     Definitions.
5.42.030     License required.
5.42.040     Temporary residential care facility business license.
5.42.050     Issuance of residential care facility business license.
5.42.060     Fee – Purpose – Amount.
5.42.070     State and/or federal licensing.
5.42.080     Insurance.
5.42.090     Safety requirements.
5.42.100     Individualized assessments.
5.42.110     Services for nonresident clients prohibited in residential zones.
5.42.120     Residential facility for elderly persons.
5.42.130     Reasonable accommodation.
5.42.140     Residential care facility business license not transferable – Termination.
5.42.150     Continued compliance.
5.42.160     Appeal.
5.42.170     Severability.

5.42.010 Purpose.
1. The purpose of this chapter is to establish licensing requirements that are not contrary to law for residential facilities which provide services and support to residents in order to promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the public.
2. It is the intent of Lindon City to comply with the Utah Fair Housing Act, the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (42 USC Section 3601 et seq.), and Section 504 of the Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 et seq.
3. A residential care facility for elderly persons, a residential facility for persons with a disability, a residential transition and treatment facility, and transitional victim homes are permitted uses in all residential, commercial, and mixed commercial zones within the city.
4. It is the intent of the city, to the extent allowed by law, to maintain the residential feel of a residential neighborhood consistent with the general plan. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.020 Definitions.
1. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined and are used in this title in that defined context. Any words in this title not defined in this chapter shall be as defined in Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary.
2. As used in this chapter, the following words shall be defined as follows:
    “Disability” means a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one (1) or more of a person’s major life activities, including a person having a record of such a problem or being regarded as having such an impairment.
        a. “Disabled” or “disability” does not mean an impairment or limitation caused by the current use of a controlled substance or alcohol.
        b. “Disabled” or “disability” also does not mean an impairment or limitation resulting from or related to kleptomania, pyromania, or any sexually related addiction or disorder, including, but not limited to, sex and pornography addictions, pedophilia, exhibitionism, voyeurism, or any other sexual behavior disorder.
    “DRC” means the development review committee.
    “Elderly” means a person who is sixty (60) years or older, who desires to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who is capable of living independently.
    “Reasonable accommodation” means a change in any rule, policy, practice, or service necessary to afford a person with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.
    “Resident” means persons living at and receiving the benefit of services and facilities provided by a residential care facility, excluding staff and care providers.
    “Residential care facility” means a residential care facility for elderly persons, a residential treatment facility for persons with a disability, a residential transition and treatment facility, and a transitional victim home.
    “Residential care facility business license” means a business license issued pursuant to this chapter.
    “Residential facility for elderly persons” means a residential facility in which more than four (4), but not more than eight (8), unrelated elderly individuals reside in a family-type arrangement or in a care facility arrangement and have live-in care providers who are paid to assist and care for the residents.
    “Residential facility for elderly persons” shall not include any of the following:
        a. A facility where persons being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse are placed;
        b. A facility where placement is not on a strictly voluntary basis or where placement is part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional institution;
        c. A facility which is a healthcare facility as defined by UTAH CODE ANN. 26-21-2, as amended; or
        d. A facility which is a residential facility for persons with a disability.
    “Residential facility for persons with a disability” means a residential facility in which more than four (4), but no more than eight (8), unrelated individuals, exclusive of staff, who have a disability reside and:
        a. Where treatment services for disabilities are provided to residents such as counseling, therapy, group support and rehabilitation therapies; and
        b. Is licensed or certified by the Department of Human Services under Utah Code Annotated Title 62A, Chapter 5, Licensure of Programs and Facilities; or
        c. Is licensed by the Department of Health under Utah Code.
        d. “Residential facility for persons with a disability” shall not include any of the following:
            i. A facility where placement is not on a strictly voluntary basis or where placement is part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional institution;
            ii. A facility which is a healthcare facility as defined by UTAH CODE ANN. 26-21-2, as amended.
    “Residential transition and treatment facility” means a residential facility that provides a living environment for more than four (4), but not more than eight (8), unrelated individuals, exclusive of staff, and:
        a. Is established or maintained with the intent of providing structured peer support to residents with disabilities in an effort to assist residents in acquiring and strengthening social and behavioral skills necessary to transition into successful independent living; and
        b. Is licensed or certified by the Department of Human Services under Utah Code Annotated Title 62A, Chapter 5, Licensure of Programs and Facilities; or
        c. Is licensed by the Department of Health under Utah Code Annotated Title 26, Chapter 21, the Health Care Facility Licensing and Inspection Act;
        d. “Residential transition and treatment facility” shall not include any of the following:
            i. A facility where placement is not on a strictly voluntary basis or where placement is part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional institution;
            ii. A facility which is a healthcare facility as defined by UTAH CODE ANN. 26-21-2, as amended.
    A “transitional victim home” means a residential support facility for up to eight (8) individuals or four (4) families (parent with children) at any given time, and said facility is licensed by the state of Utah as a residential support facility, which provides twenty-four (24) hour care and peer support to victims of abuse or crime and which arranges for or provides the necessities of life and protective services to residents who are temporarily displaced due to abuse, crime, or other emergency.
        a. Treatment is not a necessary component of a transitional victim home, but may be provided if the facility and providers are properly licensed by the state. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.030 License required.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation to establish and/or maintain a residential care facility within the city without first securing approval for such use in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Lindon City Code and obtaining a residential care facility business license. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.040 Temporary residential care facility business license.
Lindon City shall issue a temporary residential care facility business license to an applicant who has satisfied the terms, conditions, and regulations of this chapter and Chapter 17.70 governing residential care facilities, including site plan and zoning approval from the planning director and the building department, if necessary, with the exception of Section 5.42.070, State and/or federal licensing. A temporary residential care facility business license shall expire ninety (90) days from the date of issuance or may be revoked immediately upon evidence that an applicant’s request or application for state and/or federal licensing and approvals for the specific type of facility has been denied, withdrawn, or revoked. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.050 Issuance of residential care facility business license.
Lindon City shall issue a residential care facility business license to an applicant who has satisfied all of the terms, conditions, and regulations of this chapter and the Lindon City Code, including site plan and zoning approval from the planning director, and the building department, if necessary, including the receipt of a state and/or federal license. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.060 Fee – Purpose – Amount.
For purpose of regulation and to defray the cost of municipal services and administration, an annual residential care facility business license fee in the amount set forth in the Lindon City fee schedule shall be levied and assessed for each residential care facility for each calendar year or portion thereof. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.070 State and/or federal licensing.
An application for a residential care facility business license must be accompanied by proof that an applicant has obtained all necessary state and/or federal licensing and approvals for the specific type of facility the applicant is proposing to establish or maintain. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.080 Insurance.
An applicant shall provide proof of adequate general liability insurance for the program’s vehicles, hazard insurance on the home, and general liability insurance to cover residents and third-party individuals. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.090 Safety requirements.
1. The owner or operator of a residential care facility shall provide to the city recorder, no less than ten (10) days prior to the placement of a resident within the facility, a notarized statement as follows:
    a. That the facility does not accept any resident that would pose a direct threat to the health and safety of others in the facility or community or who in the past has posed a threat to the health and safety of others or whose tenancy would likely create a risk of substantial physical damage to others;
    b. That the placement of each individual is strictly voluntary on the part of the individual or his/her legal guardian or conservator, and that it is not part of, or in lieu of, any confinement, rehabilitation or treatment in a correctional facility; and
    c. That the certified agent agrees to promptly investigate any and all allegations of which it is or may become aware, relating to acts of an individual residing in or employed by such facility as may constitute a violation of the provisions of this section; and, if found to be substantiated, to take such action as may be reasonable and proper under the circumstances to correct/remedy the violation and any harm or damage resulting therefrom, and to protect the person and property of such individual and others residing or employed in and near the residential facility.
2. The written statement required above shall be accompanied by evidence that the residential care facility has adopted a process for individualized assessments consistent with the requirements of Section 5.42.100.
3. Any residential care facility that provides services to residents who have any past history of sexual assault, sexual aggression, or any offense involving a weapon, or are known to have acted in a manner which has resulted in serious bodily injury to another person, shall provide proof of a security plan that is satisfactory to the Lindon City chief of police, and which at a minimum provides twenty-four (24) hour supervision for residents and twenty-four (24) hour security measures and which complies with the rules and requirements established by the Department of Human Services under Title 62A, Chapter 2, Licensure of Programs and Facilities.
4. The city shall not issue any residential care facility business license to any residential care facility that provides services to residents who have any past history of sexual assault, sexual aggression, or any offense involving a weapon, or which resulted in serious bodily injury to another person and which is proposed to be constructed and/or operated within one thousand (1,000) feet of a public or private school or licensed daycare as measured in a straight line between the closest property lines of the proposed facility and the school or daycare. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.100 Individualized assessments.
1. Each candidate for residency will be evaluated to determine if such person would constitute a threat prior to allowing occupancy of the facility by such a person. Such assessments shall be conducted by a licensed psychologist, social worker or other licensed individual qualified to perform such assessments.
2. Assessments shall include, but not be limited to, consideration for such things as past criminal histories and/or violent acts of the individual, the amounts of time that have lapsed since such acts, and treatments the individual has received. Evaluations of individuals who have committed acts of sexual aggression or criminal sex acts shall also include psycho-sexual evaluations by a licensed psychiatrist or an individual holding a PhD in psychology. No individual determined to pose a risk for commission of sexual offenses, or being classified as having predatory tendencies, may be accepted as a resident.
3. Within seven (7) days of opening any residential facility, and at least quarterly thereafter, the person or entity licensed shall certify in a sworn affidavit to the city recorder the following:
    a. Each resident has been evaluated by a licensed psychologist, social worker or other licensed individual qualified to perform such assessments required by this section;
    b. That based on the individualized assessment performed for each resident, no person does, or will, reside in the facility whose tenancy would likely constitute a direct threat to the health or safety of other individuals or whose tenancy would result in substantial physical damage to the property of others; and
    c. That all residents in the facility have been or are currently admitted strictly on a voluntary basis and not a part of, or in lieu of, confinement or treatment in a correctional facility nor as a condition of parole. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.110 Services for nonresident clients prohibited in residential zones.
A residential care facility located in a residential zone may not provide counseling, therapy, or other addiction recovery services at the facility for individuals who are not residents of that facility. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.120 Residential facility for elderly persons.
A residential care facility for elderly persons shall comply with the requirement of this chapter, except individual assessments under Section 5.42.100 are not required. However, an applicant shall still be required to provide the required notarized statement affirming the facility does not accept any residents that would pose a direct threat to the health and safety of others in the facility or community or who in the past have posed a threat to the health and safety of others or whose tenancy would likely create a risk of substantial physical damage to others. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.130 Reasonable accommodation.
1. An applicant who desires to request a reasonable accommodation from any of the requirements of this chapter based on the Utah Fair Housing Act, the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (42 USC Section 3601 et seq.), and Section 504 of the Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 et seq., shall have the right to make such request to the city recorder.
2. A request for reasonable accommodation shall include the following:
    a. The name, mailing address and phone number of the applicant;
    b. The nature of the action for which reasonable accommodation is being sought;
    c. The physical address of the property where the applicant requests the reasonable accommodation;
    d. The exact statement of the ordinance or policy from which the applicant needs a reasonable accommodation;
    e. The proposed reasonable accommodation;
    f. A statement explaining why a reasonable accommodation is necessary;
    g. Provide evidence demonstrating the accommodation is reasonable and does not negate or negatively impact the legitimate purposes of existing zoning regulations, notwithstanding the benefit that the accommodation would provide to a person with a disability;
    h. Provide evidence that, absent the accommodation, one (1) or more persons with a disability would be denied an equal opportunity to enjoy housing of their choice; and
    i. Provide evidence that the requested accommodation will achieve equal results between persons with a disability and nondisabled persons.
3. The city shall hold an informal hearing, which shall be held no later than thirty (30) business days following the city’s receipt of the applicant’s request for reasonable accommodation.
4. Within fourteen (14) business days of the hearing the applicant shall be given written decision on the request for reasonable accommodation. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.140 Residential care facility business license not transferable – Termination.
1. A residential care facility business license is nontransferable and shall terminate upon the occurrence of any of the following:
    a. The operations of residential care facility cease for more than thirty (30) days;
    b. The structure is devoted to a use other than a residential care facility for any period of time;
    c. The structure fails to comply with all building, safety, health, and zoning requirement of the Lindon City Code;
    d. The state and/or federal licenses upon which residential care facility business license is issued lapse or are rescinded or revoked by the issuing agency;
    e. The owner or operator who originally obtained the residential care facility business license sells or transfers operations of the facility to a third party.
        i. A third party who purchases or assumes the operations of an existing and currently operating residential care facility shall not be required to resubmit site plans or obtain approval from the planning director as set forth in Chapter 17.70, but shall be required to apply for a new residential care facility business license. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.150 Continued compliance.
1. The owner or operator of a residential care facility shall be required to maintain the facility so as to be in continual compliance with the provisions of this chapter and upon request shall provide written proof of such to the city recorder.
2. If at any time the owner or operator of a residential care facility is unable to provide proof of continued compliance with the applicable provisions of the chapter, the residential care facility business license may be terminated.
3. Upon determining that a residential care facility is no longer in compliance with the applicable provisions of this chapter, the following provisions will apply:
    a. Lindon City shall provide written notice of the noncompliance to the owner and operator of the residential treatment facility.
    b. Upon receipt of a notice of noncompliance the owner or operator of the facility must bring the facility and its operations back into compliance within thirty (30) days of receipt of the notice.
    c. If the owner or operator of the facility fails to provide proof that the facility and its operations have been brought back into compliance within thirty (30) days of the notice, the residential care facility business license shall be revoked and withdrawn and residential care facility shall cease operations. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.160 Appeal.
1. An applicant or license holder who is denied a residential care facility business license or request for reasonable accommodation under this chapter may appeal the decision to the city administrator.
2. Notice of an appeal shall be filed with the city administrator within fourteen (14) days of the decision denying or revoking the residential care facility business license.
3. The notice of appeal shall identify the appellant and set forth the grounds for the appeal.
    a. If a notice fails to state the grounds for the appeal, the appeal may be summarily denied.
    b. An appellant must present every theory of relief it is claiming to preserve that theory for review in the district court.
4. The city administrator may hear the appeal or may appoint an appeals officer to hear the appeal.
5. Upon receipt of an appeal, the city administrator or appeal officer shall set an informal hearing as soon as practically possible (but not later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the request) in which the appellant and interested parties may address the city’s decision.
6. The appellant has the burden of proving the city’s decision was made in error.
7. The city administrator or appeal officer shall review factual matters on the record and shall be limited to reviewing documents and information presented to the city during the application process.
8. Any decision by the city administrator or appeal officer on an appeal of a residential care facility shall:
    a. Be issued in writing within fourteen (14) days of the meeting at which the appeal was heard;
    b. Set forth the findings of the city administrator or designated appeal officer; and
    c. Be delivered in person or by first-class mail to the applicant and/or appellant.
9. A party adversely affected by the decision of the city administrator or appeal officer may file a petition for review of the decision with the district court within thirty (30) days after the decision is final. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

5.42.170 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected. (Ord. 2018-2 § 3, adopted, 2018)

Chapter 5.44 CONDUCTING BUSINESS ON STREET OR SIDEWALKS

Sections:
5.44.010     Unlawful--Exception.

5.44.010 Unlawful--Exception.
It is unlawful for any person to engage in or carry on any business, profession, trade, vocation or avocation on any street, alley or sidewalk or in or from any automobile, vehicle, stand or structure located in or upon the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city; provided, however, this chapter shall not prohibit any business or occupation licensed or permitted under the ordinances of the city. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Prior code §15-11)

Chapter 5.48 LANDFILL LICENSE FEE

Sections:
5.48.010     Definitions.
5.48.020     Hazardous Waste.
5.48.030     Authorization of the construction and demolition landfill license fee.
5.48.040     License and Fees.

5.48.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words-and phrases shall have the following meanings:
“Construction and demolition landfill” means the facility authorized by the Lindon City Council and Planning Commission to accept construction or demolition materials from individuals and contractors throughout the Utah County area.
“Construction or demolition materials” means the solid waste from construction or demolition activities, including wood, brick, stone, rubble, concrete, drywall, and other building materials, but does not include small amounts of such materials that are disposed of by regular household waste disposal methods.
“Contractor” means the entity operating the construction and demolition landfill.
“Dispose” or “Disposal” means to abandon, deposit, or otherwise discard materials as a final action after its use has been achieved or its use is no longer intended.
“Hazardous waste” means a solid waste or combination of solid waste which is a hazardous waste under the Utah “Solid and Hazardous Waste Act,” U.C.A. §26-141, and regulations issued under it. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 2-95, adopted, 1995)

5.48.020 Hazardous Waste.
This title does not apply to the generation, transportation, treatment, storage, or disposal of hazardous waste, including asbestos or asbestos products. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 2-95, adopted, 1995)

5.48.030 Authorization of the construction and demolition landfill license fee.
Lindon City may license a contractor to establish and maintain a construction and demolition landfill in the city. The contractor shall qualify for and obtain any necessary conditional use permit and shall be in compliance with all applicable federal, state, and local statutes and ordinances. The contractor shall also comply with all business license requirements imposed by Chapter 5.04. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 2-95, adopted, 1995)

5.48.040 License and Fees.
The contractor shall pay a fee as established by the city to compensate the city for regulation and oversight of the operation. The council may annually adjust this fee by resolution. The funds collected pursuant to this section shall be applied to the general fund of Lindon City. (Ord. 98-1, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 2-95, adopted, 1995)

Title 6 ANIMAL REGULATIONS

Chapters:
6.04         Administration and Enforcement
6.08         Animal Regulations Generally
6.12         Dog Regulations Generally
6.16         Wild and Exotic Animals
6.20         Rabies
6.24         Impounding of Animals
6.28         Kennels
6.32         Animals and Land Use
6.34         Pigeons
6.35         Beekeeping

Chapter 6.04 ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT

Sections:
6.04.003     Purpose and intent.
6.04.005     Animal control definitions.
6.04.010     Animal control officer--Authority.
6.04.020     Repealed.
6.04.030     Animal control officer--Responsibility.
6.04.040     Citation authority.
6.04.050     Investigation authority.
6.04.060     Right of entry.
6.04.070     Hindering and obstructing enforcement unlawful.
6.04.080     Declaration of nuisance.
6.04.090     Restrictions prohibited.
6.04.100     Violation--Penalty.

6.04.003 Purpose and intent.
The ability to keep animals and livestock has been and continues to be a defining characteristic of the rural atmosphere that Lindon City seeks to maintain. As identified in the Community Vision Statement within the Lindon City General Plan, the City seeks to protect, preserve, and maintain the rights of land owners to raise animals on their properties. It shall be the purpose and intent of the animal control ordinance to protect the right to keep and maintain animals on residential, commercial, and industrial property in Lindon. The animal control ordinance shall provide a reasonable opportunity for the residents of Lindon to maintain animals on their property within the constraints and limits of this provision. It shall also be the purpose of this ordinance to provide regulations, constraints, and limits on the number of animals kept and the manner in which the animals are maintained in order to minimize the impact on neighboring property owners.
Lindon City recognizes that the keeping of animals and livestock is inherently associated with odors, animal excrete, flies, and some noises. Unless otherwise stated within this Title, a reasonable level of tolerance will be permitted for these inherent characteristics such as odors, flies, and animal noises that are common to the keeping of animals and livestock in order to protect, preserve, and maintain the rights of land owners to raise animals on their properties. (Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012; Ord. 99-17, adopted, 2001)

6.04.005 Animal control definitions.
For the purpose of this title, unless it is plainly evident from the context that a different meaning is intended, certain terms used herein are defined as follows:
“Animal” means birds, reptiles, fish, and mammals other than the genus Homo sapiens.
“Animal at large” means any domesticated animal, whether or not licensed, not under restraint (see “Animal under restraint”).
“Animal control officer” means the Chief of Police or the Zoning Administrator (Planning Director) and their authorized representative or agent, with the authority to enforce the provisions of this Title; also “inspector” or “code enforcement officer”.
“Animal Shelter” means the lot, premises, or buildings maintained for the confinement and care of the animals seized under the provisions of this Title.
“Animal under restraint” means an animal under control of its owner or other persons having charge, care, or custody of the animal by means of a leash or lead, or confined within a building or vehicle, or otherwise restrained (fence, shock collar, etc.) within the real property limits of the owner (or other private property with permission) without access to passers-by.
“Bite” means a puncture, tear, abrasion, or other injury inflicted by the teeth or fangs of an animal.
“Boar” means a non-castrated adult male hog.
“Bull” means a non-castrated adult male domesticated bovine (excepting bison).
“Cat” means any age feline of the domesticated types.
“Cattle” means, for the purposes of this Title, the plural form of cow and includes both sexes of the animal, including a bull.
“City” means the incorporated area of Lindon City.
“Corral” means a pen or enclosure used for enclosing and confining livestock or other animals listed in this Title and not used as a pasture for grazing livestock. Fenced areas consisting primarily of dirt or void of living vegetation (less than 50%) are considered a corral for the purposes of this Title.
“Continuous” means prolonged and unceasing without interruption.
“Cow” means, for purposes of this Title, a domesticated bovine (excepting bison) that is either an adult female that has had a calf, an immature female (heifer) that has not had a calf, or a castrated male (steer).
“Department” means the City, its agents, staff, and deputies.
“Dog” means a Canis familiaris of either sex, altered or unaltered, or any other members of the Canis genus.
“Dog License” means a properly completed and validated “dog license application” issued by the City and/or North Utah Valley Animal Services.
“Domesticated animal” means any animal accustomed to live in or about the habitation of man, including but not limited to cats, dogs, and fowl.
“Enclosure” means, for purposes of this Title, a fenced area without a roof capable of restraining or confining animals or livestock including, corrals, pastures, a kennel, pen, or cage.
“Exotic Animal” means an animal of foreign origin introduced from abroad and commonly domesticated, but not commonly raised within Lindon City. These animals shall include but not be limited to:
    a. Camel;
    b. Emu;
    c. Peacock;
    d. Ostrich.
    For purposes of this ordinance, bees and other animals specifically permitted within this title are not considered exotic animals.
“Goat” means any agile, sure-footed, hollow-horned ruminants of the genus Capra, of the family Bovidae, of either sex, closely related to the sheep, found native in rocky and mountainous regions, and widely distributed in domesticated varieties.
“Guard Dog” means a working dog which must be kept in a fenced area or other suitable structure during business hours, on leash, or under restraint while working, so it cannot come into contact with the public.
“Hog” means, for purposes of this Title, a hoofed mammal of the family Suidae, limited to domesticated swine, Sus scrofa (commonly referred to as ‘pig’).
“Horse” means, for purposes of this Title, a domesticated solid-hoofed herbivorous quadruped (Equus caballus), typically used for draught work and riding, or other ungulates belonging to the family Equidae, including the donkey, ass, and mule.
“Impounded animal” means any animal taken into custody by the City as provided in this title.
“Inspector” (see Animal control officer).
“Kennel” means any lot, building structure, enclosure or premises whereupon or wherein three (3) or more dogs over (4) months of age are kept or maintained for any purpose, including boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for fee or shelling.
“Leash” means any rope, leather strap, chain or other material capable of restraining the animal to which it is tied.
“Licensed dog” means a dog wearing its current dog license tag as required by this Title.
“License Tag” means a piece of metal or other durable material inscribed with a date and number which has been issued by the City.
“Livestock” means, for the purposes of this Title, one or more domesticated animals raised to produce commodities such as food, fiber and labor, including but not limited to poultry, cattle, horses, sheep, hogs, fish, goats, and rabbits.
“Neutered” means having had the testicles removed; a castrated animal.
“Owner” means any person, firm, association or corporation, who is either the legal owner, keeper, possessor, or the actual custodian of an animal. Ownership is established by a person registering as owner on a license or other legal document or being a person claiming ownership and taking possession of an animal.
“Pasture” means a fenced area of land covered with at least 50% grass or other living vegetation used or suitable for the grazing of livestock. Fenced areas consisting of dirt or void of living vegetation (less than 50%) are not considered pasture for the purposes of this Title.
“Poisonous” means full of or containing poison; a fluid, secretion, or other substance which can be ingested, inhaled, absorbed, applied, injected, or developed in the body which is capable of illness, injury, or death.
“Quarantine” means the isolation of an animal under the observation of a licensed veterinarian or in the custody of the animal shelter in a substantial enclosure of that the animal is not subject to contact with other animals or unauthorized persons.
“Ram” means a non-castrated adult male sheep.
“Reasonable” means having modest or moderate expectations; not making unfair demands; the determination of circumstances as seen by a hypothetical person in society who exercises average care, skill, and judgment in a sensible manner.
“Sheep” means any of numerous ruminant mammals of the genus Ovis, specifically Ovis aries, of the family Bovidae, and bred in a number of domesticated varieties primarily raised for their wool and meat.
“Sow” means a female adult hog.
“Spayed” means having had the ovaries and uterus removed or extirpated; an ovariohysterectomy.
“Stallion” means a non-castrated adult male horse.
“Structure” means something built or constructed which supports a roof and may have walls, floors, or support columns.
“Venomous” means full of or containing venom; a type of poisonous or otherwise harmful secretion of an insect or animal usually transmitted by injection through a bite or sting.
“Vicious Animal:”
    a. With a known propensity, tendency, or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury to, or to otherwise endanger the safety of humans or other domestic animals; or
    b. Which attacks a human being or other domestic animal without provocation; or
    c. Which is trained or used as a fighting animal.
    d. This provision shall not apply to police service dogs owned or used by a government entity.
“Weaned” means, for the purposes of this Title, the act of removing a young animal from its mother to be raised independently from its parent.
“Wild Animals” means any animals of a species that are untamed and in their natural life are feral (wild), including hybrids and animals which as a result of their natural or wild condition, cannot be vaccinated effectively for rabies. These animals, however domesticated, shall include but not be limited to:
    a. Alligators and crocodiles;
    b. Bears (Ursidae). All bears, including grizzly bears, brown bears, black bears, etc;
    c. Bison (buffalo);
    d. Cat family (Felidae). All except the commonly accepted domesticated cats, and including cheetah, cougar, leopard, lion, lynx, panther, mountain lion, tiger, bobcat, etc;
    e. Deer, elk, moose, antelope, caribou or similar variety of wild ruminant artiodactyl mammal of the family Cervidae.
    f. Dog family (Canidae). All except domesticated dogs and including wolf, part wolf, fox, part fox, coyote, part coyote, dingo, etc.
    g. Porcupine (Erethizontidae);
    h. Primate (Non-Human). All subhuman primates.
    i. Raccoon (Procyonidae). All raccoons, including eastern raccoon, desert raccoon, ringtail cat, etc;
    j. Skunks;
    k. Venomous fish and piranha;
    l. Venomous snakes, amphibians, and lizards;
    m. Weasels (Mustelidae). All including weasels, martens, wolverines, badgers, otters, ermine, mink, mongoose, etc;
    For purposes of this ordinance, bees and other animals specifically permitted within this title are not considered wild animals. (Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012; Ord. 99-17, adopted, 2001)

6.04.010 Animal control officer--Authority.
In the performance of his/her duties, the animal control officer is vested with the authority to enforce the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-1; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.04.020 Removed.
(Ord. 2012-16, repealed, 2012; Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-24)

6.04.030 Animal control officer--Responsibility.
The animal control officer or deputy thereof, assigned to duties which include the enforcement of animal control laws shall be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this title. (Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-2(A))

6.04.040 Citation authority.
Each of the individuals referred to in Section 6.04.030 shall have the power to issue citations for violations of this title and to swear to complaints for such violations when appropriate. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-2(B); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.04.050 Investigation authority.
The animal control officer, public health officer and any peace officer, may enter upon privately owned land to investigate reports of vicious animals, rabies, or other contagious animal diseases, and to investigate violations of this Title. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-2(C); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.04.060 Right of entry.
In the enforcement of any of the provisions of this title, the animal control officer or his deputy may enter upon the premises of any person to take possession of registered or unregistered, fierce, dangerous, or vicious animals when in fresh pursuit of such animal at the time said animal goes into private property or to abate any public nuisance as outlined in Section 6.04.080. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-2(D); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.04.070 Hindering and obstructing enforcement unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to interfere with, molest, hinder or prevent the animal control officer from discharging his/her duties. Any person who shall hinder, delay, interfere with or obstruct the animal control officer while engaging in capturing, securing or taking to the animal shelter any animal or animals to be impounded, or who shall break open or in any manner directly or indirectly aid, counsel, or advise in the breaking open of any animal shelter or vehicle used for holding, collecting or conveying any animals to the shelter shall be prosecuted under applicable state law or local ordinance. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-2(E); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.04.080 Declaration of nuisance.
The introduction, possession or maintenance of any animal, or the allowing of any animal to be in violation of this title, is in addition to being a misdemeanor, declared to be a public nuisance. The animal control officer and his/her deputy are empowered and authorized to abate such public nuisance by any means reasonable including but not limited to the impounding of such animal in an appropriate shelter, the taking of such animal by humane means for impoundment, or the destruction of the animal or animals involved. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-2(F); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.04.090 Restrictions prohibited.
The keeping of animals as permitted by this title shall not be restricted or prohibited in any manner by neighborhood organizations, homeowners associations, or private citizens in specific neighborhoods and subdivisions through the use and implementation of conditions, covenants, and restrictions (C.C.andR's) or other types of restrictive legal documents entered into after March 1, 2003. Such practices undermine the City's ability to “provide for the keeping of animals in all new residential developments either on the subject property or on neighboring parcels”. (See the Lindon City Community Vision Statement as found in the Lindon City General Plan). Neighborhood organizations and/or homeowners associations which have adopted and implemented conditions, covenants, and restrictions or other types of restrictive legal documents which restrict the right to possess, keep, and maintain animals as permitted by this Title are strongly encouraged to reconsider such C.C.andR's and/or other restrictive documents and bring them into compliance with this provision. (Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012; Ord. 2003-4, adopted, 2003)

6.04.100 Violation--Penalty.
1. Unless otherwise indicated by applicable Utah State law, any person violating any of the provisions of this Title 6 shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000) or by imprisonment for not more than six months or by both such fine and imprisonment.
2. Each day that any violation continues after notification by the Animal Control Officer or his agent that such violation exists shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000; Prior code §2-2(G))

Chapter 6.08 ANIMAL REGULATIONS GENERALLY

Sections:
6.08.010     Conditions of animal ownership.
6.08.015     Exemption of certain household pets.
6.08.020     Disturbing the peace.
6.08.030     Inspections and enforcement - public nuisance.
6.08.040     Abandoning sick or disabled animals.
6.08.050     Removal and disposition of dead animals.
6.08.060     Rendering assistance to animals.
6.08.070     Cruelty to animals.
6.08.080     Poisoning animals.
6.08.090     Encouraging fighting.
6.08.100     Injuries and communicable diseases.
6.08.110     Malicious impounding.
6.08.120     Animals at large.
6.08.130     Repealed.
6.08.140     Electric fencing.

6.08.010 Conditions of animal ownership.
Animals or keepers must comply with the following conditions of animal ownership, and the animal control officer may require such owners and keepers comply with such conditions or they may be subject to violation and penalties as outline in this Title:
1. Animals shall be restrained or confined as required by law.
2. Animals shall be humanely treated at all times.
3. Vaccinations, licenses, and permits shall be obtained as required by law.
4. Animal premises shall be kept reasonably sanitary and shall not constitute a substantial fly breeding reservoir, source of unreasonable odors uncommon to the keeping of said animals or of human or animal disease.
5. Animals and animal premises shall not be permitted to disturb the peace or constitute a public nuisance or hazard as defined within this Title, nor shall animals be permitted to go onto the property of another without the consent of said property owner or occupant. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-4; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.08.015 Exemption of certain household pets.
Except for animals specifically listed in this title, other household pets commonly found and legally sold within local pet stores and generally kept indoors for personal use (not raised commercially) shall be humanely treated and cared for, but are not otherwise intended to be regulated by this title. These animals include, but are not limited to: non-venomous arachnids, snakes, amphibians, and other reptiles; birds; rodents; insects; and fish. These types of animals must be contained by the owner and shall not be permitted to create a nuisance per LCC Title 8. (Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.08.020 Disturbing the peace.
Lindon City recognizes that the keeping of animals and livestock is inherently associated with odors, animal excrete, flies, and some noises. Unless otherwise stated within this Title, a reasonable level of tolerance will be permitted for these inherent characteristics such as odors, flies, and animal noises that are common to the keeping of animals and livestock in order to protect, preserve, and maintain the rights of land owners to raise animals on their properties.
No person shall own or harbor an animal in such a manner that the public is unreasonably disturbed. The keeping or maintenance, or the permitting to be kept or maintained, on any premises owned, occupied, or controlled by any person of any animal or fowl which, by any frequent or long continued noise, or creation of excessively unreasonable odors uncommon to the keeping of said animals, or shall cause other unreasonable annoyance or discomfort to any reasonable person of normal sensitivity in the vicinity shall constitute a violation of this section; provided, however, that nothing contained herein shall be construed to apply to reasonably expected noises, flies, or odors customary to the keeping of animals emanating from legally operated dog and cat hospitals, humane societies, pounds, commercial farm, dairy, and/or other agricultural facilities, or areas where keeping of animals or fowl are permitted. The destruction by an animal of property other than that which belongs to the owner of said animals shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section.
1. Any animal which does any of the following shall be deemed a nuisance until such time as the nuisance violation is rectified:
    a. Causes damage to the property of anyone other than its owner or custodian;
    b. Is a vicious animal as defined in this Title and kept in a manner contrary this Title;
    c. Causes excessively unreasonable fouling of the air by odor not otherwise customary to the keeping of such animal;
    d. Causes unreasonable unsanitary conditions in enclosures or surroundings, whether public or private, not otherwise customary to the keeping of such animal;
    e. Barks, wines, brays, crows, whinnys, or howls, or makes other disturbing noises in an excessive, continuous, or untimely fashion;
        i. Excessive, continuous or untimely noises shall be defined for purposes of this section as barking, baying, crying, howling, braying, crowing, whinnying, or making any other noises continuously and/or incessantly for a period of ten (10) minutes or more to the disturbance of any person at any time of day or night regardless of whether the animal is physically situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that a dog shall not be deemed a nuisance for purposes of this section if, at the time the dog is barking or making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon private property in or upon which the animal is situated or for any other legitimate cause which teased or provoked the animal.
    f. Molest passerby or chases passing vehicles, bicyclists, or pedestrians;
    g. Attacks other domestic and/or wild animals;
    h. Otherwise acts so as to constitute a nuisance or public nuisance under the provisions of Chapter 10, Title 76, Utah Code Annotated (1953, as amended).
    i. An animal is a nuisance if it is determined by the department to be a nuisance by virtue of being offensive or dangerous to the public health, welfare, or safety.
        ii. Any animal which, by virtue of the number maintained, are determined by the department to be offensive or dangerous to the public health, welfare or safety. (Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 102 §1, amended, 1983; Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-12)

6.08.030 Inspections and enforcement - public nuisance.
The Animal Control Officer shall investigate all citizen complaints concerning Public Nuisances under Title 6 or as needed.
After such investigations, when it is deemed that a violation exists on the responsible persons property, or as a result of the responsible person animals, the Animal Control Officer shall enter findings and issue an enforcement order to the responsible person to remedy the violation. (Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.08.040 Abandoning sick or disabled animals.
It is unlawful for any person to abandon or turn out at large any animal whether sick, diseased, disabled or otherwise. Animals, when rendered worthless by reason of sickness or other disability, shall be disposed of by the owner thereof as provided in Section 6.08.050 for the disposition of dead animals within the city. If after following a reasonable investigation a responsible owner cannot be identified, it shall be the duty of the animal control officer of the city to dispose of any animals found running at large within the city which are worthless from sickness, disease or other disability. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-14; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.08.050 Removal and disposition of dead animals.
It is unlawful for the owner of any animal or fowl that shall die or be killed within the city to fail to remove or bury the carcass of such animal within forty-eight (48) hours after its death. If the owner of the dead animal or fowl cannot be found, the animal control officer may remove or bury the carcass of such animal and the owner shall reimburse the city for any expenses so incurred. No person shall deposit a dead animal upon the land of another person without the latter's consent. Any person who violates this Section is guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. Each day that a violation of this Section continues after notification by the Animal Control Officer or his agent that such violation exists shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-15; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.08.060 Rendering assistance to animals.
Any person who, as the operator of a motor vehicle, strikes a domestic animal shall stop and render such assistance as may be reasonable possible, and shall immediately report such injury or death to the animal's owner; in the event the owner cannot be located, such operator shall at once report the accident to the appropriate law enforcement agency of the local humane society or to the animal control officer. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-15; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000)

6.08.070 Cruelty to animals.
Any person who injures any animal, whether belonging to himself or another, shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor if such conduct was committed intentionally or knowingly or a Class C misdemeanor if such conduct was committed recklessly or with criminal negligence. Any person who, within the city, tortures any animal or kills an animal without having a legal privilege to do so shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor if such conduct was committed recklessly or a Class C misdemeanor if such conduct was committed with criminal negligence. (Ord. 97-1 §4, amended, 2000; Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-18; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000)

6.08.080 Poisoning animals.
Any person who administers poison or poisonous substances to an animal without having a legal privilege to do so shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor if such conduct was committed recklessly or a Class C misdemeanor if such conduct was committed with criminal negligence. (Ord. 97-1 §5, amended, 2000; Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-19; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.08.090 Encouraging fighting.
It is unlawful for any person within the city to in any manner whatever encourage or urge dogs or any other animals or fowl to fight or urge them after they commence to fight. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-20; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.08.100 Injuries and communicable diseases.
No person shall knowingly harbor or keep any dog or other animal with a serious injury or afflicted with mange, ringworm, distemper or any other contagious disease, unless such dog or other animal is, in the opinion of the animal control officer or the veterinarian, being given adequate treatment for such diseases. The animal control officer or the veterinarian may take immediate possession of any such animal not being so treated or which is not responding to such treatment, and immediately dispose of the animal unless the owner shall forthwith place such animal under the control and treatment of a licensed veterinarian. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-21; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.08.110 Malicious impounding.
It is unlawful for any person to maliciously or mischievously secrete or impound the animal of another or to maliciously or mischievously aid or abet therein. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-22; Ord. 99-17, adopted, 2001)

6.08.120 Animals at large.
1. It is unlawful for any person owning or having the custody, possession, or control of any animal to allow, either negligently or with specific intent, the animal to run at large.
2. All fencing of property where animals are kept shall be of sufficient construction to prevent the escape of or injury to the animals being confined within the fencing. The fencing shall be maintained so that no part of such fence, absent extraordinary circumstance, may be broken, damaged, or in any way created the possibility of injury to the confined animal or to allow the escape thereof.
3. Any animal in violation of this section may be impounded. (Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012; Ord. 99-17, adopted, 2001)

6.08.130 Removed.
(Ord. 2012-16, repealed, 2012; Ord. 99-17, adopted, 2001)

6.08.140 Electric fencing.
In no case shall electric fencing be the sole means of enclosure for livestock. Electric fencing shall be a secondary means of enclosing and restraining livestock. All electrical wires shall be located inside corral and pasture fencing and shall not be readily accessible to the general public. (Ord. 99-17, adopted, 2001)

Chapter 6.12 DOG REGULATIONS GENERALLY

Sections:
6.12.010     Registration and license required.
6.12.020     License-Issuance and fees.
6.12.030     License--Term.
6.12.040     License--When due.
6.12.050     Applicability to nonresidents.
6.12.060     Collars and tags.
6.12.070     Restraint by owner.
6.12.080     Dogs at large.
6.12.090     Cats at large.
6.12.100     Possession of vicious dog or cat.
6.12.110     Posting of a notice to beware.
6.12.120     Prohibited in public buildings.
6.12.130     Female dog or cat in heat.
6.12.140     Emergency proclamation power of mayor.
6.12.150     Maintaining sanitary conditions.
6.12.160     Guard dogs.
6.12.170     Liability of owners - Dogs used in law enforcement.
6.12.180     Violation-penalty.

6.12.010 Registration and license required.
It is unlawful for any person to own, keep, harbor or maintain any dog within the city limits of the city which has attained the age of four (4) months unless and until such dog has been duly licensed and registered as hereinafter provided, except as hereinafter provided (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-3(A); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.12.020 License-Issuance and fees.
The license required by Section 6.12.010 shall be issued by North Utah Valley Animal Services (NUVAS) upon payment by the applicant of a fee as established by NUVAS. Said payments may be paid by the applicant to the office of the city treasurer or directly to NUVAS. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-3(B); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.12.030 License--Term.
License fees provided in Section 6.12.020 shall cover a period of one year from the date of purchase, or other period of time set forth by NUVAS. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-3(C); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.12.040 License--When due.
The annual license fees provided for in Section 6.12.030 shall be paid for each dog, male or female, kept within the limits of the city. Said fee shall be due on or before one year from the date of purchase, or other period of time set forth by NUVAS and may be delinquent or subject to the penalties hereinafter provided if unpaid on or before one year from the date of purchase or other period of time set forth by NUVAS. Upon failure to pay the license fee provided in Section 6.12.020 on or before one year from the date of purchase or other period of time set forth by North Utah Valley Animal Services, a late fee may be added to the license fee. Dogs turning four (4) months old or a newly acquired dog must be licensed within thirty (30) days. The penalties provided for in this section shall be in addition to the penalties hereinafter provided for violation of this title. Individuals moving into the city who own, keep, or harbor a dog or dogs shall be required to license that dog or dogs within thirty (30) days after bringing said dogs into the city. Unexpired tags from another city within Utah County will be honored until the date they become expired. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-3(D); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.12.050 Applicability to nonresidents.
Nothing in Sections 6.08.010--6.08.030, 6.12.060-6.12.130 and 6.20.010 shall be construed to affect persons not residing in this city who may temporarily visit the city and own a dog; provided, that such person shall constantly keep such dog under his personal care and not allow the same to run at large. Every nonresident dog must have proper vaccinations, licenses and tags from their community of record. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-5; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.12.060 Collars and tags.
License tags and current rabies tags are not transferable from one dog to another. Every owner shall be required to provide each dog with a collar or harness to which the current year's license and current rabies vaccination tag are attached. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-6; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.12.070 Restraint by owner.
Persons owning, keeping or harboring any dog shall at all times keep their dogs under restraint as defined by this Title. Dogs shall not be permitted to run at large at any time within the city, nor shall they be permitted to bite or harass any person engaged in a lawful act. Any dog running at large within the corporate limits of Lindon City may be impounded by the animal control officer or any policeman. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-8; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.12.080 Dogs at large.
1. It is unlawful for the owner or person having charge, care, custody, or control of any dog to allow such dog at any time to run at large. The owner or person charged with responsibility for a dog found running at large shall be strictly liable for any violation(s) committed by the dog, regardless of whether or not the person knows the dog is running at large.
2. However, dogs may be at large while participating in field trials and obedience classes, legal hunting or in herding of livestock, while assisting a peace officer engaged in law enforcement duties, or while being trained for the above purpose so long as such dogs are within sight of such individuals to assure that they do not violate any other provisions of law. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-8; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.12.090 Cats at large.
It is unlawful for the owner or person having charge, care, custody, or control of any cat to allow such cat to become a nuisance to any property owner or resident of Lindon or neighboring municipalities. The owner or person charged with responsibility for a cat found running at large shall be strictly liable for any violations(s) committed by the cat, regardless of whether the person knows the cat is running at large. (Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.12.100 Possession of vicious dog or cat.
The possession of a vicious dog or cat is unlawful unless it is restrained, confined or muzzled so that it cannot bite or attack any person or animal. Dogs and cats held in violation of this section shall be deemed a public nuisance, and their continued possession or ownership is unlawful. The animal control officer may impound any such dog or cat and dispose of it in a humane manner after three (3) working days to allow for legal restraining action by the owner: However, nothing contained herein shall prevent the reasonable keeping of a guard dog or dogs for security. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-10(A); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.12.110 Posting of a notice to beware.
Whenever the animal control officer determines that an animal has a disposition to attack or bite any person or animal without being cited, aroused or provoked to so act, such officer may order the owner or harborer of such animal to post a “Beware of (insert type of animal)” sign. The sign shall be posted in plain and conspicuous view and the animal shall be contained in proper confinement. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-10(B); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000)

6.12.120 Prohibited in public buildings.
It is unlawful for any person owning, keeping or harboring any dog to permit the same to enter or be in any public school building or to enter any public building, unless such dog is trained for the benefit of the disabled, such as a seeing eye dog, and the dog is being used for such a purpose and accompanied by the person needing such assistance, without express permission of the appropriate school authorities or officials responsible for the public building. (Ord. 97-1 §6, amended, 2000; Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-10(B); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.12.130 Female dog or cat in heat.
Dog and cat owners shall securely confine their female dogs and cats while in heat within a building or secure enclosure. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-13; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.12.140 Emergency proclamation power of mayor.
The mayor, upon reasonable apprehension of danger from mad or rabid dogs, may issue a proclamation forbidding dogs of every description from running at large, and after such proclamation shall have been issued twenty-four (24) hours, any dog found running at large in the city not securely muzzled, may be immediately destroyed or caused to be destroyed by the animal control officer. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-17; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.12.150 Maintaining sanitary conditions.
1. No owner or person having charge, custody or control of any dog shall permit, either willfully or through failure to exercise due control, any such dog to defecate in such a manner that the feces thereafter remain on any public street, gutter, sidewalk, public park, or any other public property. This provision shall apply when the owner or occupant of any private property does not grant permission to the animal's owner to use such private property. Any person allowing their dog to defecate on property other than their own property, shall remove such feces immediately.
2. Every person owning or occupying any property or premises where any dog or other animal is kept, shall keep such premises clean and sanitary. (Ord. 102 §1 1983, amended, 1983; Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-31; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.12.160 Guard dogs.
Guard dogs shall be kept in such a manner so that they cannot come into contact with persons or other animals who are legally upon the premises where a guard dog is maintained. The property shall be posted with a sign clearly visible stating that a guard dog is on the premises. (Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000)

6.12.170 Liability of owners - Dogs used in law enforcement.
Every person owning or keeping a dog shall be liable in damages for injury committed by such dog, and it shall not be necessary in any action brought therefore to allege or prove that such dog was of a vicious or mischievous disposition or that the owner or keeper thereof knew that it was vicious or mischievous; but neither the state, county, or city of Lindon, nor any peace officer employed by any of them shall be liable in damages for injury committed by a dog when: (1) The dog has been trained to assist in law enforcement, and (2) the injury occurs while the dog is reasonably and carefully being used in the apprehension, arrest, or location of a suspected offender or in maintaining or controlling public order. (Ord. 99-17, adopted, 2001; Ord. 97-1 §7, amended, 2000)

6.12.180 Violation-penalty.
Notwithstanding the penalties set forth in Section 6.04.100 any person violating any of the provisions of Chapter 12 of this Title shall be guilty of an infraction. Each day that a violation of this Section continues, after notification by the Animal Control Officer or his agent that such violation exists, shall be considered a separate offense. (Ord. 99-17, adopted, 2001; Ord. 97-1 §8, amended, 2000)

Chapter 6.16 WILD AND EXOTIC ANIMALS

Sections:
6.16.010     Wild and exotic animals.
6.16.012     Feeding of wild animals prohibited.
6.16.015     Conditional use required.
6.16.017     Prohibited animals.
6.16.019     Prior animal uses.
6.16.020     State licenses and rules.

6.16.010 Wild and exotic animals.
It is unlawful for any person to sell, offer for sale, barter, give away, keep, own, harbor, or purchase any wild or exotic animal, as defined by this Title, except for governmental agencies or otherwise as provided for by state or federal regulations or as permitted by issuance of a conditional use permit as allowed for within this chapter. (Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.16.012 Feeding of wild animals prohibited.
1. It is unlawful to feed or bait wild animals. A person shall not make food available for wild animals with the intent that it be consumed by or attract wild animals. Wild animals are defined in Section 6.04.005, “Wild Animals.”
2. This section does not apply to:
    a. Public employees or authorized agents acting within the scope of their employment for public safety or wildlife management purposes;
    b. Owners of wild animals that have been permitted by Lindon City and the Utah Division of Wildlife Resources (or similar state wildlife management agency) to be kept within the city limits;
    c. Planted vegetation or landscaping elements that are not intended for feeding wild animals;
    d. Normal agricultural or livestock operation practices; or
    e. Recreational feeding of wild songbirds, hummingbirds, or similar birds, unless a previous warning by the city to cease or modify feeding practices is disregarded and such continued practices attract wild animals in such numbers or circumstances to cause property damage, endanger any person, or create public health concerns. (Ord. 2019-12 §1, adopted, 2019)

6.16.015 Conditional use required.
1. Wild and exotic animals, as defined in this title, shall only be authorized in Lindon City by issuance of a conditional use from the Planning Commission. Conditional uses shall be regulated according to Chapters 17.20 through 17.24 of Lindon City Code.
2. The potential allowance of wild and/or exotic animal species and the quantities of said species are subject to approval on a case-by-case basis. Conditions of approval may be imposed by the Planning Commission as deemed necessary to protect the public health, safety, and welfare including, but not limited to, increased setbacks, fencing, size and type of enclosure or structure, etc. (Ord. 2012-16, adopted, 2012)

6.16.017 Prohibited animals.
Some wild and/or exotic animals are strictly prohibited and shall not be permitted within Lindon City. These animals, however domesticated, shall include but not be limited to:
a. Alligators and crocodiles;
b. Bears (Ursidae). All bears, including grizzly bears, brown bears, black bears, etc;
c. Cat family (Felidae). All except the commonly accepted domesticated cats, and including cheetah, cougar, leopard, lion, lynx, panther, mountain lion, tiger, bobcat, etc;
d. Dog family (Canidae). All except domesticated dogs and including wolf, part wolf, fox, part fox, coyote, part coyote, dingo, etc.
e. Primate (Non-Human). All subhuman primates.
f. Raccoon (Procyonidae). All raccoons, including eastern raccoon, desert raccoon, ringtail cat, etc;
g. Venomous fish and piranha;
h. Venomous snakes, amphibians, and lizards;
i. Other venomous or poisonous animals;
j. Other animals as prohibited by state or federal regulations;
k. Other animals as prohibited by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2012-16, adopted, 2012)

6.16.019 Prior animal uses.
The keeping of any wild or exotic animal which existed prior to October 1, 2012 may be continued, except that if the use is discontinued for one (1) year or more it shall then be deemed abandoned and any future keeping of wild or exotic animals shall be in conformity with this Title. (Ord. 2012-16, adopted, 2012)

6.16.020 State licenses and rules.
The keeping of any wild or exotic animal within Lindon City shall be in conformance with license and regulations required within Utah Administrative Code, Rule R657-3 as presently constituted or as may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 2012-16, adopted, 2012)

Chapter 6.20 RABIES

Sections:
6.20.010     Vaccination of dogs required.
6.20.020     Reports of bites.
6.20.030     Reports of suspected rabid animals.
6.20.040     Isolation of biting or suspected rabid animals.
6.20.050     Euthanisation.
6.20.060     Confinement.

6.20.010 Vaccination of dogs required.
All dogs over four (4) months of age, owned, kept, harbored, or in the custody of any person of the city shall be vaccinated at four (4) months of age or older with an approved rabies vaccine by a licensed veterinarian. A current rabies vaccination tag shall be attached to the collar or harness provided for each dog. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-7; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.20.020 Reports of bites.
All persons bitten, and the parents or guardians of minor children bitten by a dog, cat, skunk, fox or bat, coyote, bobcat, or other animal known to constitute a serious threat of rabies shall notify the animal control officer immediately thereafter. Physicians treating such bites and other person having the knowledge of such bites shall also be required to make such notification. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-23(A)(1); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.20.030 Reports of suspected rabid animals.
Any person who observes or has knowledge of an animal which shows symptoms of rabies or which acts in a manner which would lead to a reasonable suspicion that it may have rabies, shall notify the animal control officer and comply with appropriate laws and regulations regarding suspected cases of rabies as directed by the county health department. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-23(A)(2); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.20.040 Isolation of biting or suspected rabid animals.
Upon the reasonable-order of the animal control officer or public health officer, a biting or suspected rabid animal shall be isolated, at owner's expense if owned, in strict confinement under proper care and under the observation of the animal control officer, or other adequate facility in a manner approved by the animal control officer or the county health department. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-(B); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.20.050 Euthanisation.
Any biting or suspected rabid animal or bat may be humanely euthanized immediately by the animal control officer or the department of health, and such animal's undamaged and properly packaged and properly refrigerated head shall be delivered promptly to an approved medical facility having the capability of performing the fluorescent test to demonstrate the presence of rabies. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-(B)(1); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.20.060 Confinement.
The foregoing notwithstanding, if the biting or suspected rabid animal is of the domesticated variety that is owned or obviously could have an owner, said animal shall be confined as in Section 6.20.040 for a period of ten (10) days to allow time for an attempt to locate an owner unless the county veterinarian or other licensed veterinarian shall reasonably deem it necessary to sacrifice the animal for the purpose of laboratory examination. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-(B)(1); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

Chapter 6.24 IMPOUNDING OF ANIMALS

Sections:
6.24.010     Relinquishing of strays.
6.24.020     Notification of owner of record.
6.24.030     Return to owners.
6.24.040     Holding Period.
6.24.050     Disposition.
6.24.060     Destruction of dogs running at large.

6.24.010 Relinquishing of strays.
Any stray animal must be relinquished to the animal control officer within twenty-four (24) hours. Any person who relinquishes an animal to the animal control officer shall give his name, address and, if he is not the owner, the location where he found the animal. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-25; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.24.020 Notification of owner of record.
Upon receipt of a lost or stray animal bearing a valid license tag, the animal control officer shall immediately telephone the owner of record at the phone number indicated on the license form, a notice of location of the animal. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-26; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.24.030 Return to owners.
The owner of an impounded animal may claim it prior to its legal disposition by providing proper identification, meeting all the legal requirements, and paying the applicable redemption fees for impoundment, board, medical care, vaccination, advertising, and/or other costs. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-27; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.24.040 Holding Period.
1. The animal control officer shall hold an impounded, lost or stray dog for not less than three working days if it was not wearing a valid license tag when impounded and for not less than five working days after notice is given pursuant to this chapter if it was wearing a valid license tag, so that the owner or custodian may claim it prior to other disposition. The animal control officer shall hold any other impounded animal not required to be licensed for not less than three working days.
2. The animal control officer may dispose of humanely, or transfer to a new owner upon payment of the applicable fee, any impounded animal not claimed by its owner or custodian within the prescribed holding time. Animals relinquished by their owners may be humanely destroyed without regard to the prescribed holding time in order to alleviate suffering or to protect other impounded animals from exposure to contagious disease. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-28(A); Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.24.050 Disposition.
The animal control officer may dispose of humanely or transfer to a new owner upon payment of the applicable fee, any impounded animal not claimed by its owner or custodian within the prescribed holding time. Animals relinquished by their owner may be humanely destroyed without regard to the prescribed holding in order to alleviate suffering or to protect other impounded animals from exposure to contagious disease. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-28(B); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.24.060 Destruction of dogs running at large.
The police officers or animal control officers of the city may, in their discretion, provide for the destruction of any dog running at large within the corporate limits of the city in violation of the ordinance of the city, as codified in this title, which dog has been determined to be a nuisance and which has previously been observed running at large by the animal control officer or police officers of the city at least three (3) times, after a reasonable attempt has been made to notify the owner. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-29; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

Chapter 6.28 KENNELS

Sections:
6.28.010     Definition.
6.28.020     Conditional use permit--issuance conditions.
6.28.030     Conditional use permit--Fee.
6.28.040     Conditional use permit--Minimum standards.
6.28.050     Conditional use permit.
6.28.060     Right of entry.

6.28.010 Definition.
As used in this title, the word “kennel” means a premises where more than three (3) adult dogs or cats are raised, kept, housed, or boarded. No person shall operate or maintain a kennel without first obtaining a conditional use permit from the planning commission. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-34(A); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.28.020 Conditional use permit--issuance conditions.
Before the conditional use permit can be issued, the following conditions concerning the location of the kennel must be met:
1. It must be two hundred (200) feet away from any neighboring house; and
2. One hundred fifty (150) feet from any road. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-34(B); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.28.030 Conditional use permit--Fee.
The fee for the conditional use permit shall be set on the city fee schedule. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-34(C); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.28.040 Conditional use permit--Minimum standards.
The following minimum standards shall be complied with to obtain and maintain a kennel permit:
1. Enclosures and/or structures must be provided which shall allow adequate protection against weather extremes. Floors of buildings, runs and walls shall be of an appropriate material as required by the specific breed of dog and also to permit proper cleaning and disinfecting.
2. Adequate ventilation shall be maintained and an appropriate temperature provided as required by the specific breed of dog housed therein.
3. Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down and turn around without touching the sides or tops of cages.
4. Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and protection from the weather.
5. All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry and in a sanitary condition.
6. The food shall be free of contamination, palatable and of sufficient nutritive value as to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal.
7. Fresh water is to be available at all times. Water vessels shall be mounted or secured in a manner that prevents tipping and be of the removable type. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-34(J); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.28.050 Conditional use permit.
The city, acting through the animal control officer or Planning Commission, shall have the power to revoke the permit in the event the kennel is determined to be disturbing the peace as a result of barking dogs or is found to be in violation of any other provision of this title. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-34(E); Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.28.060 Right of entry.
The animal control officer shall have the authority to enter the premises of any person to inspect and assure compliance to this title. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-34(F); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

Chapter 6.32 ANIMALS AND LAND USE

Sections:
6.32.010     Lot size and permitted number of animals.
6.32.020     Responsibility of owner.
6.32.030     Repealed.
6.32.040     Agricultural accessory buildings—Barns, structures.
6.32.050     Corrals and animal enclosures.
6.32.060     Agricultural accessory buildings construction.
6.32.070     Liability of city.

6.32.010 Lot size and permitted number of animals.
The keeping of animals and livestock is permitted in all zones within the City subject to the following:
1. The number and type of animals allowed and minimum area required per animal are set forth in Table 6.32.010(a) through Table 6.32.010(c).
2. The limitations on numbers of animals apply only to weaned animals (as defined in this Title) kept on a continuous basis of no more than one 120 hour period within a 30-day period (excepting kennels, veterinary clinics, or similar commercial uses that harbor animals).
3. The age of weaned animals (as defined in this Title) is identified in Table 6.32.010(d) - Weaned Ages. Animals older than the weaned ages identified in this table will be counted towards the total allowed number of animals permitted on any lot as listed in Table 6.32.010(a) through Table 6.32.010(c).
The allowance of any type of animal not listed within this chapter, or granting of an exception to the number of animals permitted, requires approval by the Planning Commission by issuance of a conditional use permit. Conditions may be imposed to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public including, but not limited to, increased setbacks, fencing, size and type of enclosure or structure, etc.
+--------+------------------+----------------------------+
| Animal | Maximum Quantity | Minimum enclosure area per |
|        |                  |           animal           |
+--------+------------------+----------------------------+
| Dogs   | 3                | 25 sq/ft                   |
+--------+------------------+----------------------------+
| Cats   | 3                | 5 sq/ft                    |
+--------+------------------+----------------------------+
*See Chapter 6.28 (Kennels) for allowance of additional dogs or cats.
+-------------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
|     Small animal species      | Maximum Quantity† | Minimum enclosure area per |
|                               |                   |           animal           |
+-------------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Pigeons (permit required      | 50                | See LCC 6.34               |
| per LCC 6.34)                 |                   |                            |
+-------------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Chickens (Only one rooster    | 50                | 5 sq/ft                    |
| permitted per every seven     |                   |                            |
| (7) hens)                     |                   |                            |
+-------------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Ducks                         | 12                | 5 sq/ft                    |
+-------------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Pheasants                     | 50                | 5 sq/ft                    |
+-------------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Rabbits                       | 20                | 5 sq/ft                    |
+-------------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Turkeys                       | 12                | 6 sq/ft                    |
+-------------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Quail                         | 100               | 1 sq/ft                    |
+-------------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Goat (neutered male or female | 2                 | 36 sq/ft                   |
| only)                         |                   |                            |
+-------------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Sheep (neutered male or       | 2                 | 36 sq/ft                   |
| female only)                  |                   |                            |
+-------------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Pot-bellied Pig               | 1                 | 25 sq/ft                   |
+-------------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
†Multiple Animal Species: The quantity of animals above shall be reduced by 15% per species if the property owner desires to keep more than one species of permitted animals. Example: If two species listed above are desired, then the maximum quantity of each species shall be reduced by 30%. If three species are desired, then the quantity of each species shall be reduced by 45%, four species reduced by 60%, and so forth, but in no case shall the maximum quantity of animals calculated be less than one (1). Calculations shall round up to the nearest whole number. A maximum of six (6) small animal species as listed above is permitted per lot. Multiple combination of the same species is prohibited. See ‘Multiple Species Calculation Charts’ below.
+----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
|    Small animal species    | Maximum Quantity† | Minimum enclosure area per |
|                            |                   |           animal           |
+----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Pigeons* (permit required  | 50                | See LCC 6.34               |
| per LCC 6.34)              |                   |                            |
+----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Chickens (Only one rooster | 75                | 5 sq/ft                    |
| permitted per every seven  |                   |                            |
| (7) hens)                  |                   |                            |
+----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Ducks                      | 18                | 5 sq/ft                    |
+----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Pheasants                  | 75                | 5 sq/ft                    |
+----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Rabbits                    | 30                | 5 sq/ft                    |
+----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Turkeys                    | 18                | 6 sq/ft                    |
+----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Geese                      | 18                | 6 sq/ft                    |
+----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Quail                      | 300               | 1 sq/ft                    |
+----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Goats (neutered male or    | 8                 | 36 sq/ft                   |
| female only)               |                   |                            |
+----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
| Sheep (neutered male or    | 8                 | 36 sq/ft                   |
| female only)               |                   |                            |
+----------------------------+-------------------+----------------------------+
†Multiple Small Animal Species: The quantity of small animal species above shall be reduced by 15% per species if the property owner desires to keep more than one species of small animals. Example: If two species listed above are desired, then the maximum quantity of each species shall be reduced by 30%. If three species are desired, then the quantity of each species shall be reduced by 45%, four species reduced by 60%, and so forth. However, in no case shall the maximum quantity of animals calculated be less than one (1). Calculations shall round up to the nearest whole number. A maximum combination of six (6) small animal species is permitted per lot. Multiple combination of the same species is prohibited. See ‘Multiple Species Calculation Charts’.
+---------------------------+---------------------------+----------------------------+
|   Large animal species    |    Maximum Quantity††     | Minimum enclosure area per |
|                           |                           |           animal           |
+---------------------------+---------------------------+----------------------------+
| Cattle                    | 2                         | 250 sq/ft                  |
+---------------------------+---------------------------+----------------------------+
| Horses                    | 4                         | 144 sq/ft                  |
+---------------------------+---------------------------+----------------------------+
| Hogs and Pigs             | 2                         | 25 sq/ft                   |
+---------------------------+---------------------------+----------------------------+
| Llamas and Alpacas        | 4                         | 64 sq/ft                   |
+---------------------------+---------------------------+----------------------------+
| Rams, stallions, or bulls |                           |                            |
+---------------------------+---------------------------+----------------------------+
| (permitted by conditional | Limited to total quantity | See animal type above.     |
| use permit only)          | listed for animal type    |                            |
|                           | above.                    |                            |
+---------------------------+---------------------------+----------------------------+
††Multiple Large Animal Species: The quantity of large animal species above shall be reduced by 25% if the property owner desires to keep two species of permitted animals. If three species are desired, then the quantity of species shall be reduced by 50%. However, in no case shall the maximum quantity of animals calculated be less than one (1). Calculations shall round up to the nearest whole number. A maximum combination of three (3) large animal species as listed above is permitted per lot. Multiple combination of the same species is prohibited. See ‘Multiple Species Calculation Charts’.
+--------------------+-------------+
|       Animal       | Weaned Ages |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Chickens           | 2 weeks     |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Ducks              | 2 weeks     |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Pheasants          | 2 weeks     |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Rabbits            | 1 month     |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Turkeys            | 2 weeks     |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Geese              | 2 weeks     |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Quail              | 2 weeks     |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Goats              | 3 months    |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Cattle             | 6 months    |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Sheep              | 3 months    |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Horses             | 6 months    |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Hogs and Pigs      | 6 weeks     |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Llamas and Alpacas | 3 months    |
+--------------------+-------------+
| Dogs and Cats      | 4 months    |
+--------------------+-------------+
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Lots less than 20,000 | One species | Two species | Three species | Four species | Five species | Six species |
|         sq/ft         |             |             |               |              |              |             |
|    (Small Species)    |             |             |               |              |              |             |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Chickens (only one    | 50          | 35          | 28            | 20           | 13           | 5           |
| rooster permitted     |             |             |               |              |              |             |
| for every 7 hens)     |             |             |               |              |              |             |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Ducks                 | 12          | 9           | 7             | 5            | 3            | 2           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Pheasants             | 50          | 35          | 28            | 20           | 13           | 5           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Rabbits               | 20          | 14          | 11            | 8            | 5            | 2           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Turkeys               | 12          | 9           | 7             | 5            | 3            | 2           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Quail                 | 100         | 70          | 55            | 40           | 25           | 10          |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Goats (neutered male  | 2           | 2           | 2             | 1            | 1            | 1           |
| or female only)       |             |             |               |              |              |             |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Sheep (neutered male  | 2           | 2           | 2             | 1            | 1            | 1           |
| or female only)       |             |             |               |              |              |             |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Pot-bellied Pig       | 1           | 1           | 1             | 1            | 1            | 1           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Pigeons               | 50          | 35          | 28            | 20           | 13           | 5           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Goats (neutered male  | 8           | 6           | 5             | 4            | 2            | 1           |
| or female only)       |             |             |               |              |              |             |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Sheep (neutered male  | 8           | 6           | 5             | 4            | 2            | 1           |
| or female only)       |             |             |               |              |              |             |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Pigeons               | 50          | 25          | 17            | 13           | 6            | 3           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| 20,000 – 29,999 sq/ft | One species | Two species | Three species | Four species | Five species | Six species |
|    (Small Species)    |             |             |               |              |              |             |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Chickens (only one    | 75          | 53          | 42            | 30           | 19           | 8           |
| rooster permitted     |             |             |               |              |              |             |
| for every 7 hens)     |             |             |               |              |              |             |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Ducks                 | 18          | 13          | 10            | 8            | 5            | 2           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Pheasants             | 75          | 53          | 42            | 30           | 19           | 8           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Rabbits               | 30          | 21          | 17            | 12           | 8            | 3           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Turkeys               | 18          | 13          | 10            | 8            | 5            | 2           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Geese                 | 18          | 13          | 10            | 8            | 5            | 2           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Quail                 | 300         | 210         | 165           | 120          | 75           | 30          |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Goats (neutered male  | 8           | 6           | 5             | 4            | 2            | 1           |
| or female only)       |             |             |               |              |              |             |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Sheep (neutered male  | 8           | 6           | 5             | 4            | 2            | 1           |
| or female only)       |             |             |               |              |              |             |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Pigeons               | 50          | 25          | 17            | 13           | 6            | 3           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| (Large Species)                                                   |                                           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Cattle                | 2           | 2           | 1             | "                                         |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Horses                | 4           | 3           | 2             | "                                         |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Hogs and Pigs         | 2           | 2           | 1             | "                                         |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Llamas and Alpacas    | 4           | 3           | 2             | "                                         |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| 30,000 – 39,999 sq/ft | One species | Two species | Three species | Four species | Five species | Six species |
|    (Small Species)    |             |             |               |              |              |             |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Chickens (only one    | 113         | 79          | 62            | 45           | 29           | 12          |
| rooster permitted     |             |             |               |              |              |             |
| for every 7 hens)     |             |             |               |              |              |             |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Ducks                 | 27          | 19          | 15            | 11           | 7            | 3           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Pheasants             | 113         | 79          | 62            | 45           | 29           | 12          |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Rabbits               | 45          | 32          | 25            | 18           | 12           | 5           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Turkeys               | 27          | 19          | 15            | 11           | 7            | 3           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Geese                 | 27          | 19          | 15            | 11           | 7            | 3           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Quail                 | 450         | 315         | 248           | 180          | 113          | 45          |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Goats (neutered male  | 12          | 9           | 7             | 5            | 3            | 2           |
| or female only)       |             |             |               |              |              |             |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Sheep (neutered male  | 12          | 9           | 7             | 5            | 3            | 2           |
| or female only)       |             |             |               |              |              |             |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Pigeons               | 50          | 25          | 17            | 13           | 6            | 3           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| (Large Species)                                                   |                                           |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Cattle                | 3           | 3           | 2             | "                                         |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Horses                | 6           | 5           | 3             | "                                         |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Hogs and Pigs         | 3           | 3           | 2             | "                                         |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
| Llamas and Alpacas    | 6           | 5           | 3             | "                                         |
+-----------------------+-------------+-------------+---------------+--------------+--------------+-------------+
For lots 40,000 sq/ft or larger, check with the Planning Department for maximum animal quantities.
(Ord. 2012-16, adopted, 2012)

6.32.020 Responsibility of owner.
The owner of every animal shall be responsible for adequate care for the animal involved. Any corral, pen, coop, stall, hutch, agricultural accessory building or other animal enclosures shall be maintained so as to be moderately free of excrete and treated for elimination of flies as necessary. Adequate ventilation shall be provided. Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down and turn around without touching the sides or top of an enclosure or structure, and shall be provided with enclosures meeting the minimum square footage requirements per animal as listed in Table 6.32.010(a) through Table 6.32.010(c). Fresh water and adequate fresh feed are to be available at all times. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-36; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.32.030
(Ord. 2012-16, repealed, 2012; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-38)

6.32.040 Agricultural accessory buildings—Barns, structures.
For purposes of this Title, the following standards apply to agricultural accessory buildings:
1. Setbacks. Barns, stables, roofed stalls, shade structures, or other buildings and/or structures associated with the raising or containment of animals, must be located a distance of thirty (30) feet from public road or highway, fifty (50) feet from any primary residence located on separate adjoining lots, and twenty (20) feet from the residential dwelling of the person occupying the lot upon which the barn is located.
2. Agricultural accessory buildings shall also meet any required setbacks of the zone in which they are constructed.
3. Exceptions. Structures used for the raising, containment or shelter of animals that are ten (10) square feet or less (i.e., a dog house or rabbit hutch) and within a fully fenced yard area are exempted from the setback provisions listed in section 1 above, but shall meet any required setbacks of the zone in which it is constructed.
4. Pre-existing uses. Encroachment on the setbacks listed above by new residential additions or other residential uses shall not negate or prohibit the continued use of preexisting barns, stalls, or other structures associated with the raising or containment of animals. Furthermore, preexisting structures, uses and animal rights identified in this chapter are entitled to repair, maintenance, and replacement. Rights to utilize said structures and uses shall not expire and are specifically exempted from becoming a non-conforming use as set forth in Chapter 17.16 of the Lindon City Code. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-39(A); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.32.050 Corrals and animal enclosures.
For purposes of this Title, the following standards apply to corrals and animal enclosures:
1. Setbacks. Corrals and animal enclosures, including pastures, must be located a distance of five (5) feet from any public road or highway, and shall meet the following criteria:
    a. On lots less than 20,000 sq/ft in size, corrals and animal enclosures (except for pastures as defined by this Title) for small animal species as permitted in this Title, dogs, and cats shall be set back a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any primary residence located on separate adjoining lots.
    b. On lots 20,000 sq/ft or larger in size, corrals and animal enclosures (except for pastures as defined by this Title) for all animals shall be set back a minimum of fifty (50) feet from any primary residence located on separate adjoining lots.
2. Exceptions. Enclosures used for the raising or containment of animals that are ten (10) square feet or less and within a fully fenced yard area are exempted from the setback provisions listed in section 1(a) and 1(b) above.
3. Pre-existing uses. Encroachment on the setbacks listed above by new residential additions or other residential uses shall not negate or prohibit the continued use of preexisting corrals, pastures, agricultural accessory buildings or other enclosures associated with the raising or containment of animals. Furthermore, preexisting corrals, pastures, agricultural accessory buildings or other enclosures, uses and animal rights identified in this chapter are entitled to repair, maintenance, and replacement. Rights to utilize said enclosures, structures, and uses shall not expire and are specifically exempted from becoming a non-conforming use as set forth in Chapter 17.16 of the Lindon City Code.
4. Fencing. All corral, enclosure, and pasture fencing shall be constructed to protect adjoining yard fencing from possible animal damage. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-39(B); Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012)

6.32.060 Agricultural accessory buildings construction.
The construction of agricultural accessory buildings, or buildings associated with the raising or containment of animals shall be allowed only upon a showing of compliance with the restrictions on the location of such buildings above enumerated and the payment of the fee associated with any required building permit. (Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

6.32.070 Liability of city.
The city shall not be liable for any damages to private property caused by the ownership, raising or containment of animals enumerated in this chapter. (Ord. 94, amended, 1982; Prior code §2-39; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001)

Chapter 6.34 PIGEONS

Sections:
6.34.010     Definitions.
6.34.020     The keeping and raising of pigeons in any residential zone.

6.34.010 Definitions.
“Loft” shall mean a constructed accessory building for the housing of pigeons exclusively.
“Pigeons” shall include any and all varieties of Antwerp, racing or homing pigeons as accepted by the American Racing Pigeon Union, Inc., the International Federation of Racing Pigeons Fanciers, or the American Pigeon Fanciers Council as a racing or homing pigeon. (Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 175 §2, amended, 1990)

6.34.020 The keeping and raising of pigeons in any residential zone.
The keeping and raising of pigeons in any residential zone shall be in strict compliance with the following requirements:
1. No person shall keep, maintain or harbor pigeons unless the pigeons are approved by issuance of a conditional use permit and kept and maintained in a pigeon loft as defined in this Chapter. Only one pigeon loft shall be allowed on a lot.
2. The pigeon loft shall contain no more than fifty (50) pigeons, including squab. Each pigeon shall wear a metal or plastic leg band to identify the owner or keeper thereof. The pigeons kept in the pigeon loft shall not be allowed to perch or linger on the buildings or property of others. The pigeon loft shall be maintained in a reasonably clean, sanitary and wholesome manner at all times and shall be subject to periodic inspection by the animal control officer.
3. The pigeon loft shall be of a size sufficient to house the number of pigeons contemplated. In no case shall there be more than one (1) pigeon for two (2) square feet of loft space. The loft shall be located not less than twenty five (25) feet from any residential structure located on the lot, and not less than fifty (50) feet from any residential structure of any adjoining lot. The location of the loft must be approved and specifically described on the conditional use permit. All lots on which such pigeons are kept and maintained shall at all times be kept clean and free from filth, garbage, and such other substances that attract rodents.
4. All pigeons shall be fed within the confines of the loft in which such pigeons are housed and contained.
5. Pigeons shall be permitted to exercise and fly only under control of the owner or representative of the owner.
6. All pigeon lofts shall be so enclosed as to prevent the pigeons from escaping from the confines of said loft.
7. Housing of pigeons shall not be permitted in a dwelling house.
8. All grains and food stored for the use and feeding of such pigeons shall be kept in a rodent-proof container.
9. Additional restrictions and requirements may be required for the issuance of a conditional use permit.
10. At such time as pigeon owners no longer desire to harbor pigeons, all pigeons shall be disposed of in a humane manner. (Ord. 2012-16, amended, 2012; Ord. 99-17, amended, 2001; Ord. 175 §2, amended, 1990)

Chapter 6.35 BEEKEEPING

Sections:
6.35.010     Purpose.
6.35.020     Definitions.
6.35.030     Certain Conduct Unlawful.
6.35.040     Number of Hives.
6.35.050     Beekeeper Registration.
6.35.060     Species Allowed.
6.35.070     Hives.
6.35.080     Flyways.
6.35.090     Water.
6.35.100     Beekeeping Equipment.
6.35.110     Violation and Penalty.

6.35.010 Purpose.
Lindon City realizes that beekeeping provides an important pollination service and food source to the community. The purpose of this chapter is to authorize beekeeping within Lindon City subject to certain requirements intended to diminish the potential for bees to become a nuisance or hazard to neighboring properties. (Ord. 2012-16, adopted, 2012)

6.35.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms used herein are defined as follows:
“Apiary” means any place where one (1) or more colonies of bees are located.
“Beekeeper” means a person who owns or has charge of one (1) or more colonies of bees.
“Beekeeping equipment” means anything used in the operation of an apiary, such as hive bodies, supers, frames top and bottom boards, and extractors.
“Colony” means bees in any hive including queens, worker, or drones.
“Hive” means a frame hive, box hive, box, barrel, log, gum skep, or other artificial or natural receptacle which may be used to house bees.
“Honeybee” means the common honeybee, Apis mellifera species, at any stage of development, but not including the African honeybee, Apis mellifera scutellata species, or any hybrid thereof.
“Nucleus hive (nuc hive)” means a small hive containing five (5) or fewer frames used to create/raise new queens and start new bee colonies. (Ord. 2012-16, adopted, 2012)

6.35.030 Certain Conduct Unlawful.
Notwithstanding compliance with the various requirements of this article, it shall be unlawful for any person to maintain an apiary or to keep any colony on any property in a manner that threatens public health or safety or creates a nuisance. Furthermore, it is a violation of this ordinance to maintain an apiary or keep any colony that constitutes a nuisance due to its impact on the neighborhood to such an extent that the residents of adjacent properties are unable to fully enjoy the use of their property without coming into conflict with honeybees. (Ord. 2012-16, adopted, 2012)

6.35.040 Number of Hives.
1. As provided in this chapter, an apiary may be maintained on properties in any zone as provided below:
+--------------------------+------------------------------------------+
|      Property size       |             Number of Hives*             |
+--------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Less than 20,000 sq/ft   | 4                                        |
+--------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| 20,000 to 30,000 sq/ft   | 6                                        |
+--------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| 30,000 to 40,000 sq/ft   | 8                                        |
+--------------------------+------------------------------------------+
| 40,000 sq/ft and greater | 1 hive for every additional 10,000 sq/ft |
+--------------------------+------------------------------------------+
*Nucleus hives shall not count towards the total number of hives permitted per lot.

6.35.050 Beekeeper Registration.
Each beekeeper shall be registered with the Utah Department of Agriculture and Food as provided in the Utah Bee Inspection Act set forth in Title 4, Chapter 11 of the Utah Code (1953 as amended). (Ord. 2012-16, adopted, 2012)

6.35.060 Species Allowed.
Beekeepers are allowed to keep honeybees as defined in Section 6.35.020 in this chapter. (Ord. 2012-16, adopted, 2012)

6.35.070 Hives.
1. Honeybee colonies shall be kept in hives with removable frames which shall be kept in sound and usable condition.
2. Unless a flyway barrier is installed per Section 6.35.080, hives shall be placed at least fifteen (15) feet from any property line and six (6) inches above the ground, as measured from the ground to the lowest portion of the hive. If a flyway barrier is installed, a hive may be located no closer than five (5) feet from a property line.
3. Hives shall be operated and maintained as provided in the Utah Bee Inspection Act, Title 4, Chapter 11 of the Utah Code (1953 as amended).
Each hive shall be conspicuously marked with the owner’s name, address, telephone number, and state registration number. (Ord. 2012-16, adopted, 2012)

6.35.080 Flyways.
A hive shall be placed on property so that the general flight pattern of the honeybees is in a direction that will deter honeybee contact with humans and domesticated animals as follows:
1. If any portion of a hive is within fifteen (15) feet from an adjacent property line or public access point as measured from the nearest point on the hive to the property line, a flyway barrier at least six (6) feet in height shall be established and maintained around the hive except as needed to allow access.
2. Such flyway shall consist of a solid wall, a fence, dense vegetation, or other similar permanent obstruction, and must extend at least ten (10) feet along the property line beyond the hive in each direction so that honeybees are forced to fly to an elevation of at least six (6) feet above ground level over property lines in the vicinity of the apiary.
Such flyway may not violate any other provision of Lindon City Code. (Ord. 2012-16, adopted, 2012)

6.35.090 Water.
Each beekeeper shall ensure that a convenient source of water is available to the colony continuously between March 1 and October 31 of each year. The water shall be in a location that minimizes any nuisance created by honeybees seeking water on neighboring property. (Ord. 2012-16, adopted, 2012)

6.35.100 Beekeeping Equipment.
Each beekeeper shall ensure that no bee comb or other beekeeping equipment is stored, abandoned, or disposed of in a location or manner that attracts bees and causes a nuisance to other properties. (Ord. 2012-16, adopted, 2012)

6.35.110 Violation and Penalty.
The keeping of honeybees in violation of this chapter is prohibited. Any violation of this section shall be a criminal misdemeanor pursuant to Lindon City Code 6.04.100. (Ord. 2012-16, adopted, 2012)

Title 7 RESERVED

Title 8 HEALTH AND SAFETY

Chapters:
8.04         Health Department
8.08         Repealed
8.12         Food Regulations
8.16         Garbage
8.20         Public Nuisances
8.22         Fighting Contests
8.24         Hunting within City Limits
8.28         Fireworks
8.30         Sexually-Oriented Businesses
8.32         Cemeteries and Burials

Chapter 8.04 HEALTH DEPARTMENT

Sections:
8.04.010     Reporting of contagious disease.
8.04.020     Sanitary food dispensers required.
8.04.030     Authority to close buildings.
8.04.040     Occupancy of closed buildings unlawful.

8.04.010 Reporting of contagious disease.
It is unlawful for physicians or other persons having knowledge of the existence of any contagious or infectious diseases or having reason to believe that any such disease exists, to fail to report the same forthwith to the Utah County Health Department. (Ord. 133 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §13-10; Ord. 2002-3, amended, 2002)

8.04.020 Sanitary food dispensers required.
Whenever it is determined by a member of the Utah County Health Department that filthy or unsanitary conditions exist or are permitted to exist in the operation of any hotel, restaurant, boarding house, food store or other public place where food or beverages are manufactured, processed, stored, deposited, sold or offered for sale, for any purpose whatsoever, the proprietor or any persons operating said place shall first be notified and warned by the Utah County Health Department to place said premises in a sanitary condition within a reasonable length of time, and any such person who fails to obey such notice or who shall continue to deal in such foods or beverages from premises thus failing to comply, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. (Ord. 133 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §13-12; Ord. 2002-3, amended, 2002)

8.04.030 Authority to close buildings.
Whenever in the opinion of the Utah County Health Department any building or dwelling has, because required by the rules and regulations of the Utah County Health Department. It shall further be the duty of the Utah County Health Department to notify the owner, agent or lessee in writing of the action taken and post in a conspicuous place on said building or dwelling a sign reading as follows: “Closed to Occupancy by Order of the Utah County Health Department.” (Ord. 133 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §13-19; Ord. 2002-3, amended, 2002)

8.04.040 Occupancy of closed buildings unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to occupy, lodge or sleep in, or cause or permit any person to occupy, lodge or sleep in, any building or dwelling or other place closed to occupancy by order of the Utah County Health Department. (Ord. 2002-3, amended, 2002; Ord. 133 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §13-20)

Chapter 8.08 NUISANCES
(Ord. 2002-6, repealed, 2002)
Repealed and Replaced by Section 8.20.

Chapter 8.12 FOOD REGULATIONS

Sections:
8.12.010     Distribution of unwholesome food unlawful.
8.12.020     Raw milk sales--License required.

8.12.010 Distribution of unwholesome food unlawful.
No person shall sell or offer for sale in the city any unwholesome food or drink or any food or beverage which has been condemned by a government inspector or by an inspector of the Utah County Health Department. (Ord. 2002-3, amended, 2002; Ord. 133 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §13-11)

8.12.020 Raw milk sales--License required.
It is unlawful for any person to sell raw milk within the confines of the city without first having obtained a permit to do so at a fee to be established by the city council. It is further unlawful for any person to operate a business for the purpose of selling raw milk unless they conform in all respects to the regulations of the Utah State Department of Agriculture, Utah State Department of Health and the Utah County Health Department, or any other governmental agency which may have regulatory powers in regard to the sale of such products. (Ord. 14, amended, 1965; Prior code §8-34)

Chapter 8.16 GARBAGE

Sections:
8.16.010     Definitions.
8.16.020     Waste removal department.
8.16.030     Waste removal charge authority and fund establishment.
8.16.040     Waste removal department-- Superintendent and employee appointment.
8.16.050     Waste removal department-- Superintendent Duties.
8.16.060     Waste removal department-- Examination of sanitary conditions.
8.16.070     Waste removal department--Right of entry.
8.16.080     Waste removal department-- Power of superintendent to establish regulations.
8.16.090     Rates--City Council authority.
8.16.100     Waste removal service by city required.
8.16.110     Ownership.
8.16.120     No burying or dumping in city limits.
8.16.130     Accumulation unlawful.
8.16.140     Receptacles--Required.
8.16.150     Receptacles to be clean and covered.
8.16.160     Receptacles--Placement within required.
8.16.170     Liquid garbage and bulky waste matter.
8.16.180     Placement in streets unlawful.
8.16.190     Hauling without cover unlawful.
8.16.200     Loaded vehicles not to remain on streets.
8.16.210     When suitable for hog feed.
8.16.220     Weekly removal required.
8.16.230     Occupant responsibility for sanitary condition.
8.16.240     Violation--Penalty.

8.16.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future; words in the plural number include the singular number; and words in the singular number include words in the plural number. The word 'shall' is always mandatory and not merely directory.
“City” is the city of Lindon.
“Garbage” is held to include and mean kitchen and table refuse, leavings and offal, and also every accumulation of putrescible waste of animal and vegetable waste and other matter that attends the preparation, consumption, decay or dealing in or storage of meats, fish, fowl, birds, fruits, and vegetables.
“Person” is any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind.
“Waste matter” includes and is held to mean crockery, bottles, tin cans, trimmings from lawns and gardens, pasteboard boxes, rags, paper, cold ashes, sawdust, shavings, packing material, but does not include boards and pieces of lumber. (Ord. 20 §4, amended, 1970)

8.16.020 Waste removal department.
1. There is created a department of waste removal of the city, and the office of superintendent of the department, which shall be managed, operated and supervised by the superintendent thereof, under the direction of the city council.
2. The waste removal department may be charged with the responsibility of operating and maintaining a garbage and waste matter collection, removal and disposal system for the purpose of collecting and removing garbage and waste matter from the residences and business houses of all persons within the city, and disposing of said garbage and waste matter in a sanitary manner.
3. The city council may by resolution adopt the alternative method of hiring a private company or individuals on a contract basis to handle all garbage collection services. (Ord. 20 §1,1970, amended, 1970)

8.16.030 Waste removal charge authority and fund establishment.
The city council shall place the garbage pickup charge on the water and sewer statement sent out monthly and upon collection of the same, it shall be placed in the city treasury in a separate fund to be known as the “waste removal fund” and disbursed by the city council with the approval of the city council as it sees fit. (Ord. 20 §22, amended, 1970)

8.16.040 Waste removal department-- Superintendent and employee appointment.
The city council may appoint a competent and suitable person to the office of superintendent of the waste removal department, and also shall appoint such other employees as may be required for the operation and maintenance of the waste removal department, and shall have power to remove such superintendent and employees for cause. (Ord. 20 §2, amended, 1970)

8.16.050 Waste removal department-- Superintendent Duties.
The superintendent shall have charge of the waste removal department, and all property of the city used by the department. If the waste removal is handled by the city, he shall manage efficiently the system of collection and removal of garbage and waste matters in accordance with law, and under the direction of the city council. (Ord. 20 §3, amended, 1970)

8.16.060 Waste removal department-- Examination of sanitary conditions.
The superintendent of the waste removal department of the city, or other duly authorized representative, may visit all premises within the corporate limits of the city from time to time to examine the sanitary conditions of the premises to determine whether the provisions of this chapter are being complied with. Upon written notification served personally or by mail, postage prepaid, by the superintendent, or his representative, to the owner or occupant, all persons, firms, or corporations, shall within three days from the date of service of such notice, comply with the provisions of this chapter or be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor. (Ord. 97-1 §10, amended, 2000; Ord. 20 § 16, amended, 1970; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000)

8.16.070 Waste removal department--Right of entry.
The superintendent of the waste removal department of the city, after identifying himself, shall have the power to enter at reasonable times upon private or public property for the purpose of inspecting and investigating conditions relating to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 20 §21, amended, 1970)

8.16.080 Waste removal department-- Power of superintendent to establish regulations.
The superintendent of waste removal department of the city, subject to the approval of the city council, shall have power to establish rules and regulations consistent with the provisions of this chapter, governing the keeping, collection, removal, and disposal of garbage and waste matter. (Ord. 20 §23, amended, 1970)

8.16.090 Rates--City Council authority.
The city council, by resolution, shall classify and determine which class the garbage collection service furnished any owner thereof, or any structure of whatever type or nature or any premises shall fall or come within. The city shall be the sole judge of what unit or classification the garbage collection service comes within and which is given to the owner, renter, agent or occupant. The city council from time to time shall cause a resurvey of the classification to which a person belongs. Upon request the city council will investigate and if the request is reasonable then adjustments shall be made. The charges and rates, based on the classification made for garbage and waste matter disposal, may be established by resolution of the city council. Such charge shall be deemed to be a civil debt owing to the city from the occupant of the property, but nothing in this Section shall relieve the occupant from prosecution for a misdemeanor for any violation of this chapter. (Ord. 20 §19, amended, 1970)

8.16.100 Waste removal service by city required.
All property in the city shall be provided with garbage and waste removal service by the city or by the contractor hired by the city, for the hauling away and disposal of garbage and waste matter as the same is defined in Section 8.16.010 of this chapter; and every person having garbage and waste matter to be collected and disposed of shall pay the minimum charge established by the resolution of the city council, and such other charges as may be established by classification of rates based on the type and needs for garbage and waste matter collection, all to be established by resolution of the city council. It is unlawful for any owner or his agent or other person having charge of or occupying any property located within the city to remove or dispose of any garbage or waste matter as defined in this chapter other than in accordance with the rules and regulations to be established by resolution of the city council and said person must make said garbage and waste matter available for collection and disposal in accordance with the rules and regulations established by resolution of the city council. Every person within the limits of the city who has garbage or waste matter to be collected and disposed of shall be assessed and charged as here-in-above stated. (Ord. 20 §5, amended, 1970)

8.16.110 Ownership.
Ownership of garbage or waste matter set out for collection or disposed of at the city dump shall be vested in the city or its assignee. (Ord. 20 §6,1970, amended, 1970)

8.16.120 No burying or dumping in city limits.
No person, firm or corporation shall, for the purpose of final disposal thereof, dump, place or bury in any lot, street, lane or in any alley, or in any water or waterway within the corporate limits of the city, any garbage or waste matter, or any substance condemned by the superintendent of the waste removal department, or any other deleterious or offensive substances and all such substances must be disposed of at the garbage dump operated by the city, or by the person or corporation under contract with the city. (Ord. 20 §7, amended, 1970)

8.16.130 Accumulation unlawful.
No person owning or occupying any building, lot or premises in the city shall suffer, allow or permit to collect and remain upon said lot or premises any garbage for a period of more than one week, or any waste matter for a period of more than four weeks. (Ord. 20 §8, amended, 1970)

8.16.140 Receptacles--Required.
1. Every owner, tenant, or occupant of any premises where garbage is created shall provide upon such premises, in a suitable place, one or more galvanized metal garbage receptacles, with tightfitting galvanized metal cover, for receiving and holding all garbage created upon such premises between the times of collection and removal. Every owner, tenant, or occupant of any premises where waste matter is created shall, where necessary, in addition to the garbage receptacle, provide upon such premises in a suitable place, one or more receptacles, or depositories, acceptable to the superintendent of the waste removal department, to contain all waste matter which may accumulate upon such premises between removals. All persons must at all times locate such receptacles at places, so as to be readily accessible for removing and emptying the same, but they shall not be placed within the limits of any street or alley within the corporate limits of the city, or anywhere so as to constitute a nuisance.
2. All empty receptacles must be removed from the street as soon as practicable after being emptied, and in every case must be removed from the street the same day they are emptied.
3. Paper or plastic bags manufactured for the purpose of garbage disposal of a type, quality and size approved by the city may be used. (Ord. 20 §9, amended, 1970)

8.16.150 Receptacles to be clean and covered.
All garbage and waste matter receptacles shall be kept in a clean and sanitary condition by the owner or person using the same, and garbage receptacles shall be kept tightly covered at all times except when garbage is being deposited therein or removed therefrom, and shall at all times be proof against access by flies to the contents thereof. (Ord. 20 §10, amended, 1970)

8.16.160 Receptacles--Placement within required.
All garbage shall be placed in the garbage receptacle required by Section 8.16.140 of this chapter. All waste matter must be placed in the receptacle or depositories provided for such waste matter, or in the garbage receptacle. (Ord. 20 § 11, amended, 1970)

8.16.170 Liquid garbage and bulky waste matter.
No liquid garbage shall be deposited with any garbage or waste matter. All kitchen garbage shall be drained of any moisture and completely wrapped in paper before being placed in the garbage container. Bulky waste matter such as trimmings from lawns or gardens, weeds and cardboard boxes must be bundled so as not to exceed three feet in length nor thirty pounds in weight. (Ord. 20 §12, amended, 1970)

8.16.180 Placement in streets unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person engaged in hauling garbage or waste matter of any kind upon the streets of the city to permit, suffer, allow or cause any of such matter to fall into or to remain in the streets. (Ord. 20 §13, amended, 1970)

8.16.190 Hauling without cover unlawful.
It is unlawful for any person to convey, transport or haul upon the streets of the city any garbage or waste matter unless the same is contained in a sanitary receptacle tightly covered and in good condition and adequate to prevent spillage or escape of noxious odors. (Ord. 20 §14, amended, 1970)

8.16.200 Loaded vehicles not to remain on streets.
It is unlawful for any persons to suffer, permit or allow any vehicle controlled by him and which is loaded with garbage or other waste materials specified herein to be or remain standing on any public street with the city any longer than may be necessary for the purpose of loading the same or moving the same to its destination in accordance with applicable traffic laws and regulations. (Ord. 20 §15, amended, 1970)

8.16.210 When suitable for hog feed.
Whenever the superintendent of the waste removal department shall determine that the garbage from any premises is suitable for hog feed, and shall so notify the occupant of such premises, such occupant shall thereafter deposit the garbage designated as hog feed in a separate container and shall keep such garbage free from any rubbish, tin cans, glass, coffee grounds, egg shells, paper, or other indigestible materials. (Ord. 20 §17,1970, amended, 1970)

8.16.220 Weekly removal required.
Removal of garbage or waste matter from the premises shall be made at least once a week from private residences and as many times per week as the superintendent of the waste removal department of the city may order from all meat, fish, game, and vegetable markets, restaurants, boarding houses, hotels, hospitals, retail stores, wholesale stores, manufacturing establishments, and other like places. (Ord. 20 §18, amended, 1970)

8.16.230 Occupant responsibility for sanitary condition.
The owner, or his agent, or the occupant, of any premises within the city shall be responsible for the sanitary condition of the premises occupied by him, and it is unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or allow to be placed or deposited on his premises any waste matter, except as designated by the terms of this chapter. It is unlawful to place or deposit waste matter on another person’s premises. (Ord. 20 §20, amended, 1970)

8.16.240 Violation--Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than fifty dollars ($50.00) or by imprisonment in the city or county jail for not more than 30 days, or both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 20 §25, amended, 1970)

Chapter 8.20 PUBLIC NUISANCES

Sections:
8.20.010     Purpose.
8.20.020     Definitions.
8.20.030     Nuisance - Definition.
8.20.040     Exceptions.
8.20.050     Nuisance - Abatement by Eviction.
8.20.060     Finding of Nuisance.
8.20.070     Responsibility for Nuisances.
8.20.080     Inspector - Office Created.
8.20.090     Inspector - Duties.
8.20.100     Notice - Proof of Service.
8.20.110     Hearing.
8.20.120     Failure to Comply.
8.20.130     Delivery of Itemized Statement of Expenses.
8.20.140     Failure to Make Payment.
8.20.150     Collection by Lawsuit.
8.20.160     Collections through Taxation.
8.20.170     Remedies Cumulative.
8.20.180     Nuisance Unlawful - Violation-Penalty.

8.20.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to provide a means for the City and individuals to identify nuisances within the City and to provide a means for correcting or abating the nuisances. The City needs the ability to abate nuisances in order to protect the health and safety of the public, to foster neighborhood stability, to preserve the appearance, character and beauty of neighborhoods, to encourage community pride, to preserve the value of property, and to protect the general welfare of the City and its citizens, businesses and visitors. This ordinance provides for progressive enforcement measures to abate nuisances; the most aggressive forms of enforcement are generally reserved for the most recalcitrant violators of the ordinance. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002; Ord. 99-10, amended, 1999; Ord. 114 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §10-1)

8.20.020 Definitions.
“Abate” means to repair, replace, remove, destroy, correct or otherwise remedy a condition which constitutes a nuisance by such means, in such manner and to such an extent as the Inspector determines is necessary in the interest of the general health, safety and welfare of the community.
“Emergency” means a situation which, in the opinion of the Neighborhood Preservation Officer, requires immediate action to prevent or eliminate an immediate threat to the health or safety of a person or property.
“Inspector” means the City Administrator, Chief Building Official, Planning Director, Public Works Director, Police Officer, Fire Marshal and other code enforcement staff hired by the City to enforce provisions of the Lindon City Code.
“Owner” means any person who, alone or with others, has title or interest in any building or premises, with or without accompanying actual possession thereof. For the purpose of giving notice, the term “Owner” - also includes any person in physical possession.
“Premises” means a plot of ground, whether occupied or not.
“Property” means a building or structure, or the premises on which the building or structure is located, or undeveloped land.
“Public Place” means an area generally visibly to public view and includes alleys, bridges, driveways, parking lots, parks, plazas, sidewalks, streets, and buildings open to the general public, including those that sell food or drink or provide entertainment, and the doorways and entrances to buildings or dwellings and the grounds enclosing them.
“Responsible Person” means the person(s) responsible for correcting or abating a nuisance pursuant to this ordinance. The Responsible Person includes the property owner and any person who causes or permits a nuisance to occur or remain upon property in the City, and includes but is not limited to the owner(s), lessors(s), lessee(s), or other person(s) entitled to control, use and/or occupy property where a nuisance occurs. In cases where there are more than one Responsible Person, the City may proceed against one, some or all of them. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002)

8.20.030 Nuisance - Definition.
This section defines “nuisance” by providing five general definitions of what constitutes a nuisance (subsection A), and then providing specific examples of situations, conduct or activities that constitute nuisances (subsection B). The purpose of the general definitions is to allow the City to classify an offending situation, conduct or activity as a nuisance, even though the situation, conduct or activity may not be listed as a nuisance in the specific examples. The first three general definitions are taken directly from Utah State Law. The purpose of listing the specific examples is to identify some of the specific situations, conduct and activities that the City intends to abate as nuisances.
1. General Definitions of Nuisance. Any activity that meets any one or more of the five definitions set forth below shall constitute a “nuisance” if it occurs within the City of Lindon:
    a. Nuisance as Defined in U.C.A. §78-38-1(1). Anything which is injurious to health, indecent, offensive to the senses, or an obstruction to the free use of property, so as to interfere with the comfortable enjoyment of life or property.
    b. Nuisance as Defined in U.C.A. §76-10-801. Any item, thing, manner, or condition whatsoever that it is dangerous to human life or health or renders soil, air, water, or food impure or unwholesome.
    c. Nuisance as Defined in U.C.A. §76-10-803. Unlawfully doing any act or omitting to perform any duty, which act or omission:
        i. annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health, or safety of three or more persons;
        ii. offends the public decency;
        iii. unlawfully interferes with, obstructs, or tends to obstruct, or renders dangerous for passage, any lake, stream, canal, or basin, or any public park, square, street, or highway; or
        iv. in any way renders three or more persons insecure in life or the use of property.
        An act which affects three or more persons in any of the ways specified in this subsection is still a nuisance regardless of the extent to which the annoyance or damage inflicted on individuals is unequal.
    d. Nuisance. A condition which:
        i. wrongfully annoys, injures, or endangers the comfort, repose, health or safety of others; or
        ii. unlawfully interferes with, obstructs or tends to obstruct, or render dangerous for passage, any public park, square, street or highway, or any other public place; or
        iii. in any way renders other persons insecure in life, or in the use of property, and which affects the rights of an entire community or neighborhood, although the extent of the damage may be unequal.
    e. Specific Nuisances Listed in Subsection B. Anything specifically listed as a nuisance in subsection (B), below.
2. Nuisances Enumerated. Every situation, conduct or activity listed below constitutes a nuisance and may be abated pursuant to this ordinance. The listed examples are not exhaustive; a situation, conduct or activity not listed below, but coming within one of the general definitions of nuisances listed above, shall also constitute a nuisance. The first six listed nuisances are also listed as nuisances pursuant to U.C.A. §78-38-9:
    a. Drug Houses. Every building or premise where the unlawful sale, manufacture, service, storage, distribution, dispensing, or acquisition of any controlled substance, precursor, or analog specified in Title 57, Chapter 37 of the Utah Code (Utah Controlled Substances Act) occurs.
    b. Gambling. Every building or premises where gambling is permitted to be played, conducted, or dealt upon as prohibited in Title 76, Chapter 10, Part 11 of the Utah Code (Gambling) which creates the conditions of a nuisance as defined in Section 8.20.030(1)(a) of this ordinance.
    c. Gangs. Every building or premise wherein criminal activity is committed in concert with two or more persons as provided in Section 76-3-203.1 of the Utah Code.
    d. Party Houses. Every building or premises where parties occur frequently which create the conditions of a nuisance as defined in Section 8.20.030(1)(a) of this ordinance.
    e. Prostitution. Every building or premises where prostitution or the promotion of prostitution is regularly carried on by one or more persons as provided in Title 76, Chapter 10, Part 13 (Prostitution) of the Utah Code.
    f. Weapons. Every building or premises where a violation of Title 76, Chapter 10, Park 5 (Weapons) of the Utah Code occurs on the premises.
    g. Unsafe Conditions. A condition that unreasonably or unlawfully affects the health or safety of one or more persons.
    h. Fire Hazard. A fire hazard.
    i. Noxious Emanations. Emanation of noxious or unreasonable odors, fumes, gas, smoke, soot or cinders.
    j. Noxious Weeds. Noxious weeds located on vacant lots or other property, along public sidewalks or the outer edge of any public street, or weeds in any other location which constitute a fire hazard.
    k. Refuse. Keeping or storing of any refuse or waste matter which interferes with the reasonable enjoyment of nearby property.
    l. Stagnant Water. Polluted or stagnant water which constitutes an unhealthy or unsafe condition.
    m. Improper Accumulations. Accumulation of soil, litter, debris, plant trimmings, or trash, visible from the street or an adjoining property.
    n. Accumulation of Junk. Accumulation of used or damaged lumber; junk; salvage materials; abandoned, discarded or unused furniture; stoves, sinks, toilets, cabinets, or other fixtures or equipment stored so as to be visible from a public street, alley, or adjoining property. However, nothing herein shall preclude the placement of stacked firewood for personal non-commercial use on the premises.
    o. Attractive Nuisances. Any attractive nuisance dangerous to children and other persons including, but not limited to, abandoned, broken, or neglected household appliances, equipment and machinery, abandoned foundations or excavations, or improperly maintained or secured pools.
    p. Vegetation. Dead, decayed, diseased, or hazardous trees, weeds, hedges, and overgrown or uncultivated vegetation which is in a hazardous condition, is an obstruction to pedestrian or vehicular traffic, or which is likely to harbor rats, vermin or other pests.
    q. Dust. Any premises which causes excessive dust due to lack of landscaping, non-maintenance or other cause.
    r. Improper Storage. The keeping, storing, depositing or accumulating on the premises or in the public right-of-way for an unreasonable period of time dirt, sand, gravel, concrete, or other similar materials, or maintenance of such material on public rights-of-way. Material stored as part of an active construction project shall not be considered a nuisance.
    s. Garbage Can. The leaving of any garbage can or refuse container in the street, other than on collection day, for more than 24-hours after the collection day.
    t. Construction Equipment. Construction equipment or machinery of any type or description parked or stored on property when it is readily visible from a public street, alley or adjoining property, except while excavation, construction or demolition operations covered by an active building permit are in progress on the subject property or an adjoining property, or where the property is zoned for the storage of construction equipment and/or machinery.
    u. Improper Sign. Improper maintenance of a sign; or signs which advertise a business that is no longer extant on the property.
    v. Improper Parking or Storage.
        i. Parking or storage of inoperative, unregistered, abandoned, wrecked or dismantled vehicles, boats, trailers or vehicle parts, including recreational vehicles, on a Premises or in the public right-of-way. Storage or parking that is specifically allowed by the City’s zoning ordinance shall not be considered a nuisance.
        ii. Parking or storage of registered vehicles, trailers or boats in violation of City ordinance.
    w. Hazardous Conditions. Any wall, sign, fence, gate, hedge, or structure maintained in such condition of deterioration or disrepair as to constitute a hazard to persons or property.
    x. Graffiti. Graffiti which remains on the exterior of any building, fence, sign, or other structure and is visible from a public street.
    y. Improper Maintenance. Maintenance of buildings and/or structures in such condition as to be deemed defective or in a condition of deterioration or disrepair including, but not limited to the following:
        i. Any building or structure which is unfit for human habitation, or which is an unreasonable hazard to the health of people residing in the vicinity thereof, or which presents an unreasonable fire hazard in the vicinity where it is located.
        ii. Any building or structure set up, erected, constructed, altered, enlarged, converted, moved or maintained contrary to the provisions of City ordinances, or any use of land, buildings or premises in violation of City ordinances.
        iii. Buildings which are abandoned, partially destroyed, or left in an unreasonable state of partial construction for a period of six (6) months or longer. An “unreasonable state of partial construction: is defined as any unfinished building or structure where the appearance or condition of the building or structure does not meet the requirements for finished buildings or structures as required by applicable City ordinances or building codes. The building or structure shall not be considered to be a nuisance if it is under active construction.
        iv. Buildings having dry rot, warping, termite infestation, decay, excessive cracking, peeling, or chalking, as to render the building unsightly and/or in a state of disrepair.
        v. Buildings with missing doors and/or windows containing broken glass and/or no glass at all where the window is of a type which normally contains glass.
        vi. Building exteriors, walls, fences, gates, driveways, sidewalks, walkways, signs or ornamentation, or alleys maintained in such condition as to render them unsightly and/or in a state of disrepair.
        vii. Building or conditions that violate any building, electrical, plumbing, fire, housing, or other code adopted by the City.
    z. City Code Nuisances. Any violation of a Lindon City Code section that expressly declares a specific situation, conduct or activity to be a nuisance.
    aa. Alcohol. Every property or premises not licensed under applicable State law or City ordinances where any intoxicating liquors or alcohol are kept for unlawful use, sale or distribution.
    bb. Inappropriate Conduct. Every property or premises where there exists an environment which causes, encourages or allows individuals or groups of individuals to commit one or more of the following acts on the property, premises or adjacent public place, including but not limited to:
        i. Illegally consuming intoxicating liquor or alcohol;
        ii. Publicly urinating or defecating;
        iii. By physical action, intentionally causing or attempting to cause another person to reasonable fear imminent bodily injury or the commission of a criminal act upon their person or upon property in the immediate possession;
        iv. Engaging in acts of violence, including fighting amongst themselves;
        v. Discharging a firearm or explosive in violation of City ordinances or State law;
        vi. Intentionally obstructing pedestrian or vehicular traffic; or
        vii. Soliciting acts of prostitution.
        viii. Violating the Lindon City Curfew Ordinance. (Chapter 9.22.)
    cc. Inappropriate Noise. It shall be unlawful for any person to make, permit, continue, or cause to be made, or to create any unreasonable loud and disturbing noise in the City. Any noise which is substantially incompatible with the time and location where created to the extent that it creates an actual or imminent interference with peace and good order of persons of ordinary sensibilities shall be prohibited.
    dd. Dangerous Conditions. Any fence, wall, shed, deck, house, garage, building, structure or any part of any of the aforesaid; or any tree, pole, smokestack; or any excavation, hole, pit, basement, cellar, sidewalk, subspace, dock, or loading dock; or any lot, land, yard, premises or location which in its entirety, or in any part thereof, by reason of the condition in which the same is found or permitted to be or remain, shall or may endanger the health, safety, life, limb or property, or cause any hurt, harm, inconvenience, discomfort, damage or injury to any one or more individuals in the City, in any one or more of the following particulars:
        i. By reason of being a menace, threat and/or hazard to the general health and safety of the community.
        ii. By reason of being a fire hazard.
        iii. By reason by being unsafe for occupancy, or use on, in, upon, or about or around the aforesaid property.
        iv. By reason of lack of sufficient or adequate maintenance of the property, and/or being vacant, any of which depreciates the enjoyment and use of the property in the immediate vicinity to such an extent that it is harmful to the community in which such property is situated or such condition exists.
    ee. Illegal Accessory Apartments. Any violation of the City’s accessory apartment ordinance. (Section 17.46.100)
    ff. Family. Keeping or allowing people at a premise in violation of the City’s single family residence requirements. (Section 17.02.010, Family)
    gg. Parking on Landscaping. Parking in an area required to be landscaped by City ordinance.34. Banner Signs. Keeping or allowing banner signs in violation of City ordinance.
    hh. Required Landscaping. Failure to install or maintain landscaping required by City ordinance.
    ii. Animals. Nuisance violations with respect to the keeping and maintenance of animals, including odor, shall be regulated by the Lindon City Animal Control Ordinance. (Chapter 6.20) (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002)

8.20.040 Exceptions.
No act which is done or maintained under the express authority of an authoritative statute, ordinance or court ruling shall be declared a nuisance. (Ord. 2002-6 §10-7, amended, 2002; Prior code §10-3)

8.20.050 Nuisance - Abatement by Eviction.
Whenever there is reason to believe that a nuisance under Section 8.20.030(B)(1-6) is kept, maintained, or exists in the City, the City Attorney, Police Department, or any citizen(s) residing in the City, or any person or entity doing business in the City, in his or her own names, may maintain an action in a court of competent jurisdiction to abate the nuisance and obtain an order for the automatic eviction of the tenant of the property harboring the nuisance. The eviction shall take place as specified in Utah law. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002)

8.20.060 Finding of Nuisance.
If an Inspector finds that a nuisance exists, the Inspector shall attempt to have the Responsible Person abate the nuisance. Although the Inspector’s first step in correcting or abating the nuisance will always be to obtain voluntary compliance, the Inspector may pursue any remedy or combination of remedies available pursuant to this ordinance, State law or common law in order to abate the nuisance. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted to prohibit the City from engaging in its standard prosecution practices. Therefore, the City may prosecute violators of City ordinances or State laws without first having to comply with the provisions of this ordinance, even though the activity or conduct prosecuted may also constitute a nuisance under this ordinance. Nothing in this ordinance shall be interpreted to prevent the City from enforcing applicable City ordinances, building codes, or the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings Code without first treating the offending conduct, situation or activity as a nuisance pursuant to this ordinance. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002)

8.20.070 Responsibility for Nuisances.
The Responsible Person(s) is responsible for abating nuisances pursuant to this ordinance. Any person, whether as owner, agent, or occupant, who creates, aids in creating, or contributes to a nuisance, or who supports, continues, or retains a nuisance, is responsible for the nuisance and is therefore a Responsible Person pursuant to this ordinance. Every successive owner or tenant of a property or premises who fails to abate a continuing nuisance upon or in the use of such property or premises caused by a former owner or tenant is responsible therefore in the same manner as the one who first created it. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002)

8.20.080 Inspector - Office Created.
The office of inspector is created for the purpose of administering the provisions of this chapter and the powers delegated to this municipality by said statutes subject to such control and review as the City Council may from time to time direct. Until such time as the City Council may otherwise appoint an inspector by resolution, the City Administrator, Public Works Director, Chief Building Official, Planning Director, Police Officer, Fire Marshal and other code enforcement staff hired by the City shall perform the functions of inspector. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002; Ord. 133 §1, amended, 1985; Ord. 114 §3, amended, 1985; Prior code §10-4)

8.20.090 Inspector - Duties.
1. The inspector is authorized and directed to inspect and examine real property situated within the municipality for the purpose of determining whether or not it contains the above-stated object, or similar objects or conditions and for the purpose of determining whether or not the existence of such objects or similar objects or conditions creates a nuisance as above declared.
2. If the inspector concludes that such conditions exist in whole or in part, he shall:
    a. Ascertain the names of the owners and occupants and descriptions of the premises where such objects and conditions exist;
    b. Serve notice in writing upon the owner and occupant of such land, either personally or by mailing notice, postage prepaid, addressed to the owner and occupant at their last known post office addresses, as disclosed by the records of the county assessor, or as otherwise ascertained, requiring such owner or occupant, or both, as the case may be, to eradicate or destroy and remove the same within such time as the inspector may designate, which shall not be less than 10 days from the date of service of such notice;
    c. Inform the owner or occupant or both by means of such notice or an attached document that in the event he disagrees with the determination of the inspector and does not wish to remove the objects or objectionable conditions, he may within five days from the date of service of such notice request in writing a hearing before the City Council at a time and place to be set by the City Council. A written application for a hearing shall stay the time within which the owner or occupant must conform to the decision of the inspector.
3. An inspector may, at his/her discretion, use a Lindon City Uniform Citation and Notice to Appear to commence enforcement action on any violation of this provision. A Citation may be issued in lieu of the process described in 8.20.090(2)(a-c).
4. In the event the owner or occupant makes a request for a hearing, the City Council shall set the time and place for hearing such objections and the city recorded shall notify the owner or occupant in writing of the time and place at which he may appear and be heard. The hearing shall not be heard within less than five days from the date of service of mailing of the notice to eradicate, or destroy and remove the nuisance. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002; Ord. 114 §4, amended, 1985)

8.20.100 Notice - Proof of Service.
One notice served to the property owner by Lindon City shall be deemed sufficient for any violation of the section (8.20.). The inspector shall make proof of service by an Official Notice of Mailing. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002; Ord. 133 §3, amended, 1985; Ord. 114 §5, amended, 1985; Prior code §10-5)

8.20.110 Hearing.
1. At the written request of an owner or occupant ordered to remove or abate such nuisance from his real property, the City Council shall conduct an informal hearing wherein the owner or occupant may present such evidence and argument as is pertinent to the question of whether or not the removal or abatement of such object or conditions is property within the purview of this chapter. The City Council shall also permit the presentation of evidence and argument by the inspector and other interested parties. Thereafter, within not more than 10 days, the City Council, as it may designate by resolution, shall render its written decision, a copy of which shall be mailed to or served upon the owner or occupant by the inspector.
2. In the event the decision of the City Council upholds the determination of the inspector, the notice originally given by the inspector as above provided shall be deemed to be sufficient to require the owner or occupant to remove or abate such nuisance and he shall have 10 days from the date of notice of the decision within which to conform thereto.
3. In the event that the decision of the City Council either overrules or modified the determination of the inspector, the written decision of the City Council shall apprise the owner or occupant of that fact and set forth the details and extent to which the owner or occupant must make removal or other abatement of the objects or conditions, if any. The owner or occupant shall be required to conform to the decision of the City Council within 10 days after service or mailing of a copy of the decision and the decision shall be deemed to be the modified decision of the inspector.
4. The inspector shall file an amended notice and proof of service of the amended notice and file the same in the office of the county treasurer. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002; Ord. 114 §6, amended, 1985)

8.20.120 Failure to Comply.
If any responsible person described in such notice or decision shall fail or neglect to conform to the requirements thereof relating to the eradication or destruction or removal of such nuisance, the inspector shall employ all necessary assistance to abate such nuisance and to cause such materials to be removed and destroyed at the expense of the responsible person. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002; Ord. 114 §7, amended, 1985; Prior code §10-6)

8.20.130 Delivery of Itemized Statement of Expenses.
The inspector shall prepare an itemized statement of all expenses incurred in the abatement of such nuisance and the removal and destruction of such materials and shall mail a copy thereof to the owner or occupant, or both, demanding payment within 20 days of the date of mailing. Such notice shall be deemed delivered when mailed by Certified U.S. Mail addressed to the property owner’s or occupants last known address as herein set forth. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002; Ord. 114 §8, amended, 1985)

8.20.140 Failure to Make Payment.
In the event the responsible person fails to make payment of the amount set forth in the statement to the municipal treasurer within said twenty days, the inspector may do any of the following:
1. Cause suit to be brought in an appropriate court of law.
2. May refer the matter to the county treasurer as provided in this chapter.
3. May place a lien, notice of assessment, notice of interest, etc., on the responsible person’s property to recover costs for abatement actions. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000; Ord. 114 §9, amended, 1985)

8.20.150 Collection by Lawsuit.
In the event collection of expenses of destruction and removal are pursued through the courts, the city shall seek to receive judgment for all expenses of destruction and removal, together with reasonable attorney’s fees, interest and court costs, and shall execute upon such judgment in the manner provided by law. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002; Ord. 114 §10, amended, 1985)

8.20.160 Collections through Taxation.
In the event that the inspector elects to refer the expenses of abatement, destruction or removal to the county treasurer for inclusion in the tax notice of the property owner, he shall make an itemized statement of all expenses incurred in the abatement, destruction and removal of the nuisance and shall deliver three copies of such statement to the county treasurer within 10 days after the completion of the abatement and work of destroying or removing the nuisance. Thereupon, the costs of the work shall be pursued by the county treasurer within accordance with the provisions of Section 10-11-4, U.C.A., 1953, as amended, and the owner or occupant shall have such rights and shall be subject to such powers as are therein granted. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002; Ord. 114 §11, amended, 1985)

8.20.170 Remedies Cumulative.
All remedies prescribed under this chapter shall be cumulative, and the use of one or more remedies by the city shall not bar the use of any other remedy for the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002; Ord. 114 §12, amended, 1985)

8.20.180 Nuisance Unlawful - Violation-Penalty.
It is unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation either as owner, agent or occupant to maintain or permit to remain or be maintained upon his premises any nuisance as defined herein. Every such nuisance shall be removed or abated as herein provided for. Any person or persons who shall allow or maintain a nuisance as herein defined, or who shall otherwise by guilty of a violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. Each day a nuisance is permitted to remain may be deemed a separate offense. (Ord. 2002-6, amended, 2002; Ord. 114 §2, amended, 1985)

Chapter 8.22 FIGHTING CONTESTS

Sections:
8.22.010     Definitions.
8.22.020     Ultimate fighting prohibited.
8.22.030     Prize fighting prohibited.
8.22.040     Right of injunction.
8.22.050     Penalty.

8.22.010 Definitions.
For the purpose of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
“Bodily injury” means any impairment of physical condition, including physical pain.
Extreme fighting. See definition of “ultimate fighting.”
Full contact fighting. See definition of “ultimate fighting.”
“Ground ’n’ Pound” Challenge. See definition of “ultimate fighting.”
“No-holds-barred” fighting. See definition of “ultimate fighting.”
“Prize fighting” means any contest or exhibition in which blows are struck where the participants compete for a cash purse in any amount or a non-cash purse with more than nominal value. This definition shall not apply to a martial arts studio or amateur boxing studio licensed in Lindon that holds an exhibition or contest where the participants compete for a trophy or non-cash purse of nominal value, and where all the participants are bona fide students of that studio or an invited studio licensed in another jurisdiction and are demonstrating the skills and techniques taught by the studio.
“Serious bodily injury” means bodily injury that creates a substantial risk of death or causes:
    a. serious permanent disfigurement; (b) unconsciousness;
    b. extreme pain; or
    c. permanent or protracted loss or impairment of the function of a bodily member or organ.
“Tough Man” Contest. See definition of “ultimate fighting.”
“Ultimate fighting” means a live match in which:
    a. participants compete for a cash purse in any amount, a trophy, or a non-cash purse with more than nominal value; or
    b. participants are not licensed as professional contestants in any state or are not employed by or contractually engaged on a long term basis with any professional wrestling, boxing, or martial arts association sponsoring the match; or
    c. audiences are charged an admission fee; and
    d. match rules permit contestants to use any or a combination of the following combative techniques: boxing, kicking, wrestling, hitting, punching, or other combative contact techniques, and match rules do not:
        i. incorporate a formalized system of combative techniques or a point system against which a contestant’s performance is judged to determine the prevailing contestant;
        ii. divide a match into two or more equal and specified time periods for a match total of no more than fifty (50) minutes; or (iii) prohibit contestants from:
    a. using anything that is not part of the human body, except for boxing gloves, to intentionally inflict serious bodily injury upon an opponent through direct contact or the expulsion of a projectile;
    b. striking a person who demonstrates an inability to protect himself from the advances of an opponent;
    c. biting; or
    d. direct and forceful strikes to the eyes, groin area, Adam's apple area of the neck, and temple area of the head.

8.22.020 Ultimate fighting prohibited.
No person shall promote, conduct, engage, or participate in an ultimate fighting match within the corporate limits of the city of Lindon.

8.22.030 Prize fighting prohibited.
No person shall promote, conduct, engage, or participate in prize fighting within the corporate limits of the city of Lindon.

8.22.040 Right of injunction.
Lindon city or its designated representative may institute in district court a lawsuit seeking injunctive relief against any individual violating the provisions of this article.

8.22.050 Penalty.
Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class A misdemeanor. Every day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2004-10, adopted, 2004)

Chapter 8.24 HUNTING WITHIN CITY LIMITS

Sections:
8.24.010     Lawful--When.
8.24.020     Compliance with state statutes and regulations required.
8.24.030     Children of ages twelve through fourteen.
8.24.040     Children of ages fourteen through sixteen.
8.24.050     Unlawful when in vicinity of building or enclosure.
8.24.060     Unlawful when in designated areas.
8.24.070     Unlawful on posted property.
8.24.080     Violation--Penalty.

8.24.010 Lawful--When.
Notwithstanding any ordinance of the city heretofore adopted to the contrary, it is lawful to shoot wildlife within the city limits of the city during the season established by the State of Utah for the hunting and shooting of wildlife subject to the restrictions set out in Sections 8.24.020 through 8.24.070. (Ord. 2015-14, amended, 2015; Ord. 120 §01, amended, 1985)

8.24.020 Compliance with state statutes and regulations required.
All Utah State Statutes and Utah Wildlife Board Regulations pertaining to the hunting of wildlife shall be complied with by all persons hunting or shooting pheasants in the city. (Ord. 2015-14, amended, 2015; Ord. 120 §1(A), amended, 1985)

8.24.030 Children of ages twelve through fourteen.
Children 12 years of age through 14 years of age who are hunting or shooting wildlife must be accompanied by a parent, legal guardian, or person 21 years of age or older who has been approved by the child's or children's parents. (Ord. 2015-14, amended, 2015; Ord. 120 §1(B), amended, 1985)

8.24.040 Children of ages fourteen through sixteen.
Children 14 years of age through 16 years of age who are hunting or shooting wildlife must be accompanied by a person 21 years of age or older. (Ord. 2015-14, amended, 2015; Ord. 120 §1(C), amended, 1985)

8.24.050 Unlawful when in vicinity of building or enclosure.
It is unlawful for any person to hunt or shoot at wildlife within six hundred (600) feet of any house, garage, barn, shed, corral, or any enclosure where domestic animals are kept. (Ord. 2015-14, amended, 2015; Ord. 120 §1(D), amended, 1985)

8.24.060 Unlawful when in designated areas.
It is unlawful for any person to hunt or shoot at wildlife at any time within the areas of the city which are designated on the map of the city as “No Hunting, “Such areas are established by resolution and may be revised by resolution as deemed necessary and appropriate by the city council”. (Ord. 120 §1(E), amended, 1985)

8.24.070 Unlawful on posted property.
It is unlawful for any person hunting or shooting wildlife to enter upon any private property which has been posted, “NO TRESPASSING,” without the permission of the owner thereof. (Ord. 2015-14, amended, 2015; Ord. 120 §1(F), amended, 1985)

8.24.080 Violation--Penalty.
Any person violating, causing or permitting a violation of any provision of any Section of this chapter or the provisions adopted or incorporated by reference herein shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2015-14, amended, 2015; Ord. 120 §2, amended, 1985)

Chapter 8.28 FIREWORKS

Sections:
8.28.010     Terms of sale.
8.28.020     Terms of discharge.
8.28.030     Permit--Required.
8.28.040     Permit--Application.
8.28.050     Permit--Notice of acceptance or rejection.
8.28.060     Temporary stand-- Prohibitions and regulations.
8.28.070     Temporary stand-- General requirements.
8.28.080     Display of permit to sell and sales tax permit.
8.28.090     Prohibited discharges.
8.28.100     Violation--Penalty.

8.28.010 Terms of sale.
Fireworks authorized pursuant to the Utah Fireworks Act, U.C.A. 11-3-l et seq., may be sold within the city on or between June 20th and July 25th, on or between December 20th and January 2nd, and 15 days before and on the Chinese New Year. (Ord. 98, amended, 1983)

8.28.020 Terms of discharge.
Fireworks may be discharged three days prior to, on the day of, and three days following July 4th, July 24th, January 1st and the Chinese New Year. (Ord. 98, amended, 1983)

8.28.030 Permit--Required.
Except as provided herein, no person shall offer for sale or sell at retail any fireworks without having first applied for and received a permit. (Ord. 98, amended, 1983)

8.28.040 Permit--Application.
All applications for a permit to sell fireworks shall:
1. Be made in writing accompanied by a permit fee of three hundred dollars ($300);
2. Set forth the proposed location of the fireworks stand;
3. Include for delivery to the city or county clerk insurance certificates evidencing public liability coverage in the amount of two hundred thousand/ four hundred thousand dollars ($200,000/$400,000); and property damage coverage in the amount of $2,000 designating the city or county as an additional insured;
4. Include for delivery to the city or county clerk insurance certificates evidencing products liability insurance in an amount in excess of one million dollars' ($1,000,000) coverage;
5. Include a statement that the applicant agrees to comply strictly with the terms of any permit granted and to furnish any additional information upon request;
6. Include a sales tax permit. (Ord. 98, amended, 1983)

8.28.050 Permit--Notice of acceptance or rejection.
Applicants for a permit shall be notified by the city or county clerk of rejection or acceptance at the earliest possible time but no later than five days after the application is applied for. (Ord. 98, amended, 1983)

8.28.060 Temporary stand-- Prohibitions and regulations.
Retail sales of fireworks shall be permitted within a temporary fireworks stand, and from any permanent building or structure. Temporary stands shall be subject to the following prohibitions:
1. No fireworks stand shall be located within twenty-five (25) feet of any other building nor within fifty (50) feet of any gasoline pump or dispensing device.
2. Fireworks stands need not comply with the provisions of the building code, however, all stands shall be erected in a manner that will reasonably assure the safety of attendants and patrons.
3. Each stand up to twenty-four feet in length must have at least two exits, and each stand in excess of twenty-four (24) feet in length must have at least three exits spaced at approximately equal distances apart.
4. Each stand shall be provided with a two and one-half gallon water pressure-type fire extinguisher or an ABC fire extinguisher by each required exit in good working order and easily accessible for use in case of fire. (Ord. 98, amended, 1983)

8.28.070 Temporary stand-- General requirements.
General requirements for temporary fireworks stands shall be as follows:
1. All weeds and combustible material shall be cleared from the location of the stand, including a distance of at least twenty-five (25) feet surrounding the stand.
2. “No Smoking” signs shall be prominently displayed on the fireworks stand.
3. A sign prohibiting the discharge of any fireworks within one hundred (100) feet of fireworks stands shall be prominently displayed.
4. There shall be at least one supervisor, 18 years of age or older, on duty at all times. All fireworks shall be effectively kept away from any kind of self-service by the public, and shall be placed in a location which is unavailable and inaccessible to members of the public in capacities other than as legal customers.
5. Firework stands shall be removed within seven days after retail sales cease.
6. No person(s) shall sleep in a fireworks stand. (Ord. 98, amended, 1983)

8.28.080 Display of permit to sell and sales tax permit.
The permit to sell fireworks, and the sales tax permit shall be displayed in a prominent place in the fireworks stand. (Ord. 98, amended, 1983)

8.28.090 Prohibited discharges.
It is unlawful for any person to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or use, or permit the ignition, explosion, or projection of any fireworks upon or over or onto the property of another, or to ignite, explode, project, or otherwise fire or make use of any fireworks within twenty feet of any residence, dwelling, or other structure. (Ord. 98, amended, 1983)

8.28.100 Violation--Penalty.
Persons violating this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Every day a violation of this Chapter continues shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 3-94, adopted, 1994; Ord. 98, amended, 1983)

Chapter 8.30 SEXUALLY-ORIENTED BUSINESSES

Sections:
8.30.010     Title for citation.
8.30.020     Purpose of provisions.
8.30.030     Application of provisions.
8.30.040     Definitions.
8.30.050     Obscenity and lewdness-- statutory provisions.
8.30.060     Location and zoning restrictions.
8.30.070     Business license required.
8.30.080     Exemptions from license requirements.
8.30.090     Legitimate artistic modeling.
8.30.100     Business categories -- number of licenses.
8.30.110     Employee license.
8.30.120     License application -- disclosures required.
8.30.130     License—fees.
8.30.140     License—Bond.
8.30.150     License--premises location and name.
8.30.160     License--issuance conditions.
8.30.170     License—term.
8.30.180     License--notice of change of information.
8.30.190     License--transfer limitations.
8.30.200     License—display.
8.30.210     License--statement in advertisements.
8.30.220     Regulations and unlawful activities.
8.30.230     Outcall services--operation requirements.
8.30.240     Adult business--design of premises.
8.30.250     Semi-nude entertainment business--design of premises.
8.30.260     Alcohol prohibited.
8.30.270     Semi-nude dancing agencies.
8.30.280     Performers--prohibited activities.
8.30.290     Patrons--prohibited activities.
8.30.300     Nudity--defenses to prosecution.
8.30.310     Violation—injunction.
8.30.320     Violation--license suspension or revocation.
8.30.330     Effect of license revocation.
8.30.340     Appeal procedures.
8.30.350     Violation--penalty--responsibility.
8.30.360     Severability.
8.30.370     Effective date.

8.30.010 Title for citation.
The provisions codified in this chapter shall be known and may be referred to as the “Sexually-Oriented Business and Employee Licensing Ordinance.” (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.020 Purpose of provisions.
It is the purpose and object of this chapter that the city establish reasonable and uniform regulations governing the time, place, and manner of operation of sexually-oriented businesses and their employees in the city. This chapter shall be construed to protect the governmental interests recognized by this chapter in a manner consistent with constitutional protections provided by the United States and Utah constitutions. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.030 Application of provisions.
This chapter imposes regulatory standards and license requirements on certain business activities which are characterized as sexually-oriented businesses, and certain employees of those businesses characterized as sexually-oriented business employees. Except where the context or specific provisions require, this chapter does not supersede or nullify any other related ordinances, including, but not limited to, those codified in Chapter 9 of the Lindon City Code. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.040 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the following words shall have the following meanings:
“Adult Bookstore” or “Adult Video Store” means a commercial establishment which:
    a. excludes minors from more than fifteen percent (15%) of the retail floor or shelf space of the premises; or
    b. as one of its principal purposes, offers for sale or rental, for any form of consideration, any one or more of the following: books, magazines, periodicals, or other printed matter or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, or video reproductions, slides, or other visual representations, the central theme of which depicts or describes specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or instruments, devices, or paraphernalia which are designated for use in connection with specified sexual activities, except for legitimate medically recognized contraceptives.
“Adult Business” means an adult motion picture theater, adult theater, adult bookstore, or adult video store.
“Adult Motion Picture Theater” means a commercial establishment which:
    a. excludes minors from the showing of two (2) consecutive exhibitions (repeated showings of any single presentation shall not be considered a consecutive exhibition); or
    b. as its principal business, shows, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides, or similar photographic reproductions which are primarily characterized by the depiction or description of specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas.
“Adult Theater” means a theater, concert hall, auditorium, or similar commercial establishment which:
    a. holds itself out as such a business; or
    b. excludes minors from the showing of two (2) consecutive exhibitions (repeated performances of the same presentation shall not be considered a consecutive exhibition); or
    c. as its principal business, features persons who appear in live performances in a state of semi-nudity or which are characterized by the exposure of specified anatomical areas or by specified sexual activities.
“Employ” means hiring an individual to work for pecuniary or any other firm of compensation, whether such person is hired on the payroll of the employer, as an independent contractor, as an agent, or in any other form of employment relationship.
“Escort” means any person who, for pecuniary compensation, dates, socializes, visits, consorts with, or accompanies or offers to date, consort, socialize, visit, or accompany another or others to or about social affairs, entertainment, or places of amusement, or within any place of public or private resort or any business or commercial establishment or any private quarters. “Escort” shall not be construed to include persons who provide business or personal services such as licensed private nurses, aides for the elderly or handicapped, social secretaries or similar service personnel whose relationship with their patron is characterized by a bona fide contractual relationship having a duration of more than twelve (12) hours and who provide a service not principally characterized as dating or socializing. “Escort” shall also not be construed to include persons providing services such as singing telegrams, birthday greetings, or similar activities characterized by appearances in a public place, contracted for by a party other than the person for whom the service is being performed and of a duration not longer than one (1) hour.
“Escort Service” means an individual or entity who, for pecuniary compensation, furnishes or offers to furnish escorts, or provides or offers to introduce patrons to escorts.
“Escort Service Runner” means any third person, not an escort, who, for pecuniary compensation, acts in the capacity of an agent or broker for an escort service, escort, or patron by contacting or meeting with escort services, escorts, or patrons at any locations within the city, whether or not such third person is employed by such escort service, escort, patron, or by another business, or is an independent contractor or self-employed.
“Operator” means the manager or other natural person principally in charge of a sexually-operated business.
“Outcall Services” means services of a type performed by a sexually-oriented business employee outside of the premises of the licensed sexually-oriented business, including but not limited to escorts, models, dancers and other similar employees.
“Patron” means any person who contracts with or employs any escort services or escort of the customer of any business licensed pursuant to this chapter.
“Pecuniary Compensation” means any commission, fee, salary, tip, gratuity, hire, profit, reward, or any other form of consideration.
“Person” means any person, unincorporated association, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity.
“Semi-nude” means a state of undress in which:
    a. fully opaque clothing completely covers the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; and
    b. the male or female genitals, pubic region, buttocks, and anus, are covered by fully opaque clothing no narrower than four inches (4") wide in the front and five inches (5") wide at the back, which shall not taper to less than one inch (1") wide at the narrowest point.
“Semi-nude Dancing Agency” means any person, agency, firm, corporation, partnership, or any other entity or individual which furnishes, books, or otherwise engages or offers to furnish, book, or otherwise engage the service of a professional dancer licensed pursuant to this chapter for performance or appearance at a business licensed for adult theaters.
“Semi-nude Entertainment Business” means a business, including adult theater, where employees perform or appear in the present of patrons of the business in a state of semi-nudity. A business shall also be presumed to be a semi-nude entertainment business if the business holds itself out as such a business.
“Sexually-oriented Business” means semi-nude entertainment businesses, sexually-oriented outcall services, adult businesses, and semi-nude dancing agencies, as defined by this chapter.
“Sexually-oriented Business Employees” means those employees who work on the premises of a sexually-oriented business in activities related to the sexually-oriented portion of the business. This includes all managing employees, dancers, escorts, models, and other similar employees, whether or not hired as employees, agents, or as independent contractors. Employees shall not include individuals whose work in unrelated to the sexually-oriented portion of the business, such as janitors, bookkeepers, and similar employees. Sexually-oriented business employees shall not include cooks, serving persons, and similar employees, except where they may be managers or supervisors of the business. All persons making outcall meetings under this chapter, including escorts, models, guards, escort runners, drivers, chauffeurs, and other similar employees, shall be considered sexually-oriented business employees.
“Specified Anatomical Areas” means:
    a. The human male or female pubic area, genitalia, buttocks, or anus; or the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola.
“Specified Sexual Activities” means:
    a. Acts, whether real or simulated, of:
        i. masturbation,
        ii. human sexual intercourse,
        iii. sodomy,
        iv. fellatio,
        v. cunnilingus, or
        vi. bestiality.
    b. Manipulating, caressing, or fondling, or simulating the manipulation, caressing, or fondling of any person of:
        i. the genitals of a human,
        ii. the pubic area of a human,
        iii. any part of the breast or breasts of a human female; or
        iv. any part of the human buttocks or anus.
    c. Actual or simulated sadomasochistic acts, flagellation, or torture by or upon a person clad in undergarments, a mask or bizarre costume, or in the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained on the part of the one so clothed.
    d. The actual or simulated display of human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.050 Obscenity and lewdness-- statutory provisions.
Notwithstanding anything contained in this chapter, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to permit or allow the showing or display of any matter which is contrary to applicable federal or state statutes prohibiting obscenity. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.060 Location and zoning restrictions.
It is unlawful for any sexually-oriented business to do business at any location within the city not zoned for such business. Sexually-oriented businesses licensed as adult business, or semi-nude entertainment businesses pursuant to this chapter shall only be allowed in areas zoned for their use as set forth in Chapter 17.61. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.070 Business license required.
It is unlawful for any person to operate a sexually-oriented business without first obtaining a general business license and a sexually-oriented business license. The sexually-oriented business license shall specify the type of business for which it is obtained. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.080 Exemptions from license requirements.
The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to any sex therapist or similar individual licensed by the state to provide bona fide sexual therapy or counseling, licensed medical practitioner, licensed nurse, or psychiatrist, nor shall it apply to any educator licensed by the state for activities in the classroom. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.090 Legitimate artistic modeling.
1. The city does not intend to unreasonably or improperly prohibit legitimate modeling which may occur in a state of nudity for purposes protected by the First Amendment or similar state protections. The city does intend to prohibit prostitution and related offenses occurring under the guise of nude modeling. Notwithstanding the provisions of this chapter, a licensed outcall employee may appear in a state of nudity before a customer or patron, providing that a written contract for such appearance was entered into between the customer or patron and the employee, and signed at least forty eight (48) hours before the nude appearance. All other applicable provisions of this chapter shall still apply to such nude appearance.
2. In the event of a contract for nude modeling or appearance signed more than forty eight (48) hours in advance of the modeling or appearance, the individual to appear nude shall not be required to obtain a license pursuant to this chapter. During such unlicensed nude appearance, it is unlawful to:
    a. Appear nude or semi-nude in the presence of persons under the age of eighteen (18);
    b. Allow, offer, or agree to any touching of the contracting party or other person by the individual appearing nude;
    c. Allow, offer or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, solicitation of a minor, or committing activities harmful to a minor;
    d. Allow, offer, commit, or agree to any sex act as defined by city ordinances or state statute;
    e. Allow, offer, agree, or permit the contracting party or other person to masturbate in the presence of the individual contracted to appear nude;
    f. Allow, offer, or agree for the individual appearing nude to be touched by any other person or be within five (5) feet of any other person while performing or while nude or semi-nude. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.100 Business categories -- number of licenses.
1. It is unlawful for any business premises to operate or be licensed for more than one (1) category of sexually-oriented business, except that a business may have a license for both outcall services and a semi-nude dancing agency on the same premises.
2. The categories of sexually-oriented businesses are:
    a. Outcall services;
    b. Adult business;
    c. Semi-nude entertainment business;
    d. Semi-nude dancing agency. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.110 Employee license.
It is unlawful for any sexually-oriented business to employ or for any individual to be employed by a sexually-oriented business in the capacity of a sexually-oriented business employee, unless that employee first obtains a sexually-oriented business employee license. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.120 License application -- disclosures required.
Before any applicant may be licensed to operate a sexually-oriented business or as a sexually-oriented business employee pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall submit, on a form to be supplied by the city, the following;
1. The correct legal name of each applicant, corporation, partnership, limited partnership, or entity doing business under an assumed name;
2. If the applicant is a corporation, partnership, limited partnership, or individual or entity doing business under an assumed name, the information, required below for each individual applicant shall be submitted for each partner and each principal of an applicant, and for each officer, director, and any shareholder (corporate or personal) of more than ten percent (10%) of the stock of any applicant. Any holding company, or any entity holding more than ten percent (10%) of an applicant, shall be considered an applicant for purposes of disclosure under this chapter;
    a. These shareholder disclosure requirements shall only be applicable for outcall service licenses;
3. All corporations, partnerships, or non-corporate entities included on the application shall also identify each individual authorized by the corporation, partnership, or non-corporate entity to sign the checks for such corporation, partnership, or non-corporate entity.
4. For all applicants or individuals, the application must also state:
    a. any other names or aliases used by the individual,
    b. the age, date, and place of birth,
    c. height,
    d. weight,
    e. color of hair,
    f. color of eyes,
    g. present business address and telephone number,
    h. present residence address and telephone number,
    i. Utah driver’s license or identification number, and
    j. social security number;
5. Acceptable written proof that any individual is at least eighteen (18) years of age;
6. Two (2) color photographs of the applicant clearly showing the individual's face and the individual's fingerprints on a form provided by the police department. For persons not residing in the city, the photographs and fingerprints may be on a form from the law enforcement jurisdiction where the person resides. Fees for the photographs and fingerprints shall be paid by the applicant directly to the issuing agency;
7. For any individual applicant required to obtain a sexually-oriented business license as an escort of a semi-nude entertainer, a certificate from the Utah County Health Department, stating that the individual has, within thirty (30) days immediately preceding the date of the original or renewal application, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable diseases;
8. A statement of the business, occupation, or employment history of the applicant for three (3) years immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application.
9. A statement detailing the license or permit history of the applicant for the five-year (5) period immediately preceding the date of the filing of the application, including whether such applicant has ever had a license, permit, or authorization to do business denied, revoked, or suspended, or has had any professional or vocational license or permit denied, revoked, or suspended. In the event of any such denial, revocation, or suspension, state the date, the name of the issuing or denying jurisdiction, and state in full the reasons for the denial, revocation, or suspension. A copy of any order of denial, revocation, or suspension shall be attached to the application;
10. All criminal convictions or pleas of nolo contendere, except those which have been expunged, and the disposition of all such arrests for the applicant, for five (5) years prior to the date of the application. This disclosure shall include identification of all ordinance violations, excepting minor traffic offenses (any traffic offense designated as a felony shall not be construed as a minor traffic offense), stating the date, place, nature of each conviction or plea of nolo contendere and sentence of each conviction, or other disposition, identifying the convicting jurisdiction and sentencing court, and providing the court identifying case numbers or docket numbers. Application for a sexually-oriented business or employee license shall constitute a waiver of confidentiality for any criminal conviction or pleas of nolo contendere for the purposes of any proceeding involving the business or employee license;
11. In the event the applicant is not the owner of record of the real property upon which the business or proposed business is or will be located, the application must be accompanied by a notarized statement from the legal or equitable owner of the possessory interest in the property specifically acknowledging the type of business for which the applicant seeks a license for the property. In addition to furnishing such notarized statement, the applicant shall furnish the name, address, and phone number of the owner of record of the property, as well as the copy of the lease or rental agreement pertaining to the premises in which the service is or will be located.
12. A description of the services to be provided by the business, with sufficient detail to allow reviewing authorities to determine what business will be transacted on the premises, together with a schedule of usual fees for services to be charged by the license, and any rules, regulations, or employment guidelines under or by which the business intends to operate. This description shall also include:
    a. The hours that the business or service will be open to the public, and the methods of promoting the health and safety of the employees and patrons and preventing them from engaging in illegal activity;
    b. The methods of preventing the employees from engaging in acts of prostitution or other related criminal activities;
    c. The methods of supervising employees and patrons to prevent employees and patrons from charging or receiving fees for services or acts prohibited by this chapter or other statutes or ordinances;
    d. The methods of screening employees and customers in order to promote the health and safety of employees and customers and prevent the transmission of disease, and prevent the commission of acts of prostitution, or other criminal activity.
    It is unlawful to knowingly submit false or materially misleading information on or with a sexually-oriented business license application or to fail to disclose or omit information for the purpose of obtaining a sexually-oriented or employee license. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.130 License—fees.
1. The owner or employee of a sexually-oriented business shall pay the application fees and annual fees set forth in the annual fee schedule adopted by the city.
2. An application fee shall not be prorated.
3. The fees described in this section are in addition to fees paid for general business licenses or beer licenses.
4. An application is not complete until all appropriate fees have been paid. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.140 License—Bond.
Each application for a sexually-oriented business license shall post, with the city administrator or his designee a cash or corporate surety bond payable to Lindon City in the amount of two thousand dollars ($2,000). Any fines assessed against the business, officers, or managers for violations of city ordinances shall be taken from this bond if not paid in cash within ten (10) days after notice of the fine, unless appeal is filed as provided by this chapter. In the event the funds are drawn against the cash or surety bond to pay such fines, the bond shall be replenished to two thousand dollars ($2,000) with fifteen (15) days of the date of notice of any draw against it. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.150 License--premises location and name.
1. It is unlawful to conduct business under a license issued pursuant to this chapter at any location other than the licensed premises. Any location to which telephone calls are automatically forwarded by such business shall require a separate license.
2. It is unlawful for any sexually-oriented business to do business in the city under any name other than the business name specified in the application. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.160 License--issuance conditions.
The city administrator or his designee shall approve the issuance of a license to the applicant within thirty (30) days after receipt of a completed application, unless the official finds one or more of the following:
1. The applicant is under eighteen (18) years of age.
2. The applicant is overdue in payment to the city of taxes, fees, fines, or penalties assessed against the applicant or imposed on the applicant in relation to a sexually-oriented business.
3. The applicant has falsely answered a material question or request for information as authorized by this chapter.
4. The applicant has violated a provision of this chapter or similar provisions found in statutes or ordinances from any jurisdiction within two years immediately preceding the applications; a criminal conviction for a violation of a provision of this chapter or similar provisions from any jurisdiction, whether or not it is being appealed, is conclusive evidence of a violation, but a conviction is not necessary to prove a violation.
5. The premises to be used for the business have been disapproved by the Utah County Health Department, the fire department, the police department, the building officials, or the zoning officials as not being in compliance with applicable laws and ordinances of the city. If any of the foregoing reviewing agencies cannot complete their review within the thirty (30) day approval or denial period, the agency or department may obtain from the city administrator or his designee an extension of time of no more than fifteen (15) days for their review. The total time for the city to approve or deny a license shall not exceed forty-five (45) days from the receipt of a completed application and payment of all fees. Businesses located outside of the corporate boundaries of the city but requiring a license under this chapter may be denied a license pursuant to this chapter if the business does not have a valid business license to conduct business at the business location from the appropriate jurisdiction for that location.
    a. Upon receipt of an application, all departments required to review the application shall determine whether or not the application is incomplete in items needed for processing. Incomplete applications shall be promptly returned to the applicant with a note indicating the items which are incomplete.
    b. The time for processing applications specified in this section shall begin to run from the receipt of a complete application.
    c. In the event that a license for semi-nude entertainment, semi-nude dancing agencies, adult businesses, or semi-nude entertainment businesses has not been disapproved within thirty (30) days or the forty five (45) days allowed after an extension, the city shall issue a temporary license pending completion of the city's review.
    d. Any license issued pursuant to Subsection 8.30.160(5)(c) above may be revoked by the city, if the completed review determines that the license should have been denied.
6. The required license fees have not been paid.
7. All applicable sales and use taxes have not been paid.
8. An applicant for the proposed business is in violation of or not in compliance with this chapter or similar provisions found in statutes or ordinances from any jurisdiction.
9. An applicant has been convicted or plead nolo contendere to a crime:
    a. Involving prostitution; exploitation of prostitution; aggravated promotion of prostitution; aggravated exploitation of prostitution; solicitation of sex acts; sex acts for hire; compelling prostitution; aiding prostitution; sale, distribution, or display of material harmful to minors; sexual performance by minors; possession of child pornography; lewdness; indecent exposure; any crime involving sexual abuse or exploitation of a child; sexual assault or aggravated sexual assault; rape; forcible sodomy; forcible sexual abuse; incest; harboring a runaway child; criminal attempt, conspiracy or solicitation to commit any of the foregoing offenses or offenses involving similar elements from any jurisdiction, regardless of the exact title of the offense; for which:
        i. Less than two (2) years have elapsed from the date of conviction, if the conviction is of a misdemeanor offense, or less than five (5) years if the convictions are of two (2) or more misdemeanors within five (5) years, or ii. Less than five (5) years have elapsed from the date of conviction, if the offense is a felony;
    b. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the disqualification pursuant to this section. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.170 License—term.
Sexually-oriented business and employee licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be valid from the date of issuance through December 31 of the year in which the license was issued. The license fees required under the fee schedule shall not be prorated for any portion of the year the license is applied for. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.180 License--notice of change of information.
Any change in the information required to be submitted under this chapter for either a sexually-oriented business license or sexually-oriented business employee license shall be given, in writing to the city administrator or his designee and the police department within fourteen (14) days after such change. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.190 License--transfer limitations.
Sexually-oriented business licenses granted under this chapter shall not be transferable. It is unlawful for a license held by an individual to be transferred. It is unlawful for a license held by a corporation, partnership, or other non-corporate entity to transfer any part in excess of ten (10) percent thereof, without filing a new application and obtaining prior city approval. If any transfer of the controlling interest in a business licensee occurs, the license is immediately null and void, and the business shall not operate until a separate new license has been properly issued by the city as provided in this chapter. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.200 License—display.
It is unlawful for any sexually-oriented business location within the boundaries of the city to fail to display the license granted pursuant to this chapter in a prominent location within the business premises. It is unlawful for any individual licensed pursuant to this chapter to fail to carry, at all times while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate boundaries of the city, their employee license on their person. If the individual is nude, such license shall be visibly displayed within the same room the employee is performing. When requested by police, city licensing or other enforcement personnel or health official, it is unlawful to fail to show the appropriate licenses while engaged in licensed activities within the corporate boundaries of the city. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.210 License--statement in advertisements.
It is unlawful for any advertisement by the sexually-oriented business or employee to fail to state that the business or employee is licensed by the city, and shall include the city license number. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.220 Regulations and unlawful activities.
It is unlawful for any sexually-oriented business or sexually-oriented business employee to:
1. Allow persons under the age of eighteen (18) years on the licensed premises, except that in adult
2. businesses which exclude minors from less than all of the business premises, minors shall not be permitted in excluded areas:
3. Allow, offer, or agree to conduct any outcall business with persons under the age of eighteen (18) years;
4. To allow, offer, or agree to allow any alcohol to be stored, used, or consumed on or in the licensed premises;
5. Allow the outside door to the premises to be locked while any customer is in the premises;
6. Allow, offer, or agree to gambling on the licensed premises;
7. Allow, offer, or agree to any sexually-oriented business employee touching or being touched by any patron or customer; except that outcall employees and customers may touch, except that any touching of specified anatomical areas, whether clothed or unclothed, is prohibited;
8. Allow, offer, or agree to illegal possession, use, sale, or distribution of controlled substances while engaged in the activities of the business;
9. Allow sexually-oriented business employees to possess, use, sell, or distribute controlled substances while engaged in the activities of the business;
10. Allow, offer, or agree to commit prostitution, solicitation of prostitution, solicitation of a minor, or activities harmful to a minor to occur on the license premises or, in the event of an outcall employee or business, the outcall employee committing, offering, or agreeing to commit prostitution, attempting to commit prostitution, soliciting prostitution, soliciting a minor, or committing activities harmful to a minor;
11. Allow, offer, commit, or agree to any specified sexual activity as validly defined by city ordinances or state statutes in the presence of any customer or patron;
12. Allow, offer, or agree to any outcall employee appearing before any customer or patron in a state of dress that violates this chapter;
13. Allow, offer, or agree to allow a patron or customer to masturbate in the presence of the sexually-oriented business employee or on the premises of a sexually-oriented business;
14. Allow, offer, or agree to commit an act of lewdness as defined in Section 76-9-702 or 76-9-702.5. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.230 Outcall services--operation requirements.
It is unlawful for any business or employee providing outcall services contracted for in the city to fail to comply with the following requirements:
1. All businesses licensed to provide outcall services pursuant to this chapter shall provide to each patron a written contract in receipt of pecuniary compensation for services. The contract shall clearly state the type of services to be performed, the length of time such services shall be performed, the total amount such services shall cost the patron, and any special terms or conditions relating to the services to be performed. The contract need not include the name of the patron. The business licensee shall keep and maintain a copy of each written contract entered into pursuant to this section for a period not less than one (1) year from the date of provision of services. The contracts shall be numbered and entered into a register listing the contract number, date, names of all employees involved in the contract, and pecuniary compensation paid.
2. All outcall businesses licensed pursuant to this chapter shall maintain an open office or telephone at which the licensee or licensee's designated agent may be personally contacted during all hours outcall employees are working. The address and phone number of the license location shall appear and be included in all patron contracts and published advertisements. For outcall businesses with premises within the city, private rooms or booths where the patrons may meet with the outcall employee shall not be provided at the open office, nor shall patrons meet outcall employees at the business premises.
3. Outcall services shall not advertise in such a manner that would lead a reasonable prudent person to conclude that specified sexual activities would be performed by the outcall employee.
4. All employees of outcall services who provide outcall services within the city shall be licensed in accordance with this chapter, regardless of the primary location of the business. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.240 Adult business--design of premises.
1. In addition to the general requirements of disclosure for a sexually-oriented business, any applicant for license as an adult business shall also submit a diagram, drawn to scale, of the premises. The design and construction shall conform to the following requirements:
    a. The interior of the premises shall be configured in such a manner that there is an unobstructed view from a manager's station of every area of the premises to which any patron is permitted access for any purpose, excluding restrooms.
    b. Restrooms may not contain any video reproduction equipment or any of the business merchandise. Signs shall be posted stating that only one (1) person per stall will be allowed in the restroom, and only one (1) person may be in any stall at a time, and that patrons shall not be allowed access to the manager's station areas.
    c. For businesses which exclude minors from the entire premises, all windows, doors and other openings to the premises shall be darkened or otherwise constructed to prevent anyone outside the premises from seeing the inside of the premises. Businesses which exclude minors from less than all of the premises shall be designed and constructed so that minors may not see into the area from which they are excluded.
    d. The required diagram shall not necessarily be a professional engineer's or architect's blueprint; however, the diagram must show marked internal dimensions, all overhead lighting fixtures, and ratings for illumination capacity.
2. It shall be the duty of the licensee and the licensee's employees to insure that the views from the manager's station in Subsection 8.30.240(1)(a) remain unobstructed by any doors, walls, merchandise, display racks, or any other materials at all times that any patron is present in the premises, and to insure that no patron is permitted access to any area of the premises which has been designated as an area in which patrons will not be permitted.
3. The premises shall at all times be equipped and operated with overhead lighting fixtures of sufficient intensity to illuminate every place to which patrons are permitted access at an illumination of not less than one (1) footcandle, measured at floor level. It shall be the duty of the licensee and the licensee's employees present on the premises to insure that the illumination described above is maintained at all times that any patron is present in the premises. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.250 Semi-nude entertainment business--design of premises.
1. It is unlawful for a business premises licensed for semi-nude entertainment to:
    a. Permit a bed, sofa, mattress, or similar item in any room on the premises, except that a sofa may be placed in a reception room open to the public or in any office to which patrons are not admitted, and except that in an adult theater such items may be on the stage as part of a performance;
    b. Allow any door in any room used for the business (except for the door to an office to which patrons shall not be admitted, outside doors, and restroom doors) to be lockable from the inside;
    c. Provide any room in which the employee or employees and the patrons are alone together without a separation by a solid physical barrier at least three (3) feet high and six (6) inches wide, the patron or patrons shall remain on one side of the barrier and the employee or employees shall remain on the other side of the barrier;
2. Adult theaters shall also require that the performance area shall be separated from the patrons by a minimum of three (3) feet, which separation shall be delineated by a physical barrier at least three (3) feet high. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.260 Alcohol prohibited.
1. It is unlawful for any sexually-oriented business licensed pursuant to this chapter to allow the sale, storage, supply, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises.
2. It is unlawful for any person to possess or consume any alcoholic beverage on the premises of any sexually-oriented business. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.270 Semi-nude dancing agencies.
It is unlawful for any individual or entity to furnish, book, or otherwise engage the services of a professional dancer, model, or performer to appear in a state of semi-nudity for pecuniary compensation in or for any semi-nude entertainment business or adult theater licensed pursuant to this chapter, unless such agency is licensed pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.280 Performers--prohibited activities.
It is unlawful for any professional dancer, model, or performer while performing in any business licensed pursuant to this chapter to:
1. Touch in any manner any other person;
2. Throw any object or clothing off the stage area;
3. Accept any money, drink, or any other object directly from any person;
4. Allow another person to touch the performer or to place any money or object on the performer or within the costume or person of the performer; or
5. Place anything within the costume or adjust or move the costume while performing so as to render the performer in a state of nudity. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.290 Patrons--prohibited activities.
It is unlawful for any person or any patron of any business to touch in any manner any performer; to place any money or object on or within the costume or person of any performer; or to give or offer to give to any such performer any drinks, money, or object while such performer is performing; except that money may be placed on the stage, which shall not be picked up by the performer except by hand. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.300 Nudity--defenses to prosecution.
It is a defense to prosecution or violation under this chapter that a person appearing in a state of nudity did so in a modeling class operated:
1. By a proprietary school licensed by the state, or a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation; or
2. By a private college or university which maintains and operates educational programs in which credits are transferable to a college, junior college, or university supported entirely or partly by taxation. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.310 Violation—injunction.
An entity or individual who operates or causes a sexually-oriented business to be operated without a valid license, or who employs or is employed as an employee of a sexually-oriented business, or who operates such a business or functions as such an employee in violation of the provisions of this chapter is subject to a suit for injunction in addition to civil and criminal violations, and any other remedy available at law or in equity. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.320 Violation--license suspension or revocation.
1. The city may issue a notice suspending or revoking a sexually-oriented business or employee license granted under this chapter if a licensee or an employee of the licensee has:
    a. Violated or is not in compliance with this chapter;
    b. Refused to allow any inspection of the premises of the sexually-oriented business specifically authorized by this chapter or by any other law;
    c. Failed to replenish the cost bond as provided in this chapter (such suspension shall extend until the bond has been replenished);
    d. Given materially false or misleading information in obtaining the license;
    e. Knowingly operated the sexually-oriented business or worked under the employee license during the period when the business licensee or employee licensee's license was suspended;
    f. Committed an offense which would be grounds for denial of a license for which the required time period required has not elapsed;
    g. A licensee is delinquent in payment to the city for ad valorem taxes or sales taxes related to the sexually-oriented business.
2. Suspension or revocation shall take effect within fifteen (15) days of the issuance of the notice, unless an appeal is filed as provided by this chapter.
3. The fact that a conviction is being appealed shall have no effect on the revocation of the license. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.330 Effect of license revocation.
When a license issued pursuant to this chapter is revoked, the revocation shall continue for one (1) year from its effective date, and the licensee shall not be issued a sexually-oriented business or employee license for one (1) year from the date of such revocation. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.340 Appeal procedures.
The denial, suspension, or revocation of any license issued pursuant to this chapter may be appealed as set forth in Chapter 5 of the Lindon City Code and according to the administrative procedure policies of the city. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.350 Violation--penalty--responsibility.
1. In addition to revocation or suspension of a license as provided in this chapter, each violation of this chapter shall, upon citation require the licensee to pay a civil penalty in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500). Such fines shall be deducted from the cost bond posted pursuant to this chapter, unless paid within ten (10) days of notice of the fine or the final determination after any appeal. In addition to the civil fines provided in this chapter, the violation of any provision of this chapter shall be a Class B misdemeanor. Each day of violation shall be considered a separate offense.
2. Every act or omission by an employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the sexually-oriented business licensee and/or operator, if such act or omission occurs either with the authorization, knowledge, or approval of the licensee and/or operator, or as a result of the licensee's employee, and the sexually-oriented business licensee shall be punishable for such act or omission in the same manner as if the licensee committed the act or caused the omission.
3. A sexually-oriented business licensee and/or operator shall be responsible for the conduct of all employees while on the licensed premises, and any act or omissions of any employee constituting a violation of the provisions of this chapter shall be deemed the act or omission of the licensee and/or operator for the purposes of determining whether the licensee's license shall be revoked, suspended, or renewed. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.360 Severability.
If any provision or clause of this chapter or its application thereof to any person or circumstances is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other sections, provisions, clauses, or applications which can be implemented without the invalid provision, clause, or application. To this end, the provisions of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

8.30.370 Effective date.
This ordinance shall take effect immediately upon its passage and publication as prescribed by law. (Ord. 99-19, adopted, 2000)

Chapter 8.32 CEMETERIES AND BURIALS

Sections:
8.32.010     Definitions.
8.32.020     Interment in cemeteries.
8.32.030     Burial above ground prohibited.
8.32.040     Cemetery hours.
8.32.050     Only human burials permitted.
8.32.060     Vaults required.
8.32.070     Burial rights and ownership.
8.32.080     Burial permit required.
8.32.090     Exhumations.
8.32.100     Double depth burials.
8.32.110     Burials per lot.
8.32.120     Traffic regulations.
8.32.130     Funeral processions.
8.32.140     Right to maintain city cemeteries.
8.32.150     Plantings in city cemeteries.
8.32.160     Grave decorations.
8.32.170     Repealed.
8.32.180     Private improvements prohibited.
8.32.190     Grave markers.
8.32.200     Burial of indigents.
8.32.210     Infant or urn burial lot.
8.32.220     Repealed.
8.32.230     Animals prohibited.
8.32.240     Persons and activities not permitted in city cemeteries.
8.32.250     Holiday funerals.
8.32.260     Fees.
8.32.270     Resale restricted.
8.32.280     No right to burial in specific location.
8.32.290     Care of lots.
8.32.300     Damaging property.
8.32.310     Burial information.
8.32.320     Forfeiture of burial rights.
8.32.330     Rules and regulations.
8.32.340     Violation misdemeanor.

8.32.010 Definitions.
“Burial” means the opening and closing of a grave for the interment of human remains.
“Cemetery” means any cemetery owned or operated by Lindon City for the purpose of receiving the remains of deceased humans. The term also includes any cemetery operated within the city limits of Lindon City.
“City” means Lindon City.
“Double burial” means the burial of two (2) human bodies in adjacent burial lots.
“Double depth burial” means the burial of the remains of two (2) human bodies in the same burial lot in separate vaults, one (1) on top of the other.
“Infant” is defined as any child who is able to be buried in a casket no greater than thirty-six inches (36") long.
“Lot” means a grave site in any cemetery owned by the city.
“Lot owner or purchaser” means the purchaser of burial rights or privileges evidenced by a burial rights certificate.
“Resident” is defined as a person who resides within the city and whose primary residence has been within the city for at least thirty-one (31) days prior to a burial or purchase of burial rights.
“Veteran” is defined as anyone who has served in the Armed Forces of the United States, including members of the National Guard and Reserves. A person who has had a dishonorable discharge does not typically qualify as a veteran. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2014-15, amended, 2014; Ord. 2012-4, amended, 2012; Ord. 3-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.020 Interment in cemeteries.
No human remains shall be interred within the city limits of Lindon City except in a cemetery operated by the city or a cemetery otherwise established and operated in accordance with the laws of the state of Utah. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2014-15, amended, 2014; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.030 Burial above ground prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to bury the body of a deceased person in any structure above the ground. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.040 Cemetery hours.
It shall be unlawful for any person other than city and cemetery employees performing their duties to be in any cemetery between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.050 Only human burials permitted.
There shall be no burial of anything other than the remains of human bodies in any cemetery. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.060 Vaults required.
It shall be unlawful for the remains of any dead human body to be buried in any cemetery unless the casket is placed in a concrete or steel vault approved by the city sexton. No wood or fiberglass shall be used in the construction of any part of any vault. Exceptions to the provisions of this section may be granted for infant or cremation burials only. In such instances, the design and construction of the burial vaults shall be approved by the city sexton. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.070 Burial rights and ownership.
1. All property in a city cemetery, including lots, blocks, and grave sites, is the exclusive property of the city. A burial right granted by the city is merely a right to be buried on city property.
2. Burial rights in a city cemetery are granted to the person or persons named in the burial rights certificate.
3. No person, except the owner of the burial rights on a lot, shall be buried on that lot, unless a form provided by the city sexton has been signed by the owner giving permission for someone else to be buried on the lot.
4. Upon the death of the owner of the burial rights, the burial rights may be used for the burial of the owner. If not so used, the burial rights shall pass to the owner’s heirs or beneficiaries in accordance with applicable law, provided, however, the burial right to any one (1) lot shall not be divided in fractional interests except as otherwise permitted by the city for infant and urn burials. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2014-15, amended, 2014; Ord. 3-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.080 Burial permit required.
No remains of any dead human body shall be buried within any cemetery unless a proper burial permit has been issued by the city sexton. Burial shall not begin any sooner than twenty-four (24) hours after the issuance of a burial permit. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.090 Exhumations.
No exhumations shall be permitted without written permission of the city sexton. It is unlawful, within two (2) years from the date of burial, for any person to exhume the body of a person who has died of a contagious disease unless such body has been buried in a hermetically sealed coffin and is found to be so encased. All exhumations must comply with applicable state law. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.100 Double depth burials.
Double depth burials are not allowed in any location in any cemetery, except where double depth burial rights have previously been issued by the city. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2014-15, amended, 2014; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.110 Burials per lot.
Only one (1) burial shall be allowed per lot, except as follows:
1. Double depth burial rights purchased prior to June 20, 2008 will be permitted.
2. Burial of up to four (4) urns per full-size lot (forty inches (40") by one hundred inches (100")), or two (2) urns per half-size lot (forty inches (40") by fifty inches (50")) is permitted
3. Burial of up to two (2) infants per full-size lot (forty inches (40") by one hundred inches (100")), or one (1) infant per half-size lot (forty inches (40") by fifty inches (50")) is permitted. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2014-15, amended, 2014; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.120 Traffic regulations.
The provisions of the city traffic ordinances relative to the operation of vehicles and conduct of pedestrians shall apply in all city cemeteries. In addition the following traffic regulations apply in all city cemeteries:
1. It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle upon any cemetery lot, back over any grave, cut a corner or drive such vehicle upon any part of the cemetery which is not an established roadway; provided, however, that this provision shall not apply to city employees in the discharge of their duties.
2. It is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle within a city cemetery at a speed greater than ten (10) miles per hour in areas where speed limits are not posted, or at such other lesser speed as is reasonable and prudent under existing conditions, having regard for actual and potential hazards. Where speed limits are posted, it is unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle in excess of the posted speed limit.
3. Whenever signs have been installed by the city, directing traffic to proceed in one (1) direction only upon any street in a city cemetery, it is unlawful for any person to disobey such signs and drive a motor vehicle in the opposite direction. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2014-15, amended, 2014; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.130 Funeral processions.
Funeral processions passing through the city shall proceed to the place of interment under the direction of the funeral director. Within city cemeteries, city employees and/or funeral directors and their staff may direct traffic for the purposes of maintaining traffic flow and for the proper parking of vehicles. All vehicles in city cemeteries shall be driven in a careful and orderly manner. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992; Ord. 2014-15, amended, 2014)

8.32.140 Right to maintain city cemeteries.
The city sexton shall have the right to enter upon any lot to perform all work necessary for the maintenance of any city cemetery. The city sexton or appointed designee shall be responsible for the total maintenance of city cemeteries. The city shall not be responsible for the repair or replacement of grave markers of any nature. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2014-15, amended, 2014; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.150 Plantings in city cemeteries.
Planting of shrubs, trees, flowers, lawn, or other plantings, or placement of rocks, markers, or similar objects by private individuals is prohibited, except when such planting has been approved by the city sexton. In determining whether to allow private planting, the city sexton shall consider whether the planting is in harmony with the cemetery landscape and if the planting will interfere with cemetery maintenance and safety. Any object, flower, shrub, tree, or decoration not in compliance with this section may be removed immediately by the city sexton. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.160 Grave decorations.
Properly displayed flowers and decorations add to the beauty and character of the cemetery. In order to preserve the unique character of the cemetery the following rules and regulations for grave decorations have been established:
1. Lindon City is not responsible or liable for any flowers or decorations left in the cemetery. All grave decorations and other personal property left in the cemetery shall be presumed to have been abandoned. Special mementos desired to be kept should be removed at the conclusion of the graveside service.
2. Grave decorations or arrangements, real or artificial, shall be permitted if placed directly on top of the headstone. The decorations shall be allowed until such time as they become faded, worn, weathered, or otherwise unsightly, after which they will be removed and disposed of at the discretion of cemetery personnel.
3. Any object not kept on the headstone and placed in the grass area, or extending over the grass area, will be removed and discarded, except during the following circumstances:
    a. Funeral decorations will be allowed anywhere on a new burial lot (including on the grass) for seven (7) days after the graveside service, after which all items will be removed and discarded.
    b. Beginning on the Friday before Memorial Day until the Sunday after Memorial Day, grave decorations will be allowed anywhere on the burial lot (including on the grass). After the first Monday following Memorial Day, cemetery personnel may remove and dispose of all grave decorations on the grass and other faded or worn flowers or decorations on the headstone.
4. Decorations on trees, shrubbery, or fences are not permitted and will be removed and discarded.
5. Except as noted above for new burials and Memorial Day, any objects driven into the ground such as wires, ornamental iron, shepherd hooks, solar lights, sticks, pegs, flags, toys, air socks, balloons, outdoor lighting, pinwheels, etc. are not permitted and will be removed and discarded.
6. Glass, porcelain, glass covered picture frames not mounted to the headstone, or other breakable containers or objects are not allowed and will be removed and discarded.
7. Shepherd hooks or similar ornamental iron for hanging decorations are permitted if secured to the headstone by means of holes drilled into the headstone or by other secure attachment directly on top of the headstone. These hooks must be easily removable by cemetery personnel and may not project horizontally beyond the headstone (over the grass area) nor can they exceed six feet (6') in height from the ground elevation.
8. Outlining of headstones using bricks, rocks, flowers or other decoration or device is prohibited.
9. Decorations or objects deemed hazardous, inappropriate, or conflicting with maintenance of the cemetery may be removed and discarded at any time by cemetery personnel. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.170 Artificial flowers.
(Ord. 2016-20 §1, repealed, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.180 Private improvements prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any private person to erect or maintain any structure, fence, corner post, coping, or hedging of any kind upon any lot, street, or driveway in a city cemetery, or grade the ground or land thereof. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.190 Grave markers.
All headstones or grave markers in city cemeteries shall comply with the size, type, placement, and other requirements of this section. All grave markers shall be installed under the direction of the city sexton. Within ninety (90) days after the interment of any human remains in any lot, the owner of any burial rights or relatives of the interred person shall place or cause to be placed upon the grave a suitable grave marker with the name of the deceased person plainly inscribed thereon. If any person does not comply with this requirement, the city reserves the right to install a grave marker to identify the deceased and collect the cost of the purchase and installation of the grave marker from the persons otherwise responsible for the placement of such marker. Markers, monuments, or structures other than those explicitly provided for in this section shall not be placed upon any lot.
1. Size of Markers. All grave markers shall be securely set in a concrete foundation at least six inches (6") thick, or the grave marker shall consist of one (1) solid piece of granite six inches (6") thick. All grave markers shall also be surrounded by a six inch (6") wide border of concrete or granite that will act as a mowing strip. Markers shall have a maximum length of forty inches (40") for single burials, and eighty inches (80") for double burials, and shall have a maximum width of forty inches (40") for both single burials and double burials. Markers where infants or urns are buried shall not exceed forty inches (40") by twenty-five inches (25"). Maximum grave marker dimensions listed above include the six inch (6") concrete or granite border.
2. Type of Markers. All grave markers/headstones and their associated concrete/granite borders shall be placed flush with the ground. No upright headstones shall be allowed in the cemetery. Grave markers shall be made from long-lasting weather resistant materials such as stone, concrete, bronze, or other similar materials approved by the city sexton.
3. Placement of Markers. All grave markers shall be placed at the head of the grave. Exceptions to this rule shall apply only on lots where a veteran is buried, where one (1) additional grave marker, supplied by the Veteran’s Administration, may be placed at the foot of the grave. Markers in the cemetery face west; meaning viewers are facing east when reading the marker. Traditional side-by-side burials of couples normally have the husband on the right (or south) and the wife on the left (or north). Grave marker installation shall be inspected by the city to verify conformance to city standards.
4. Number of Markers. Except as otherwise permitted in this chapter, only one (1) grave marker per lot shall be permitted regardless of the number of human remains buried in the lot. (Ord. 2018-15 §1, amended, 2018; Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2014-15, amended, 2014; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.200 Burial of indigents.
A portion of any cemetery (either as a group of plots together or plots dispersed throughout the cemetery) may be designated by the city council for the burial of indigents; provided, however, that indigents shall have no inherent right of burial in city cemeteries. Whenever it is determined by the city administrator that any resident of Lindon who has died, who does not have funds or an estate sufficient to pay the cost of a burial right in the cemetery, and whose nearest relative or representative desires to have the body of such deceased interred in the city cemetery, the city administrator may grant a burial right for such deceased person at no cost and waive all city fees associated with the burial. All strangers without known relatives or funds who die in the city may be accorded the same privilege. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992; Ord. 2000-7, amended, 2000)

8.32.210 Infant or urn burial lot.
A portion of any cemetery may be reserved for the burial of infants or urns in reduced size lots as established by the city. Vaults used in such portion of a cemetery shall be a maximum of thirty-six inches (36") in length. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2014-15, amended, 2014; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.220 American veteran burial lot.
(Ord. 2018-15 §1, repealed, 2018; Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2014-15, amended, 2014; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.230 Animals prohibited.
No animal shall be allowed in a city cemetery except in the confines of a vehicle. It shall be unlawful for the owner, agent, caretaker, or other person or persons in charge of any animal to permit any animal to run at large or trespass on any city cemetery grounds. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.240 Persons and activities not permitted in city cemeteries.
1. Only cemetery patrons are allowed in city cemeteries.
2. Children under twelve (12) years of age must be accompanied at all times on the cemetery property by a parent or some supervising adult eighteen (18) years of age or older.
3. It shall be unlawful to engage in recreational activities in city cemeteries. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.250 Holiday funerals.
Interments or exhumations shall not be allowed on any city observed holiday or on Sundays, or on Memorial Day weekend beginning on the Saturday preceding Memorial Day through Memorial Day; provided, however, that a burial may be permitted on any of the days described above if the deceased died of a contagious disease. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2012-4, amended, 2012; Ord. 2010-5, adopted, 2010; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.260 Fees.
All prices, fees, and charges pertaining to city cemeteries shall be established by resolution of the city council. No burial, opening, closing, interment, or exhumation shall take place until all appropriate fees have been paid to the city and no certificate of burial rights shall be given to a purchaser until the entire cost of the burial right has been paid in full. In addition, reasonable charges may be imposed for digging of graves, inspections, and other services performed. Fees, prices, and charges may be changed at any time, shall be part of the fee schedule within the city budget, and shall be available for public inspection. The city may charge different fees for residents and nonresidents. Residency shall be determined by the residency of the named owner as shown on the certificate at the time of purchase of a right of burial. If a person to be buried is deceased at the time of purchase of the burial right, residency shall be determined by the residency of the deceased person at the time of death. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 3-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992; Ord. 2014-15, amended, 2014)

8.32.270 Resale restricted.
No person who owns any burial right in a city cemetery shall sell such burial right to any buyer except the city. In the event the city elects to repurchase the burial rights, the repurchase price shall be the lesser of the original purchase price of the rights or the current selling price at the time of repurchase. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.280 No right to burial in specific location.
A burial right granted by the city does not entitle the owner thereof to any right to burial in a specific location or lot in a specific city cemetery or even the right to burial in a city cemetery. The city may substitute another lot if more than one (1) right to burial for a specific lot has been sold or if title to the lot or parcel has been sold by the municipality. The city may also refuse to bury any person in a city cemetery and repurchase the burial right by paying the owner thereof the reasonable value of the right on the date the certificate is presented to the city, or may provide for burial rights in another private or public cemetery. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.290 Care of lots.
The city shall determine the extent of care to be given to the city cemetery, including lots related to sold and unsold burial rights. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992; Ord. 2014-15, amended, 2014)

8.32.300 Damaging property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, injure, deface, take, or carry away any monument, tree, shrub, lawn, building, structure, or facility on the grounds of any city cemetery except with the prior written permission of the city sexton. The city shall not be responsible or liable for flowers or other personal property left at a city cemetery. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.310 Burial information.
Relatives of a deceased person, funeral directors, and any other person requesting burial of a body in the city cemetery shall provide the sexton information identifying the deceased, including but not limited to decedent’s name, place of death, and name and address of the funeral director or other person making the interment. Written authorization must be made by a burial right owner or successor in interest of the decedent prior to interment of a body in a lot. The city will record and maintain a record of each certificate of burial right. All new certificates will be recorded with Utah County biannually, no later than January 1st and July 1st of each year. The city will file an accurate plat of the cemetery with Utah County clearly showing sections of burial lots which have been disposed of and the names of persons owning each burial right and sections of burial rights held for disposal. Additional plats for additions to the cemetery will be filed with Utah County before offering for sale any burial rights located in the cemetery. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992; Ord. 2014-15, amended, 2014)

8.32.320 Forfeiture of burial rights.
A burial right or lot that remains unused for a period of one hundred twenty (120) years after the date of issuance of the certificate of burial right shall revert to the city in accordance with procedures and notice requirements set forth in Title 8, Chapter 5, U.C.A. and as may be amended hereafter. However, a burial right or lot will not revert to the city if the owner provides proof of a valid interest in the burial right or lot within the time frames set forth in said statutes. Upon receiving proof of a valid interest in the burial right or lot, the city shall, at no cost to the owner, issue a new certificate which shall be valid for an additional one hundred twenty (120) years. The owner of a burial right or lot that has reverted to the city, upon providing proof of a valid interest in a burial right or lot that was reclaimed, shall have a right to redemption or other compensation, at the option of the city, in accordance with state law. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992; Ord. 2014-9, amended, 2014)

8.32.330 Rules and regulations.
The city sexton, with approval of the city council, may prepare and enforce such other printed rules and regulations for the operation of city cemeteries as will cover matters necessary for, or useful in, the operation of city cemeteries, and which are not contained in this code. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

8.32.340 Violation misdemeanor.
Any person who violates any provision of this chapter is guilty of a class C misdemeanor. Every day a violation of this chapter continues shall constitute a separate violation. (Ord. 2016-20 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 11-92, adopted, 1992)

Title 9 PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE

Chapters:
9.04         Adoption of Criminal Code
9.08         Offenses against Public Officers and Government
9.12         Offenses against Property
9.16         Offenses against Public Decency
9.20         Offenses by or Against Minors
9.22         Curfew
9.24         Weapons
9.28         Consumer Protection
9.29         Offenses in Public Schools
9.32         Miscellaneous Offenses
9.36         Incriminating Testimony Not an Excuse

Chapter 9.04 ADOPTION OF CRIMINAL CODE

Sections:
9.04.010     Adoption of Criminal Code.

9.04.010 Adoption of Criminal Code.
1. The Utah Criminal Code, as contained in Title 76 of Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended and constituted in 2004, is hereby adopted as the criminal code for Lindon City and incorporated as part of the ordinances of Lindon City. Where a citation, information or complaint is issued under the Utah Criminal Code, as adopted by this section, it shall be sufficient to use the section number of the Utah Code to designate the section number of the City Code that has been violated. Those portions of the Utah Code, as adopted herein, referring to or dealing with felonies which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, are not part of the adopted Lindon City Code. Those portions of the Utah Code provisions that are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Ordinances of Lindon City referring to or dealing with Class “A” Misdemeanors, that are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, are hereby specifically excepted, and are not part of the adopted Lindon City Code.
2. Title 77 of the Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended in 2004, titled the Utah Code of Criminal Procedure, and Sections 78-31-801, as amended and constituted in 2004, and 78-3a-802, as enacted and constituted in 2004, are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Lindon City Code. Where a citation, information, or complaint is issued under Title 77, Section 78-3a-801, or Section 78-3a-802 of the Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, as adopted herein, it shall be sufficient to use the section number of the Utah Code to designate the section number of the City Code that has been violated. Those portions of the above-referenced Utah Code, as adopted herein, referring to or dealing with felonies which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, or punishments associated with felonies which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, are not part of the adopted Lindon City Code. Those portions of the Utah Code provisions that are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Ordinances of Lindon City referring to or dealing with Class “A” Misdemeanors, that are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, are hereby specifically excepted, and are not part of the adopted Lindon City Code. (Ord. 2005-4, amended, 2005; Ord. 1-95, amended, 1995; Ord. 2005-4, amended, 2005; Ord. 2000-15, amended, 2000; Ord. 99-1, amended, 2000; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000)

Chapter 9.08 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC OFFICERS AND GOVERNMENT

Sections:
9.08.010     Furnishing articles to prisoners.
9.08.020     Repealed.

9.08.010 Furnishing articles to prisoners.
1. It is unlawful for any person to furnish or to attempt to furnish or to deliver or to attempt to deliver to any prisoner in the custody of any peace officer, any tool, intoxicating drink, drug, merchandise or food or other article without the consent of the officer in charge.
2. Any person found guilty of violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2011-9, amended, 2011; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000; Prior code §12-45)

9.08.020 Library materials.
(Ord. 2002-2, repealed, 2002)

Chapter 9.12 OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY

Sections:
9.12.010     Defacing or destroying.
9.12.020     Repealed.
9.12.030     Trespass.
9.12.040     Motor Vehicle Trespass on Private and Public Lands.

9.12.010 Defacing or destroying.
It is unlawful for any person willfully to injure, deface or destroy property of another, either public or private, or to secrete any goods, chattels or personal property of another, or to prepare any deadfall, or to dig any pit, or to arrange any trap, to injure another's person or property, or to take down, injure or remove any monument, street sign, or any tree marked as a boundary of any tract of land or city lot, or to injure, destroy, deface or alter the marks of any monument or street sign, or to deface, injure, or destroy any kind of public or private property, or to deface sidewalks or trees located upon public property with painted or printed handbills, signs, posters or other advertisements. Violations of this section shall be a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000; Prior code §12-11)

9.12.020 Taking vehicles without Permission.
(Ord. 97-1 §16, repealed, 2000; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000; Prior code §12-49)

9.12.030 Trespass.
It is unlawful for any person to take down any fence, or to let down any bars or to open any gates so as to expose any enclosure or to ride, drive, walk, lodge, camp or sleep upon the premises of another without the permission of the owner or occupant thereof.
Additionally, Section 23-20-14 of the U.C.A., 1953 as amended and constituted in 2004, is hereby adopted and enacted. Where a citation, information, or complaint is issued under U.C.A. Section 23-20-14, 1953 as amended, as adopted herein, it shall be sufficient to use the section number of the Utah Code to designate the section number of the City Code that has been violated. Those portions of the above-referenced Utah Code, as adopted herein, referring to or dealing with felonies which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, or punishments associated with felonies which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, are not part of the adopted Lindon City Code. Those portions of the Utah Code provisions that are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Ordinances of Lindon City referring to or dealing with Class “A”
Misdemeanors, that are subject to enforcement by Lindon City, are hereby specifically excepted, and are not part of the adopted Lindon City Code. (Ord. 2005-4, amended, 2005; Ord. 2000-15, amended, 2000; Prior code §12-50)

9.12.040 Motor Vehicle Trespass on Private and Public Lands.
1. Lindon City incorporates by reference the following sections of Chapter 41-22 of the Utah Code, 1953 as amended and constituted in 2004 relating to the use of off-highway vehicles on public land;
Section 10.1. Vehicles operated on posted public land;
Section 10.5(4). Local ordinances-designating routes - supervision;
Section 10.7(1),(3) Vehicle equipment requirements-rulemaking-exceptions;
Section 10.8. Protective Headgear requirements-owner duty-penalty for violation;
Section 12(2). Restrictions on use of public lands;
Section 12.5. Restrictions on use of privately-owned lands without permission - unlawful for person to tamper with signs or fencing on privately-owned land;
Section 13. Prohibited uses.
2. This section does not prohibit the use of such property by the following:
    a. Emergency vehicles;
    b. Vehicles of commerce in the course of normal business operations;
    c. Vehicles being operated on property devoted to commercial or industrial purposes where such operation is in conjunction with commercial or industrial use and permission for such operation is implied or expressly given by the person in possession of the property;
    d. Vehicles operated on property actually used for residential purposes, where such vehicles are there at the express or implied invitation of the owner or occupant;
    e. Vehicles being operated on public or private parking lots, where permission to do so is implied or expressly given by the person in possession of the lot.
3. Unless otherwise indicated, trespass violations as found in this section are a class C misdemeanor. Unless otherwise indicated, the minimum fine for an offense under this section shall be as follows:
First offense: $200
Second offense: $750
Third and all subsequent offenses: $750 plus up to the state allowed 35% surcharge as offenses as determined appropriate by the court.
4. The city believes that community service should be an integral part of the penalty for violations under this section, and encourages the court to assess up to one-half of the penalty as community service, at a rate of $5 per hour. (Ord. 2005-4, amended, 2005; Ord. 2003-9, adopted, 2003)

Chapter 9.16 OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC DECENCY

Sections:
9.16.010     Definitions.
9.16.020     Disorderly houses.
9.16.030     Repealed.
9.16.040     Drinking intoxicating liquor in public.
9.16.050     Controlled substances, drug paraphernalia and imitation controlled substances.
9.16.060     Unlawful Intoxicating chemical compounds and paraphernalia.

9.16.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words have the following meanings, unless the context requires otherwise:
“Advertising purposes” means purposes of propagandizing in connection with the commercial sale of a product or type of product, the commercial offering of a service or the commercial exhibition of an entertainment.
“Display publicly” means the exposing, placing, posting, exhibiting, or in any fashion displaying in any location, whether public or private an item in a manner that it may be readily seen and its contents or character distinguished by normal, unaided vision viewing it from a public thoroughfare, depot, building, or vehicle.
“Distribute” means to transfer possession of or permit to be viewed, heard, or examined, with or without consideration.
“Furnishes” means to sell, give, rent, loan, or otherwise provide.
“Nude” or “nudity” means uncovered, or less than opaquely covered buttocks, human genitals, pubic areas, the human female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or the covered human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state or in a condition of sexual excitement. For purposes of this definition, a female breast is considered uncovered if the nipple and the areola only are covered.
“Obscene” means an act, depiction, representation, description, obscene performance, or any other item, material or conduct in this chapter described, whether actual or simulated in form, which:
    a. Taken as a whole, the average person would find appeals to the prurient interest when applying contemporary community standards;
    b. Is presented in a patently offensive way by going substantially beyond customary limits of candor in description or representation of the aforesaid matters in the community; and
    c. Taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.
“Obscene performance” means an obscene play, motion picture, dance, show, or other presentation, whether pictured, animated, or live, performed before an audience.
“Obscenities” means obscene slang words currently and generally rejected for regular use in mixed society, that are used to refer to genitals, female breasts, sexual conduct, or excretory functions or products, either that have no other meaning or that, in context, are clearly used for their bodily sexual or excretory meaning.
“Pandering” means catering to the lust or gratification of another.
“Person” includes individuals, public and private corporations, firms, joint-associations, partnerships, and the like. The word “person” applies to a natural person and applies equally to the male and female genders.
“Prurient interest” means a shameful or morbid interest in nudity, sex, or excretion.
“Public place” means any place to which the public or a substantial group of the public has access. It includes commercial establishments and any place to which admission is gained by payment or membership or admission fee, however designated, notwithstanding its being designated a private club.
“Sado-masochistic abuse” means obscene flagellation or torture by or upon a person who is nude or clad in undergarments or in revealing or bizarre costume, or the condition of being fettered, bound or otherwise physically restrained by one so clothed.
“Sexual conduct” means human masturbation, sexual intercourse, or any touching of the covered or uncovered genitals, human female breast, pubic areas or buttocks of the human male or female, whether alone or between members of the same or opposite sex or between humans and animals, in an act of apparent sexual stimulation or gratification, which term shall include, but not be limited to fellatio, cunnilingus, pederasty, and bestiality.
“Sexual excitement” means the condition of human male or female genitals or the breasts of the female when in a state of sexual stimulation, or the sensual experience of humans engaging in or witnessing sexual conduct or nudity.
“Willfully” means a purpose or willingness to commit the act or to omit an act referred to herein.

9.16.020 Disorderly houses.
It is unlawful for any person to do, commit or suffer to be done or committed any or either of the things or acts in this section hereinafter enumerated, within the limits of the city;
1. To keep, maintain or permit to be kept or maintained upon or in any property owned, occupied or leased by or to such person, any building, place or structure resorted to or used in whole or in part by one or more females for lewdness or prostitution;
2. To resort to, or reside in any place mentioned in this section for the purpose of lewdness, prostitution, unlawful sexual intercourse or other immoral or illegal purpose;
3. To keep a house of ill-fame resorted to for the purpose of prostitution or lewdness, or to willfully reside in such house, or to resort thereto for lewdness;
4. To be the owner of any building or tenement, the whole or any part of which is used for any of the purposes mentioned in this section;
5. To have control of such building or tenement as agent, guardian or lessee of such owner, after written notice to such owner, agent, guardian or lessee that such building or tenement is being used for the purposes mentioned in this section;
6. To let any building or tenement, knowing that the lessee intends using the same, or any part thereof, for the purpose mentioned in this section; to harbor or keep about his premises any person known to be guilty of following a lewd course of life; and
7. It is unlawful for any person knowingly to visit, frequent or resort to a disorderly house, except for a legitimate purpose.
8. All bawdy houses, houses of ill-fame, assignation houses, all houses or places frequented or resorted to for lewd, unchaste or immoral purposes, all public dance halls that are not licensed, and all houses, restaurants, hotels, soft drink parlors, pool halls and other places where intoxicating liquors are sold, kept, served or consumed, or where intoxicating liquor or vessels or bottles which have recently contained intoxicating liquors are found upon, under or near dance halls, and all houses, restaurants, hotels, soft drink parlors, pool halls and other places where intoxicating liquors are sold, kept, served or consumed, or where intoxicating liquor or vessels or bottles which have recently contained intoxicating liquors are found upon, under or near tables, or in rooms or booths' shall be deemed and held to be disorderly houses. (Prior code §12-18)

9.16.030 Unlawful sex acts.
(Ord. 97-1, repealed, 2000; Ord. 13-95, repealed, 1995; Ord. 18-93, amended, 1993)

9.16.040 Drinking intoxicating liquor in public.
It is unlawful for any person to drink intoxicating liquor or to have in his possession any opened bottle or vessel containing intoxicating liquor, in or on any street, alley, motor vehicle, sidewalk, beer parlor or public place. The word “liquor” shall have the same definition as the same word is defined in Section 32-1-3, U.C.A., 1953. (Prior code §12-28)

9.16.050 Controlled substances, drug paraphernalia and imitation controlled substances.
1. The “Utah Controlled Substances Act” as contained in Chapter 37 of Title 58, U.C.A., 1953 as amended and constituted in 2004, the “Drug Paraphernalia Act” as contained in Chapter 37a of Title 58, U.C.A., 1953 as amended and constituted in 2004, and the “Imitation Controlled Substances Act” as contained in Chapter 37b of Title 58, U.C.A., 1953 as amended and constituted in 2004, are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Ordinances of Lindon City. Where a citation, information, or complaint is issued under U.C.A. Title 58 Chapter 37, 1953 as amended, as adopted herein, or under U.C.A. Title 58 Chapter 37a, 1953 as amended, as adopted herein, or under U.C.A. Title 58 Chapter 37b, 1953 as amended, as adopted herein, it shall be sufficient to use the section number of the Utah Code to designate the section number of the City Code that has been violated. Those portions of the above referenced Utah Code, as adopted herein, referring to or dealing with felonies which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, or punishments associated with felonies which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, are not part of the adopted Lindon City Code. Those portions of the Utah Code provisions that are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Ordinances of the Lindon City referring to or dealing with Class “A” Misdemeanors that are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, are hereby specifically expected, and are not part of the adopted Code of Lindon City. (Ord. 2005-4, amended, 2005; Ord. 2000-15, amended, 2000; Ord. 99-1, amended, 2000)

9.16.060 Unlawful Intoxicating chemical compounds and paraphernalia.
1. Intoxicating Chemical Compounds. It shall be unlawful for any person, including a corporation or other entity, to manufacture, distribute, use, possess, purchase, attempt to purchase, sell, publicly display for sale, attempt to sell, give, trade or barter any one or more of the following chemical compounds and/or substances or their salts, isomers, homologues, and salts of their isomers and homologues:
    a. Salvia divinorum or salvinorum A; all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum, whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts.
    b. (6aR, 10aR)-9-(hydroxymethyl)-6, 6dimethyl-3(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a, 7, 10, 10a-tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol, some trade or other name: HU-210.
    c. Naphthalen-1-yl-(1-pentylindol-3-yl) methanone (also known as 1 Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole, some trade or other name: JWH-018.
    d. Naphthalen-1-yl-(1-butylindol-3-yl) methanone (also known as 1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl) indole, some trade or other name: JWH-073.
    e. 2-[(1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol, some trade or other name: CP 47,497 and its C6. C7, C8, and C9 homologues.
    f. 1-(3-[triflouromethylphenyl]) piperazine, some trade or other name: TFMPP.
    g. (R)-(+)-[2,3-Dihydro-5-methyl-3-(4-morpholinylmethyl)pyrrolo[1,2,3-de)-1,4-benzoxazin-6-yl]-1-napthalenylmethanone, some trade or other name: WIN 55,2-212.
    h. 2-[(1R,2R,5R)-5-hydroxy-2-(3-hydroxypropyl) cyclohexyl]-5-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)phenol, some trade or other name: CP 55,940.
    i. 6,6,9-trimethyl-3-(3-methyloctan-2-yl)-7,8,9,10-tetrahydrobenzo [c]chromen-1-ol, some trade or other name: Dimethylheptylpyran 1, 2-dimethylheptyl-Δ3THC, or DMHP, or A-40824, or EA-1476.
    j. [(6S,6aR,9R,10aR)-9-hydroxy-6-methyl-3-[(2R)-5-phenylpentan-2-yl]oxy-5,6,6a,7,8,9,10,10a-octahydrophenanthridin-1-yl] acetate, some trade or other name: Levonantradol, or CP 50,556-1.
    k. -1-(4-methylphenyl)-2-methylaminopropan-1-one, some trade or other name: Mephedrone, 4-methylmethcathinone, 4-MMC or 4-methylephedrone.
    l. Any similar structural analogs to the chemical compounds identified in Section 1(a) through 1(l).
    m. Or any other compounds containing cannabinoid receptor agonists that are designed, produced, manufactured, synthesized, grown, cultivated, harvested or otherwise prepared or used with the intent to produce or mimic the effects of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC).
2. Lawful Possession. It is not an offense under Subsection 1 of this section if the person was acting at the direction of an authorized agent of Lindon City to enforce or ensure compliance with this law prohibiting the sale of the aforementioned intoxicating chemical compound.
3. Confiscation of Contraband. If any of the aforementioned intoxicating chemical compounds or cannabinoid receptor agonists are found in the possession of any person, they may be confiscated and destroyed by law enforcement officials.
4. Medical Uses. Subsection 1 does not apply to any person who commits any act described in this section pursuant to the lawful direction or prescription of a licensed physician or dentist authorized to direct or prescribe such act. This section likewise does not apply to the inhalation of anesthesia for a medical purpose or dental purpose when inhaled under the direction of a licensed Physician or Dentist.
5. Paraphernalia. It is the intent of this Subsection 5 to discourage the use of any of the above mentioned substances by eliminating paraphernalia designed for processing, ingesting, or otherwise using the substances described under Subsection 1. As such it shall be unlawful for any person, including a corporation or other entity, to, use, or possess, any Paraphernalia as defined in this Subsection.
    a. Paraphernalia under this section shall be defined as follows: Any equipment, product, or material used, or intended for use, to plant, propagate, cultivate, grow, harvest, manufacture, compound, convert, produce, process, prepare, test analyze, package, repackage, store, contain, conceal, inject, ingest, inhale, or to otherwise introduce chemicals or compounds prohibited in Section 1, and/or any other product prepared or used with the intent to produce or mimic the effects of tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) which includes, but is not limited to, the devices and products listed in Utah Code Ann. Title 58-37a-3.
    b. It is not an offense under this Subsection if a person possesses or uses paraphernalia in conjunction with a lawful use of the identified chemical compounds as permitted in Subsections 2 and 4 of this Section.
6. Penalty. Any person found to be in violation of this Subsections 1 or 5 of this Section is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor and/or subject to a term of imprisonment not to exceed six months and a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and/or both. Each day during which violation of this Section occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
7. Injunctions. Lindon City shall have the authority to seek an injunction to compel compliance of any business which fails or refuses comply with this Section.
SECTION 2. Subsequent State Action: If the State of Utah Legislature adopts a statute which includes the provisions in this chapter and enacting criminal penalties for prohibitions set forth in this ordinance, then upon the effective date of such state statute, provisions of this ordinance that are covered by the state statute shall no longer be deemed effective. Any violations of this ordinance which occur prior to said state statutes becoming effective will be prosecuted. If there are provisions of this ordinance that are not covered by the state statute, those provisions will remain in effect. (Ord. 2010-7, amended, 2010)

Chapter 9.20 OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS

Sections:
9.20.010     Enticing from parents or guardians.
9.20.020     Repealed.
9.20.030     Repealed.
9.20.040     Possession of alcoholic beverages.
9.20.050     Violation of Section 9.20.040--Penalty.
9.20.060     Runaways.

9.20.010 Enticing from parents or guardians.
It is unlawful for any person to use any influence or otherwise to entice or persuade any minor, male or female, under the age of 18 years, from his or her parents, guardians or other persons having charge or custody of such minor without the consent of such parents, guardians or custodians. (Prior code §12-29)

9.20.020 Curfew imposed (Repealed).
(Ord. 132 §1, amended, 1985)
(Repealed and replaced by §9.22.040)

9.20.030 Curfew—Exceptions (Repealed).
(Ord. 132 §2, amended, 1985)
(Repealed and replaced by §9.22.050)

9.20.040 Possession of alcoholic beverages.
It is unlawful for any person under the age of 21 years to have in his possession any alcoholic beverage within the city limits of the city. (Ord. 43 §1, amended, 1978)

9.20.050 Violation of Section 9.20.040--Penalty.
Any person convicted of violating Section 9.20.040 may be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred ninety-nine dollars ($299) and imprisoned in the Utah County jail for a term not to exceed six months or both such fine and imprisonment may be imposed. (Ord. 43 §4, amended, 1978)

9.20.060 Runaways.
Section 62A-4a-501 of the Utah Code, as contained in Title 62A of the Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended and enacted in 1996.

Chapter 9.22 CURFEW

Sections:
9.22.010     Purpose.
9.22.020     Definitions.
9.22.030     Encouragement – Abuse - Violation - Penalty.
9.22.040     Curfew hours - under eighteen (18) years of age.
9.22.050     Curfew - exceptions.
9.22.060     Curfew - enforcement.
9.22.070     Parental Liability.
9.22.080     Severability - Advisory options.

9.22.010 Purpose.
The governing body of Lindon City finds it beneficial to establish a curfew prohibiting juveniles from remaining idly and purposelessly on the public street late at night. (Ord. 2000-4, repealed and replaced, 2000)

9.22.020 Definitions.
For the purpose of this Chapter, terms “child” and “children” mean any person under the age of eighteen (18) years.
“Care and custody” means the legal authority of a parent or guardian to supervise or otherwise be responsible for a minor, or the express authority given from such parent or legal guardian of a minor to supervise or otherwise be responsible for the activities and care of the minor hereby adopted as the Runaway Code for Lindon City and incorporated as part of the Lindon City Ordinances. Where a citation, information, or complaint is issued under the Utah Code governing Runaways, as adopted by this section, it shall be sufficient to use the Utah Code section number to designate the Lindon City Code section that has been violated. Misdemeanors which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City are hereby specifically excepted, and are not a part of the adopted Lindon City Code.
“Emergency errand” means any errand or travel undertaken to directly and immediately seek to prevent the consequences of an illness or injury, criminal, or potential criminal activity, or fire, or other accident and shall include the seeking of aid and assistance from medical or emergency response personnel or the purchase of medications.
“Juvenile” or “Minor” means any unmarried, unemancipated person who is not a member of the armed forces of the United States and who is under the age of eighteen (18) years.
“Public places” means any place open to the public, whether privately owned, including but not limited to parking lots and the interior and exterior of commercial establishments such as restaurants, stores, or places of entertainment. As a type of public place, a street is a way or place, of whatever nature, open to the use of the public as a matter of right for purposes of vehicular travel or in the case of a sidewalk thereof for pedestrian travel. “Street” includes that legal right of way, including but not limited to traffic lanes, the curb, the sidewalks whether paved or unpaved, and any grass plots or other grounds found within the legal right of way.
“Time of night” referred to herein is based upon the prevailing standard time, whether Mountain Standard Time or Mountain Daylight Savings Time, generally observed at that hour by the public in the City; prima facie, the time then observed in the city administrative offices and police station.
“Years of Age” continues from one birthday to the next, but does not include the day of the next birthday. For example, up to the birthday on which an individual turns eighteen (18) years of age means “under 18 years of age.” (Ord. 4-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 94-1, amended, 1994; Ord. 2000-4, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 2005-4, amended, 2005; Ord. 2000-15, adopted, 2000)

9.22.030 Encouragement – Abuse - Violation - Penalty.
1. Any person eighteen (18) years of age or over who induces, aids or encourages a child to violate any federal, state or local law or municipal ordinance of the city, or tends to cause children to become or remain delinquent, or aids, contributes to, or becomes responsible for the neglect or delinquency of any child; and
2. Any person eighteen (18) years of age or over having a child in his legal custody or in his employment who willfully abuses or ill treats, neglects, or abandons such child in any manner likely to cause the child unnecessary suffering or serious injury to his health or morals; and
3. Any person eighteen (18) years of age or over who forcibly takes away a child from or encourages him to leave the legal or physical custody of any person, agency or institution in which the child has been legally placed for the purpose of care, support, education, or adoption, or any person who knowingly detains or harbors such child, or any person who commits any act described above is guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be punished by imprisonment in the county jail not exceeding six (6) months and by a fine not exceeding two hundred ninety-nine dollars ($299.00), or by both. (Ord. 2000-4, repealed and replaced, 2000)

9.22.040 Curfew hours - under eighteen (18) years of age.
It is unlawful for any person under the age of eighteen (18) years to be or remain in or upon any sidewalks, streets, alleys or public places or vacant lots within the city limits between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the following morning. (Ord. 2008-9, amended, 2008; Ord. 2000-4, repealed and replaced, 2000)

9.22.050 Curfew - exceptions.
The provision of this Chapter shall not apply to any circumstance in which the minor is:
1. Accompanied by a parent, guardian, or other responsible adult having care and custody of such minor.
2. Engaged in a legitimate trade, employment or occupation which requires the minor's presence in or on the sidewalks, streets, alley or public places while working at or traveling to or from such employment.
3. Engaged on an emergency errand, and/or an errand directed by the minor's parent, guardian or the responsible person having care and custody.
4. In a motor vehicle engaged in normal interstate travel beginning in, traveling to or ending in the city.
5. Attending or engaged in traveling between the minor's home or place of residence and a place where any religious, social, entertainment, sporting, political, library, or school function is occurring.
6. Within the boundaries of the minor's place of residence.
7. When authorized by special permit from the Chief of Police carried on the person of the juvenile, the juvenile is thus authorized as follows: when necessary night time activities of a juvenile may be inadequately provided for by other provisions of this Ordinance, then recourse may be had to the Chief of Police for a special permit as the circumstances warrant by a written application signed by the juvenile and by a parent of the juvenile, if feasible, stating (1) the name, age, and address of the juvenile (2) the name, address, and telephone number of parent thereof (3) the height, weight, sex, color of eyes and hair, and other physical characteristics of the juvenile (4) the necessity that requires the juvenile to remain upon a public place during the curfew hours otherwise applicable (5) the public place, and (6) the beginning and ending of the period of time involved by date and hour, then the Chief of Police may grant a permit in writing for the juvenile's use of a public place at such hours as in the opinion of the Chief of Police may reasonably be necessary and consistent with the purposes of this Ordinance. In an emergency this may be handled by telephone or other effective communication, with a corresponding record being made contemporaneously to the Chief of Police or the person designated to act on behalf of the Chief of Police in an emergency, at the police station. (Ord. 2000-4, repealed and replaced, 2000)

9.22.060 Curfew - enforcement.
1. Any minor who is in violation of the provisions of this chapter is subject to arrest and citation.
2. Upon arrest, the minor shall be returned to the custody of the parent, guardian or other person charged with the care and custody of the minor.
3. It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person charged with the care and custody of a minor, who is in violation of this chapter, to knowingly refuse to appear and take custody of said minor after being ordered to do so by a peace officer.
4. Any person who violates the provision of this chapter is guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2000-4, repealed and replaced, 2000)

9.22.070 Parental Liability.
It shall be unlawful for any parent, guardian, or other person having care and custody of any minor to knowingly allow or permit the minor to violate the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2000-4, repealed and replaced, 2000)

9.22.080 Severability - Advisory options.
1. If any provision of this ordinance is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder shall not be affected thereby.
2. Advisory Opinions. The Chief Executive Officer of the City, after consulting with the City Attorney, is hereby authorized to give advisory opinions in writing, which shall be binding and shall be adhered to by the police department until the Ordinance is amended in such respect; interpreting terms, phrases, parts or any provision of the Ordinance. Normally, such advisory opinions shall be in response to good faith, signed letters addressed to the Chief Executive Officer or to a member of the City Council questioning the Curfew Ordinance for reasons such as: (1) ambiguity (2) having a potential chilling effect on the constitutional rights specifically invoked, or (3) otherwise invalid, in all three categories with respect to proposed conduct definitely described. This administrative remedy must exhausted prior to presenting to any court a question in any of the three categories. The City Council does not intend a result through the enforcement of this Ordinance that is absurd, impossible execution, or unreasonable. The Council intends that the Ordinance be held inapplicable in such cases, if any, where its application would be unconstitutional under the Constitution of the State of Utah or the Constitution of the United States of America. (Ord. 2000-4, repealed and replaced, 2000)

Chapter 9.24 WEAPONS

Sections:
9.24.010     Air guns--Discharge prohibited.
9.24.020     Firearms-Discharge prohibited.

9.24.010 Air guns--Discharge prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to discharge any air gun, sparrow gun flipper or other similar contrivance within the limits of the city. (Prior code §12-12)

9.24.020 Firearms-Discharge prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to discharge firearms of any description within the limits of the city except during State of Utah designated hunting seasons and within designated hunting areas by persons with a valid hunting license. Discharge of firearms may also be permitted for the slaughter of livestock or similar activities after a valid permit has been issued by the Lindon City Police Department. (Ord. 2015-14, amended, 2015; Prior code §12-13)

Chapter 9.28 CONSUMER PROTECTION

Sections:
9.28.010     Repealed.
9.28.020     Drugs --Labeling required.

9.28.010 Drugs--Sale on street prohibited.
(Ord. 97-1 §18, repealed, 2000; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000; Prior code § 12-19)

9.28.020 Drugs --Labeling required.
1. No person licensed by the State of Utah or authorized under the laws of the State of Utah to proscribe or dispense a controlled substance shall distribute a controlled substance unless it is packaged and labeled in compliance with the requirements of Section 305 of the Federal Comprehensive Drug Abuse Prevention and Control of 1970.
2. No person except a pharmacist for the purpose of filling a prescription shall alter, deface, or remove any label affixed by the manufacturer.
3. Wherever a pharmacist sells or dispenses any controlled substance on a prescription issued by a practitioner, he shall affix to the container in which the substance is sold or dispensed a label showing his own name, address, and registry number, or the name, address, and registry number of the pharmacist or pharmacy owner for whom he is lawfully acting; the prescription number, the name of the patient, or if the patient is an animal, the name of the owner of the animal and species of the animal, the name of the practitioner by whom the prescription was written; any directions stated on the prescription and any directions as required by state or federal rules and regulations. No person shall alter the face or remove any label so long as any of the original contents remain.
4. An individual to whom or for whose use any controlled substance has been prescribed, sold, or dispensed by a practitioner or pharmacist and the owner of any animal for which any substance has been prescribed, sold, or dispensed by a veterinarian may lawfully possess it only in the container in which it was delivered to him by the person selling or dispensing it. (Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000; Prior code §12-20)

Chapter 9.29 OFFENSES IN PUBLIC SCHOOLS

Sections:
9.29.010     Schools--Alcoholic beverages.
9.29.020     School--Dangerous materials.
9.29.030     Dangerous materials--Exceptions.
9.29.040     School property--Criminal trespass.

9.29.010 Schools--Alcoholic beverages.
It is unlawful for any person to possess or drink an alcoholic beverage inside or on the grounds of any building operated by a part of the public education system within the city or in those portions of any building, park or stadium within the city which are being used for an activity sponsored by or through any part of the public education system. Any person violating any provision of this section shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000 or imprisonment for a period not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000)

9.29.020 School--Dangerous materials.
It is unlawful for any person to possess a weapon, explosive, flammable material, or other material dangerous to persons or property in a public or private elementary or secondary school, on the grounds of the school, or in those parts of a building, park, or stadium which are being used for an activity sponsored by or through the school. A violation of this section is a class B misdemeanor punishable by a fine of not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by imprisonment for a period not longer than six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment, unless a higher penalty is prescribed in the Criminal Code, title 76 of the U.C.A. (Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000)

9.29.030 Dangerous materials--Exceptions.
Section 9.29.020 does not apply when:
1. Possession of the dangerous materials described therein is approved by the responsible school administrator or when the item or material is present or to be used in connection with a lawful, approved activity and is in the possession or under the control of the person responsible for its possession or use; or
2. The possession of a weapon is authorized by state law as provided for in U.C.A. § 76-10-505.5(4). (Ord. 2011-9, amended, 2011; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000)

9.29.040 School property--Criminal trespass.
A person is guilty of criminal trespass upon school property if the person enters or remains unlawfully upon school property and intends to cause annoyance or injury to a person or damage to property on the school property, or if the person intends to commit a crime, or is reckless as to whether the person’s presence will cause fear for the safety of another. A person is also guilty of criminal trespass upon school property if the person enters or remains without authorization upon school property if notice against entry or remaining has been given by the posting of signs reasonably likely to come to the attention of trespassers, by fencing or other enclosure obviously designed to exclude trespassers, by a current order of suspension or expulsion, or by personal communication to the person by a school official or an individual with apparent authority to act for a school official. Any person violating this section is guilty of a class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000)

Chapter 9.32 MISCELLANEOUS OFFENSES

Sections:
9.32.010     Cheating and swindling.
9.32.020     Expectoration.
9.32.030     Flooding streets and sidewalks.
9.32.040     Disorderly conduct.
9.32.050     Mischievous conduct.
9.32.060     Repealed.
9.32.070     Possession of mutilated tires.
9.32.080     Posting bills without permission.
9.32.090     Failure to remove election signs.
9.32.100     Failure to keep guest register.

9.32.010 Cheating and swindling.
It is unlawful for any person or persons to use or practice any game, trick or device with intent to defraud, cheat or swindle another or for any persons to conspire together to accomplish such purpose within the limits of the city. (Prior code §12-8)

9.32.020 Expectoration.
It is unlawful for any person to expectorate or spit or throw cigar stumps, cigarette stumps or quids of tobacco on the floor of any street railway car or other public conveyance or public building or upon any paved sidewalk or paved crosswalk within the city. (Prior code §12-24)

9.32.030 Flooding streets and sidewalks.
Every person who willfully, carelessly or negligently obstructs, injures or floods any street or sidewalk by the flow or seepage of water, or who willfully, carelessly or negligently permits water under his control to escape in any manner so as to obstruct, injure or flood any street or sidewalk, within the limits of the city, is guilty of a misdemeanor. (Prior code §12-26)

9.32.040 Disorderly conduct.
It is unlawful for any person to get on or catch hold of, or to race alongside of, or in front of, or attempt to get on, or catch hold of any street railway car, or any railroad car or locomotive, or any wagon, automobile or other vehicle while the same is in motion, except when required to do so by nature of his occupation. (Prior code §12-36)

9.32.050 Mischievous conduct.
It is unlawful for any person to place upon any track or rail over which cars of any kind or description pass, or over which cars of any description are intended to pass, any cartridge, cap, torpedo or any explosive thing or substance or any obstruction or thing or substance whatsoever. (Prior code §12-37)

9.32.060 Trade in motor vehicles with altered serial numbers.
(Ord. 97-1 §21, repealed, 2000; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000; Prior code §12-38)

9.32.070 Possession of mutilated tires.
It is unlawful for any person to buy, sell, receive, dispose of, conceal or have in his possession any motor vehicle tire or casing from which identification marks have been obliterated or removed, defaced or changed, covered or destroyed, whether in whole or in part. (Prior code §12-39)

9.32.080 Posting bills without permission.
It is unlawful for any person, acting for himself or through an agent, or for such agent, to print, paint, write, or in any way post up any notice, card, advertisement or other device upon any tree, post or pole upon any street at any time or to post any such notice, card, advertisement or other device upon any wall, fence, tree, post, pole, building or other property without the permission of the owner or person in charge thereof. (Prior code §12-44)

9.32.090 Failure to remove election signs.
1. Any person or persons erecting, posting or placing any election sign, banner, notice or handbill supporting any candidate or cause is required by the terms of this section to remove such poster, sign or handbill within five days following the election itself, regardless of whether such sign, banner, or handbill was placed on public or private property. Such person or persons shall remain individually responsible for the removal and proper disposal of such signs, banners, and/or handbills.
2. Any person convicted of violating any of the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof may be punished by a fine not to exceed two hundred ninety-nine dollars ($299) or imprisonment not to exceed six months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. (Ord. 61 §1, amended, 1978)

9.32.100 Failure to keep guest register.
It is unlawful for the keeper of any hotel, boarding house, lodging house, rooming house or motel/trailer park or other public lodging place to fail to keep a register in which such keeper shall require each guest to write his or her name and place of residence before occupying any sleeping or other room; or to fail to enter on such register opposite the name of each guest the number, letter, or other designation of the room assigned to such guest or fail to keep such register open to public inspection at all times until one year after such register shall have been filled. Such register shall be a permanently bound blank book sufficient in size to contain all the information herein provided to be placed in the same. Any person, be he the owner, proprietor, clerk or any other person having regular or temporary charge of any hotel, boarding house, lodging house, rooming house, motel, trailer park or other public lodging place, who shall violate any provisions of this section, shall be deemed guilty of a public offense. (Prior code §12-47)

Chapter 9.36 INCRIMINATING TESTIMONY NOT AN EXCUSE

Sections:
9.36.010     Incriminating testimony not an excuse.

9.36.010 Incriminating testimony not an excuse.
No person shall be excused from attending and testifying or from producing books, papers and documents before any court having jurisdiction of the offenses defined in this chapter, upon the ground, or for the reason that the testimony or evidence, documentary or otherwise, required of him may tend to incriminate him or subject him to a penalty or forfeiture. But no person shall be prosecuted or subjected to any penalty or forfeiture on account of any prosecution, matter or thing concerning which he may produce evidence, documentary or otherwise, before any court as aforesaid. (Prior code §12-76)

Title 10 VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC

Chapters:
10.04        Adoption of Traffic Rules and Regulations
10.08        Uniform Operators and Chauffeurs License Act
10.12        Speed Limits
10.16        Stopping, Standing and Parking
10.18        Street Legal All-Terrain Vehicles
10.20        Stop and Yield Intersections
10.24        Coasting

Chapter 10.04 ADOPTION OF TRAFFIC RULES AND REGULATIONS

Sections:
10.04.010    Adoption of traffic rules and regulations.
10.04.020    Definitions.

10.04.010 Adoption of traffic rules and regulations.
Adoption of Chapter 22 of Title 31A, Part III, consisting of Section 301 through 312, U.C.A., 1953 as amended and constituted in 2004; adoption of Title 41, Chapters 1a, 6, 7, 8, 12a, 21 and 22, U.C.A., 1953 as amended and constituted in 2004; and adoption of Title 53, Chapter 3, U.C.A., 1953 as amended and constituted in 2004.
1. Part III, consisting of sections 301 through 315 of Chapter 22, of Title 31A of U.C.A.,1953 as amended and constituted in 2004, titled “Motor Vehicle Insurance,” is hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the City Code of Lindon City. Where a citation, information, or complaint is issued under Part III of Chapter 22 of Title 31A of Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended, as adopted herein, it shall be sufficient to use the section number of the Utah Code to designate the section number of the City Code which has been violated. Those portions of the above-referenced Utah Code provisions, as adopted herein, referring to or dealing with felonies which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, or punishments associated with felonies which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, are not part of the adopted code of the Lindon City. Those portions of the above-referenced Utah Code provisions which are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the ordinances of the Lindon City referring to or dealing with Class “A” Misdemeanors which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, are hereby specifically excepted, and are not part of the adopted Code of Lindon City.
2. Chapters 1a, 6, 7, 8, 12a, 21, and 22 of Title 41 of U.C.A., 1953 as amended and constituted in 2004, and Chapter 3 of Title 53 of U.C.A., 1953 as amended and constituted in 2004, dealing with motor vehicles and licensing, are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the City Code of Lindon City. Where a citation, information, or complaint is issued under Chapters 1a, 6, 7, 8, 12a, 21, and 22 of Title 41 of Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended, or Chapter 3 of Title 53 of Utah Code Annotated, 1953 as amended, as adopted herein, it shall be sufficient to use the section number of the Utah Code to designate the section number of the City Code which has been violated. Those portions of the above-referenced Utah Code provisions as adopted herein, referring to or dealing with felonies which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, or punishments associated with felonies which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, are not part of the adopted Code of Lindon City. Those portions of the above-referenced Utah Code provisions which are hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the Ordinances of Lindon City referring to or dealing with Class “A” Misdemeanors which are not subject to enforcement by Lindon City, are hereby specifically excepted, and are not part of the adopted Code of Lindon City. (Ord. 95-1, amended, 1995; Ord. 108 §1, amended, 1984; Ord. 2000-15, amended, 2000; Ord. 99-1, amended, 2000)

10.04.020 Definitions.
Unless the context otherwise requires, all references in the foregoing traffic rules and regulations to:
“Department of Public Safety of the state of Utah” means the chief of police of agent; Safety of the state of this municipality or his agent;
“Local authorities” means the governing body of this municipality;
“Magistrate” means the justice of the peace or judge of this municipality;
“State Road Commission” means this municipality and its officers, departments, agencies and agents. (Ord. 108 §2, amended, 1984)

Chapter 10.08 UNIFORM OPERATORS AND CHAUFFEURS LICENSE ACT

Sections:
10.08.010    Adoption of Chapters 1, 6, and 12a of Title 11, U.C.A., 1953 as amended.
10.08.020    Registration of vehicles.
10.08.030    Definitions for Section 10.08.020 as used in Section 10.08.020.
10.08.040    Violation--Penalty.

10.08.010 Adoption of Chapters 1, 6, and 12a of Title 11, U.C.A., 1953 as amended.
1. Chapter 1 of Title 41 of U.C.A., 1953 as amended, titled “Motor Vehicle Act” is hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the city code of the Lindon City. Where a citation or complaint is issued under Chapter 1 of Title 41 of U.C.A., 1953 as amended, as adopted herein, it shall be sufficient to use the section number of the U.C.A. to designate the section number of the city code which has been violated.
2. Chapter 2 of Title 41 of U.C.A., 1953 as amended, titled “Operators License Act” is hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the city code of the Lindon City. Where a citation or complaint is issued under Chapter 2 of Title 41 of U.C.A., 1953 as amended/ as adopted herein, it shall be sufficient to use the section number of the U.C.A. to designate the section number of the city code which has been violated.
3. Chapter 12a of Title 41 of U.C.A., 1953 as amended, titled “Motor Vehicle Financial Responsibility” is hereby adopted and incorporated as part of the city code of the Lindon City. Where a citation or complaint is issued under Chapter 12a of Title 41 of U.C.A., 1953 as amended, as adopted herein, it shall be sufficient to use the section number of the U.C.A. to designate the section number of the city code which has been violated. (Ord. 157 §11, amended, 1987)

10.08.020 Registration of vehicles.
The following acts are prohibited and the commission thereof is declared to be a misdemeanor:
1. To break, injure, interfere with or remove from any vehicle any seal/lock, or device thereof for holding or displaying thereon any registration plate or registration card attached thereto for denoting registration and identity of such vehicle;
2. To remove from any registered vehicle the registration plate or registration card issued or attached thereto in respect to its registration;
3. To place or display any registration plate or card upon any other vehicle than that in respect whereof the same was issued by the motor vehicle division of the Utah State Tax Commission;
4. To use, or permit the use or display of any registration plate, registration card, or permit upon or in the operation of any vehicle other than that for which it was issued;
5. To forge, falsify, counterfeit or alter any plate, card, permit, assignment or other thing or document relating to the registration of or right, title or interest to or in any vehicle subject to registration by the laws of the State of Utah;
6. To operate upon any street in the city any vehicle required by the laws of the State of Utah to be registered without having the registration plate or plates securely attached thereto, and the registration card issued by the motor vehicle division of the State Tax Commission to denote registration thereof securely attached thereto, except that the registration card issued by the motor vehicle division of the State Tax Commission shall be sealed by the motor vehicle division of the State Tax Commission to all trailers and semi-trailers, save in such cases as is by Utah State law expressly excepted;
7. To operate on any street of the city any vehicle required by law to be registered without having previously paid the registration fee or tax required by the laws of the State of Utah in respect thereof;
8. For any person to combine, conspire or confederate with another or others to do, attempt to do, or cause or suffer to be done any of the acts or things prohibited by this section;
9. To operate any motor vehicle with a camper mounted on it upon any street in the city without displaying a current decal in plain sight upon the rear of the camper, issued by the county assessor of the county in which the camper has situs for taxation. (Ord. 157 §11, amended, 1987; Ord. 97 §2, amended, 1983)

10.08.030 Definitions for Section 10.08.020 as used in Section 10.08.020.
“Motor vehicle” is defined as every vehicle which is self-propelled and every vehicle which is propelled by electric power obtained from overhead trolley wires, but not operated upon rails;
“Vehicle” is defined as every device in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, excepting devices moved by human power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 97 §2, amended, 1983)

10.08.040 Violation--Penalty.
Any person violating, causing or permitting a violation of any provision of this Chapter or the provisions adopted or incorporated by reference shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor, unless another penalty is expressly provided. Each day a violation of this Chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 93-9, amended, 1993; Ord. 97 §3, amended, 1983)

Chapter 10.12 SPEED LIMITS

Sections:
10.12.010    Prima facie speed limits.

10.12.010 Prima facie speed limits.
1. When appropriate traffic control or regulatory signs giving notice of speeds are posted, the prima facie maximum speed limits designated upon such signs shall apply to the appropriate streets or portions of streets so posted.
2. In the absence of any speed limit sign designating a speed limit applicable thereto, the prima facie speed limit shall be:
    a. Twenty-five (25) miles per hour in any urban district. “Urban District” means the territory contiguous to and including any street on which structures devoted to business, industry, or dwelling houses are situated at intervals of less than one hundred (100) feet for a distance of a quarter of a mile or more;
    b. Forty (40) miles per hour in other locations. (Ord. 93-9, amended, 1993; Ord. 108 §, amended, 1984; Ord. 99-2, amended, 2000)

Chapter 10.16 STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING

Sections:
10.16.010    Parking of vehicles.
10.16.020    Standing or parking vehicles-Restrictions and exceptions.
10.16.030    Parking in alleys.
10.16.040    Overnight parking.
10.16.050    Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
10.16.060    Parking adjacent to schools.
10.16.070    Parking on narrow streets prohibited.
10.16.080    Parking in safety path prohibited.
10.16.090    Standing or parking on one-way roadways.
10.16.100    Parking near hazardous places.
10.16.110    Parking to be close to the curb.
10.16.120    Angle parking--Designation authority.
10.16.130    Obedience to signs and markings.
10.16.140    Parking vehicles prohibited after notice.
10.16.150    Moving parked vehicles required after notice.
10.16.160    Moving parked vehicles because of public necessity.
10.16.170    Parking time limit.
10.16.180    Stopping for loading-- Authority to designate zones.
10.16.190    Permits for curb loading zones.
10.16.200    Loading or unloading at angle-permits.
10.16.210    Standing in passenger curb loading zone prohibited.
10.16.220    Standing in freight curb loading zone.
10.16.230    Public carrier stops and stands.
10.16.240    Parking buses and taxicabs.
10.16.250    Restricted use of bus, taxicab stands.
10.16.260    Parking or storage of commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, and trailers in a residential zone.
10.16.270    Authority to abate nuisance.
10.16.280    Notice to owner.
10.16.290    Procedure for owner to claim vehicle.
10.16.300    Unclaimed vehicles-- Advertisement and auction.
10.16.310    Payment of proceeds of sale to owner.
10.16.320    Record of impoundment and disposal.
10.16.330    Impound not a bar to prosecution.
10.16.340    Separate violation.
10.16.350    Description of vehicles.
10.16.360    Definitions in this chapter.
10.16.370    Parking Violation-Penalties.
10.16.380    Notice required.

10.16.010 Parking of vehicles.
Except when necessary to comply with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person or owner, shall stop, stand, park, or permit to be parked, a vehicle upon any street in the Lindon City in violation of the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.020 Standing or parking vehicles-Restrictions and exceptions.
Except where necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall:
1. Stop, stand or park a vehicle:
    a. on the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge or curb of a street;
    b. on a sidewalk;
    c. within an intersection;
    d. on a crosswalk;
    e. between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within thirty feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings;
    f. alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic;
    g. upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel;
    h. on any railroad tracks;
    i. on any controlled-access highway;
    j. in the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers;
    k. any place where official traffic-controlled devices prohibit stopping.
2. Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers:
    a. in front of a public or private driveway;
    b. within fifteen feet of a fire hydrant;
    c. within twenty feet of a crosswalk at an intersection;
    d. within thirty feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway;
    e. within twenty feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station and on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within seventy-five feet of said entrance when property signposted;
    f. at any place where official traffic-control devices prohibit standing.
3. Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers:
    a. within fifty feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing;
    b. at any place where official traffic-control devices prohibit parking.
4. No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under such person's control into any prohibited area or an unlawful distance from the curb. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000)

10.16.030 Parking in alleys.
No person shall park a vehicle within an alley in such a manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten (10) feet of the width of the roadway for the free movement of vehicular traffic, and no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle within an alley in such position as to block the driveway entrance to any abutting property. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.040 Overnight parking.
No person shall park any vehicle on any city street where the pavement runs from curb to curb, or within five feet of any paved surface where there is no constructed curb, between the hours of four a.m. and four p.m. from the period of November 1st through March 15th of the following year. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.050 Parking for certain purposes prohibited.
No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway or roadside for the principal purpose of:
1. Displaying such vehicle for sale;
2. Greasing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by an emergency;
3. Storage of such vehicle. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.060 Parking adjacent to schools.
1. The city administrator and the chief of police together, are authorized to cause to be erected signs indicating no parking upon either or both sides of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in their opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation.
2. When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon either side of a street adjacent to any school property as authorized in this chapter, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.070 Parking on narrow streets prohibited.
1. The city administrator and the chief of police together, are authorized to cause to be erected signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed twenty (20) feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet.
2. When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon such street in violation of any such sign. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.080 Parking in safety path prohibited.
Except when necessary to comply with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic control device, no person or owner shall stop, stand, park, or permit to be parked, a vehicle within or on any designated safety path, or in such a manner as to obstruct a safety path. For the purpose of this section a safety path shall include all areas marked for pedestrian traffic and all marked pedestrian lanes along city streets. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.090 Standing or parking on one-way roadways.
In the event a street is a one-way street or a street includes two or more separate roadways and traffic is restricted to one direction upon any such roadway, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon the left-hand side of such one-way roadway unless signs are erected to permit such standing or parking. The city administrator and the chief of police together are to determine when standing or parking may be permitted upon the left-hand side on any such one-way roadway and to cause to be erected signs giving notice thereof. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.100 Parking near hazardous places.
1. The city administrator and the chief of police together are authorized to determine and cause to be designated by proper signs, places not exceeding one hundred (100) feet in length in which the stopping or standing of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic.
2. When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places as authorized in this chapter no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle in any such designated place. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.110 Parking to be close to the curb.
Except as otherwise provided in this chapter every vehicle stopped or parked upon a roadway where there are adjacent curbs shall be so stopped or parked with the right-hand wheels of such vehicle parallel to and within 18 inches of the right-hand curb. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.120 Angle parking--Designation authority.
1. Signs or markings. The city administrator and the chief of police together, shall determine upon what streets angle parking shall be permitted and shall cause to be marked or cause to be erected signs on such streets but such angle parking shall not be indicated upon any federal-aid or state highway within the city unless the State Road Commission has determined by resolution or under order entered in its minutes that the roadway is of sufficient width to permit angle parking without interfering with the free movement of traffic.
2. Angle parking shall not be indicated or permitted at any place where passing traffic would thereby be caused or required to drive upon the left side of the street or upon any street side shoulder.
3. Except where official signs are erected to allow angle parking, no person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle by angle parking. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.130 Obedience to signs and markings.
It shall be unlawful to disobey signs erected by the city which prohibit parking or regulate the hours thereof.
Where lines are painted on the roadway to indicate the angle at which a vehicle shall be parked, it shall be unlawful to park a vehicle except as indicated. It shall also be unlawful to park in violation of curb marking designated by the city. Such curb markings shall have the following meanings:
1. Red. No stopping, standing or parking at any time.
2. Yellow. With the words “Restricted Zone” stenciled thereon, shall mean no stopping, standing or parking except as stated on the signs or markings giving notice thereof, except that this provision shall not apply on Sundays and legal holidays. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.140 Parking vehicles prohibited after notice.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on a public street after notice from the city that during specific dates and times parking is not permitted along such streets. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.150 Moving parked vehicles required after notice.
It shall be unlawful to allow any vehicle to remain parked on a public street after notice from the city to move such vehicle. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.160 Moving parked vehicles because of public necessity.
The city may move or impound any parked vehicle if public necessity so requires and notice to the owner is not practicable under the circumstances. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.170 Parking time limit.
It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle or trailer in the same location on a public street for a continuous period of time exceeding 48 hours. At the end of the permitted period of time, the vehicle or trailer must be removed from its location and shall not be permitted to re-locate on any public street within the city limits for a period of an additional fort-eight (48) hours. (Ord. 2007, amended, 2007; Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.180 Stopping for loading-- Authority to designate zones.
The city administrator and the chief of police together, are authorized to determine the location of passenger and freight curb loading zones and shall cause to be placed and maintained appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of this section are applicable. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 § 4, amended, 1984)

10.16.190 Permits for curb loading zones.
The city administrator and the chief of police together shall not hereafter designate or sign any curb loading zone upon special request of any person unless such person makes application for a permit of such zone and for two signs to indicate the ends of each such zone. The city administrator and the chief of police together, upon granting a permit and issuing such signs shall collect from the applicant and deposit in the city treasury a service fee of $20 per year or fraction thereof and may by general regulation impose conditions upon the use of such signs and for reimbursement of the city for the value thereof in the event of their loss or damage and their return in the event of misuse or upon expiration of permit. Every such permit shall expire at the end of one year. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.200 Loading or unloading at angle-permits.
1. The city administrator and the chief of police together are authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or material subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized in this chapter.
2. It is unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.210 Standing in passenger curb loading zone prohibited.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or period of time other than for the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers in any place marked as a passenger curb loading zone during hours when the regulations applicable to such curb loading zone are effective, and then only for a period not to exceed three minutes. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.220 Standing in freight curb loading zone.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pickup and loading of materials in any place marked as a freight curb loading zone during hours when the provisions applicable to such zones are in effect. In no case shall the stop for loading and unloading of material exceed 30 minutes. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.230 Public carrier stops and stands.
The city administrator and the chief of police together are authorized and required to establish bus stops, bus stands, taxicab stands and stands for other passenger common-carrier motor vehicles on such public streets in such places and in such manner as they shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public, and every bus stop, bus stand, taxicab stand, or other stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.240 Parking buses and taxicabs.
1. The operator of a bus shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than a bus stand so designated as provided herein.
2. The operator of a bus shall not stop such vehicle upon any street at any place for the purpose of loading or unloading passengers or their baggage other than a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone so designated as provided in this chapter, except in case of an emergency.
3. The operator of a bus shall enter a bus stop, bus stand, or passenger loading zone on a public street in such a manner that the bus when stopped to load or unload passengers or baggage shall be in a position with the right front wheel of such vehicle not further than 18 inches from the curb and the bus approximately parallel to the curb so as not to unduly impede the movement of other vehicular traffic.
4. The operator of a taxicab shall not stand or park such vehicle upon any street at any place other than in a taxicab stand or designated as provided herein. This provision shall not prevent the operator of a taxicab from temporarily stopping in accordance with other stopping or parking regulations at any place for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of passengers.
5. This section shall not apply to school buses while temporarily stopped for the purpose of and while actually engaged in the expeditious loading or unloading of students, unless otherwise provided by appropriate signs. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.250 Restricted use of bus, taxicab stands.
No person shall stop, stand, or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop or other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand when such stop or stand has been officially designated and appropriately signed, except that the driver of a passenger vehicle may temporarily stop therein for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading passengers when such stopping does not interfere with any bus or taxicab waiting to enter or about to enter such zone. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.260 Parking or storage of commercial vehicles, recreational vehicles, boats, and trailers in a residential zone.
1. Commercial Vehicles. 
    a. It is considered unlawful for any person to park or store any ‘commercial vehicle’ on a public street in residential areas. Off street, the vehicles shall be located behind a six foot sight obscuring fence, or within an enclosed structure, and shall not be stored within the front 30 foot setback area. For the purpose of this ordinance a ‘commercial vehicle’ is defined as, “A motor vehicle, trailer, or semi-trailer used or maintained for the transportation of persons or property that operates: a), as a carrier for hire, compensation or profit; or b) as a carrier to transport the vehicle owner’s goods or property in furtherance of the owner’s commercial enterprise, or c) Any vehicle exceeding 25' in length.” Below are exceptions to the standards and definition listed above for vehicle storage in residential areas:
        i. Any agricultural vehicle or associated tractor or agricultural implement not parked on the street, but located on the property behind the 30' front setback.
        ii. Recreational vehicles (RVs) of any length or size, but located on the property behind the 30 foot front setback.
        iii. School buses, except that said buses shall not be parked on the street overnight.
        iv. Any passenger vehicles, including ‘pick-up trucks’ less than twenty-five (25) feet long that are used for personal commercial, or agricultural use - regardless of its rated load capacity.
        v. Any vehicle actively involved in permitted construction, landscaping, or development of the property.
        vi. Vehicles associated with a state of emergency at the site or area.
        vii. Any vehicle involved in temporary parking for dropping off, moving in, deliveries, or similar temporary uses.
2. Recreational Vehicles, Boats and Trailers. The parking and storing of recreational vehicles (RVs), boats, trailers, and other similar recreational vehicles in residential areas is permitted provided the following conditions are met:
    a. The storage of these vehicles shall not be located in the front 30' of the property.
    b. The vehicles shall not be parked in a public street for more than 48 hours as required under LCC Section 10.16.170. (Ord. 2007-15, amended, 2007; Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.270 Authority to abate nuisance.
Any vehicle parked in violation of any provision of this chapter is hereby declared a nuisance and detrimental to the safe and proper regulation of traffic. The same may be summarily abated by removing any vehicle by or under the direction or at the request of the city or a police officer to a place of storage by means of towing or otherwise. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.280 Notice to owner.
As soon as is reasonable under the circumstances, a written notice that a vehicle has been impounded and will be sold after 30 days if not claimed shall be mailed to the owner of said vehicle impounded and any recorded lien holder thereof at their last known mailing address as shown by the records of the Motor Vehicle Division of the Utah State Tax Commission. If the license plates on the vehicle are from another state, a request shall be made of the department of motor vehicles in such other state to notify the registered owner and lien holder of the impounded vehicle that said vehicle has been impounded and that the same will be sold at public auction as provided by this chapter, if not claimed by the owner or his or her proper representative. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.290 Procedure for owner to claim vehicle.
Before the owner or his agent shall be permitted to remove a vehicle which has been impounded he or she shall:
1. Furnish satisfactory evidence of his or her identity;
2. Request and obtain a written order from the police department authorizing the place of storage where the vehicle is impounded to release the vehicle to the owner upon payment of reasonable towing and storage charges actually incurred in the towing and storage of the vehicle from the date of impound to the time of presentment of the order of release from the police department; and
3. Sign a written receipt for the vehicle and deliver the same to the place of storage upon receiving the impounded vehicle. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.300 Unclaimed vehicles-- Advertisement and auction.
If, at the expiration of 30 days after mailing the notice provided for in section 10.16.280, an impounded vehicle is not redeemed by the owner or his or her agent, the chief of police or his or her agent shall proceed to sell the same at public auction to the highest bidder after first giving at least 10 days’ notice of sale by publishing the notice at least once in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. Said notice shall describe the vehicle to be sold with reasonable certainty and shall, if known, state the name of the owner and lien holder, as shown on the records of the office of the Motor Vehicle Division of the State Tax Commission. A copy of said notice shall be mailed to the last known address of the owner and all recorded lien holders. Any money received from the sale shall be first applied to the actual cost of towing and storage of the impounded vehicle, then to pay the cost of advertising and conducting the notice of sale, and the balance, if any, shall be paid into the city treasury. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.310 Payment of proceeds of sale to owner.
At any time within one year from the date of sale of any impounded vehicle, the former owner of the said vehicle may appear and make a claim, and upon application to the city council and upon presentation of satisfactory proof that he or she was the owner of the vehicle, said person shall be paid the proceeds of the sale less the necessary expenses thereof, including towing, impounding, storage, advertising, and other similar charges. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.320 Record of impoundment and disposal.
Beginning with the date of impoundment and for one year after the sale of any impounded vehicle, the police department shall keep a record of the vehicle impounded by manufacturer's name or make, body type, and license number, the names and addresses of all owners and lien holder of the vehicle, the nature and circumstances of the impounding and sale, the name and address of the purchaser at the sale, together with other related information as the police department may choose to record. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.330 Impound not a bar to prosecution.
The impounding of a vehicle shall not prevent or preclude the institution and prosecution of criminal proceedings. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.340 Separate violation.
Each day that a vehicle is parked in violation of the provisions of this chapter shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.350 Description of vehicles.
Vehicles for the purpose of this chapter are defined as, but not limited to, automobiles, trucks, trailers, buses, campers, mobile homes, motor homes, travel trailers, boats, motorcycles, snowmobiles, or any other objects used or capable of being used for transportation purposes whether for the transportation of humans, animals, or freight of any kind. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 § 4, amended, 1984)

10.16.360 Definitions in this chapter.
For purposes of this chapter, street, road, roadway, or roadside includes the entire right-of-way of a city street. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984)

10.16.370 Parking Violation-Penalties.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750). (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 §4, amended, 1984; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000)

10.16.380 Notice required.
Unless otherwise specified, any notice required or allowed by this chapter shall be sufficient if made in a manner reasonably calculated to give actual notice to interested persons. (Ord. 2-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 8-92, amended, 1992; Ord. 108 § 4, amended, 1984)

Chapter 10.18 STREET LEGAL ALL-TERRAIN VEHICLES

Sections:
10.18.010    Definitions.
10.18.020    Authorized Locations for Use.
10.18.030    Excluded Public Streets and Highways.
10.18.040    Legal Requirements of a Street Legal All-Terrain Vehicle Operator.
10.18.050    Legal Requirements of a Street Legal All-Terrain Vehicle.
10.18.060    Lawful Crossing of Excluded Public Streets and Highways.

10.18.010 Definitions.
“ATV” means an all-terrain vehicle.
“Operator” means any person who is in actual physical control of an off-highway vehicle.
“Public Street or Highway” means the entire width of the street or highway, between boundary lines of every way or place, when any part of it is open to the use of the public for vehicular travel.
“Street Legal ATV.” These ATV types are defined as follows:
    a. “All-terrain Type I Vehicle” (ATV) means any motor vehicle 52 inches or less in width, having an unladen dry weight of 1,500 pounds or less, traveling on three or more low pressure tires, having a seat designed to be straddled by the operator, and designed for or capable of travel over unimproved terrain.
    b. “Utility Type Vehicle” (UTV) means any recreational vehicle designed for and capable of travel over unimproved terrain, traveling on four or more tires, having a width of thirty to seventy inches, having an unladen dry weight of 2,200 pounds or less, having a seat height of twenty-five to forty inches when measured at the forward edge of the seat bottom, and having side by side seating with a steering wheel for control. “Utility type vehicle” does not include an all-terrain type I vehicle, an all-terrain type II vehicle, a motorcycle, or a snowmobile.
    c. Not included under this definition are motorcycles, snowmobiles, golf carts, vehicles designed to carry disabled persons, or any other vehicle that is not specifically designed for recreational use.

10.18.020 Authorized Locations for Use.
In accordance with Utah Code §41-22-10.5 and §41-6a-1509 as presently constituted or as amended from time to time, off-road vehicles legally identified as “street-legal all-terrain vehicles (ATVs)” may be operated on all non-excluded public streets and highways within the jurisdictional boundaries of Lindon City. See Section 10.18.03 for list of Excluded Public Streets and Highways not authorized for ATV use.

10.18.030 Excluded Public Streets and Highways.
1. All public streets and highways identified as a controlled-access highway are excluded from Section 10.18.020. Except for lawful crossing, ATV use is not permitted on controlled-access highways.
2. As used in this Section, “controlled-access highway” means a highway, street, or roadway:
    a. designed primarily for through traffic;
    b. to or from which owners or occupants of abutting lands and other persons have no legal right of access, except at points as determined by the highway authority having jurisdiction over the highway, street, or roadway; and
    c. specifically identified as:
        i. Geneva Road (SR 114);
        ii. any other public street or highway in which the posted speed limit is greater than 45 miles per hour; and
        iii. any future street or highway designated as “limited access” by Lindon City or by the State of Utah.

10.18.040 Legal Requirements of a Street Legal All-Terrain Vehicle Operator.
Any operator of a Street-legal ATV must:
1. adhere to all traffic rules set forth in Utah Code Chapter 41-6a;
2. be at least 16 years of age and have a valid driver’s license in accordance with Utah Code Chapter 54-3.3; and
3. obtain and provide upon request motor vehicle insurance in accordance with Utah Code Chapter § 41-12a.

10.18.050 Legal Requirements of a Street Legal All-Terrain Vehicle.
Per Utah Code §41-6a-1509(a)—(b), all Street Legal ATVs shall comply with the following requirements:
1. be legally registered with the State of Utah in accordance with Utah Code Chapter 41-1a;
2. pass emissions and inspections in accordance with Utah Code Chapter 41-6a; and
3. be properly and safely equipped with all of the following:
    a. one or more headlamps in accordance with Utah Code §41-6a-1603;
    b. one or more tail lamps;
    c. a tail lamp or other lamp constructed and placed to illuminate the registration plate with a white light;
    d. one or more red reflectors on the rear;
    e. one or more stop lamps on the rear;
    f. amber or red electric turn signals, one on each side of the front and rear;
    g. a braking system, other than a parking brake, that meets the requirements of Utah Code §41-6a-1623;
    h. a horn or other mechanical sound-producing device that meets the requirements of Utah Code § 41-6a 1625;
    i. a muffler and emission control system that meets the requirements of Utah Code § 41-6a-1626;
    j. rearview mirrors on the right and left side of the driver in accordance with Utah Code § 41-6a-1627 (a type I ATV requires only a left side mirror and Type II or UTVs require both a left side and right side mirror—see 13.03.01(1));
    k. a windshield, unless the operator wears eye protection, such as goggles or a face shield, while operating the vehicle;
    l. a speedometer, illuminated for nighttime operation;
    m. protective headgear that is properly fitted and fastened for all operators and passengers who are under the age of 18; and
    n. for vehicles with side-by-side seating, seatbelts for each vehicle, and tires that:
        i. do not exceed twenty-six inches in height;
        ii. are not larger than the tires the all-terrain vehicle manufacturer made available for the all-terrain vehicle model; and
        iii. have at least 2/32 inches or greater tire tread.

10.18.060 Lawful Crossing of Excluded Public Streets and Highways.
In accordance with Utah Code § 41-6a-1509, an operator of a Street Legal All-Terrain Vehicle may only cross excluded public streets or highways in the following manner:
1. prior to crossing, the Street Legal ATV shall be equipped with a reflector or reflective tape;
2. when crossing, the Street Legal ATV must come to a complete stop, proceed only after yielding the right-of-way to oncoming traffic, and proceed at a right angle; and
3. after crossing, the operator of a Street Legal ATV shall operate the vehicle on the extreme right hand side roadway so as to not interfere with traffic. (Ord. 2013-9, adopted, 2013)

Chapter 10.20 STOP AND YIELD INTERSECTIONS

Sections:
10.20.010    Through streets.

10.20.010 Through streets.
When appropriate traffic control or regulatory signs are posted at entrances to intersections identifying them as stop or yield entrances, such streets are declared to be stop entrances and yield entrances as designated by such signs. (Ord. 108 §5, amended, 1984)

Chapter 10.24 COASTING

Sections:
10.24.010    Prohibited on streets.

10.24.010 Prohibited on streets.
It is unlawful for any person to coast or slide with any sled, sleigh, toboggan or vehicle upon any public street, avenue, sidewalk or alley within the city; provided, however, that the city council, by public notice or proclamation, may authorize the use of certain streets for coasting during the winter season. During the period for which such notice or proclamation shall be issued coasting and sliding upon such streets as may be designated by the proclamation or notice shall be permissible. (Prior code §12-9)

Title 11 IMPACT FEES

Chapters:
11.04        Impact Fees
11.05        Parks, Recreation and Trails Facilities Impact Fees
11.08        Lindon City Storm Water Impact Fee Ordinance
11.12        Impact Fees for Roadway Facilities
11.13        Lindon City Public Safety Impact Fees Ordinance

Chapter 11.04 IMPACT FEES

Sections:
11.04.010    Purpose.
11.04.020    Definitions.
11.04.030    Impact Fee Analysis.
11.04.040    Impact Fee Calculations.
11.04.050    Impact Fee Schedules.
11.04.060    Fee Exceptions and Adjustments.
11.04.070    Appeal Procedure.
11.04.080    Miscellaneous.

11.04.010 Purpose.
This Impact Fee Policy is promulgated pursuant to the requirements of the Impact Fees Act, Utah Code Annotated §11-36-101-401 (the “Act”). This ordinance establishes impact fees within the City-wide Service Area, describes certain capital improvements to be funded through impact fees and provides a schedule of impact fees for differing types of land-use development, and sets forth direction for challenging and appealing impact fees.

11.04.020 Definitions.
Words and phrases that are defined in the Act shall have the same definition in this Impact Fee Policy. The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
“Capital Facilities Plan” means the plan required by Section 11-36-201 of the Act. In Section 11-36-201(2)(e) there is an exception to the Capital Facilities Plan for Cities of 5,000 or less in population, based on the latest counts. The City of Lindon does not meet this exception, therefore, they have completed a comprehensive Capital Facilities Plan for culinary water, wastewater and parks and recreation facilities in accordance with the Act and adopted on August 20, 2002 as included in Exhibit B.
“Development activity” means any construction or expansion of building, structure or use, any change in use of building or structure, or any change in the use of land that creates additional demand and need for public facilities. Development activity will include residential and commercial users who will connect to the City’s water and wastewater systems and will utilize the City’s parks and recreation systems.
“Development approval” means any written authorization from the City that authorizes the commencement of development activity.
“City” means a local political subdivision of the State of Utah and is referred to herein as Lindon City (the “City”).
“Impact fee” means a payment of money imposed upon development activity as a condition of development approval. “Impact fee” includes development impact fees, but does not include a tax, a special assessment, a hookup fee, a building permit fee, a fee for project improvements, or other reasonable permit or application fees.
“Project improvements” means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for development resulting from a development activity and are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupant or users of development resulting from a development activity. “Project improvements” do not include “system improvements” as defined below.
“Proportionate share” of the cost of public facilities improvements means an amount that is roughly proportionate and reasonably related to the service demand and needs of a development activity.
“Public facilities” means Culinary Water, Wastewater and Parks and Recreation improvements of the City for the City-wide Service Area.
“Service area” refers to the geographic area designated by the City based on sound planning or engineering principles in which a defined set of the City’s public facilities provides service. The service area for purposes of the City-wide Impact Fee Analysis includes all areas within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City (Exhibit A: Map of the Lindon City-wide Service Area).
“System improvements” refer to both existing public facilities designed to provide services within the Lindon City-wide Service Area and to future public facilities identified in reasonable plan for capital improvements adopted by the City that are intended to provide service to the Lindon City-wide Service Area. “System improvements” do not include “Project improvements” as defined above.

11.04.030 Impact Fee Analysis.
1. Executive Summary. A summary of the findings of the Written Impact Fee Analysis that is designed to be understood by a lay person is included in Exhibit C and demonstrates the need for impact fees to be charged to fairly show costs related to capital infrastructure. A copy of the Executive Summary is included in the Impact Fee Analysis and has been available for public inspection prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
2. Written Analysis. The City has prepared a Written Analysis for the Culinary Water, Wastewater and Parks and Recreation impact fees that identifies the impact upon the individual systems required by the development activity and demonstrates how those impact on system improvements are reasonably related to the development activity, estimates the proportionate share of the costs of impact on system improvements that are reasonably related to the development activity and identifies how the impact fees are calculated. A copy of the Written Analysis is includes in the Impact Fee Study and has been available for public inspection prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
3. Proportionate Share Analysis. The City has prepared a Proportionate Share Analysis analyzing whether or not the proportionate share of the costs of public facilities is reasonably related to the new development activity. The Proportionate Share Analysis identifies the costs of existing public facilities, the manner of financing existing public facilities, the relative extent to which new development will contribute to the cost of existing facilities and the extent to which new development is entitle to a credit for payment toward the costs of new facilities from general taxation or other means apart from user charges in other parts of the City. A copy of the Proportionate Share Analysis is included in the Impact Fee Study and has been available for public inspection prior to the adoption of this ordinance.

11.04.040 Impact Fee Calculations.
1. Ordinance Enacting Impact Fees. The City Council will, by this ordinance, approve an impact fee in accordance with the impact fee analyses set forth in Exhibit C: Lindon City-wide Impact Fee Analysis.
    a. Elements. In calculating the impact fee, the City has included the construction costs, land acquisition costs, costs of improvements, fees for planning, surveying, and engineering services provided for and directly related to the construction of system improvements, and debt service charges if the City might use impact fees as a revenue stream to pay principal and interest on bonds or other obligations to finance the cost of system improvements.
    b. Notice and Hearing. Before approving the ordinance, the City will hold a public hearing on August 20, 2002, and make a copy of the ordinance available to the public at least fourteen (14) days before the date of the hearing, all in conformity with the requirements of Utah Code Annotated 10-9-103(2). After the public hearing, the City Council may adopt or reject the impact fee ordinance as proposed or amend the impact fee ordinance and adopt or reject it as amended.
    c. Adjustments. The standard impact fee may be adjusted at the time the fee is charged in response to unusual circumstances or to fairly allocate costs associated with impacts created by a development activity or project. The standard impact fee may also be adjusted to insure that impact fees are imposed fairly for affordable housing projects, in accordance with the local government’s affordable housing policy, and other development activities with broad public purposes.
    d. Previously Incurred Costs. To the extent that the new growth and development will be served by previously constructed improvements, the City’s impact fee may include public facility costs and bond costs related to the culinary water, wastewater and parks and recreation improvements and previously incurred by the City. These costs may include all projects included in the reasonable capital projects plan which are under construction or completed but have not been utilized to their capacity, as evidenced by outstanding debt obligations.
2. Developer Credits. Development may be allowed a credit against impact fees for any dedication or improvement to land or new construction of system improvements provided by the developer provided that it is (i) identified in the City’s Capital Facilities Plans and (ii) required by the City as a condition of approving the development activity. Otherwise, no credit may be allowed unless expressly provided in Section 11.04.060 below.
3. Impact Fees Accounting. The City will establish separate interest-bearing ledger accounts for each type of public facility for which an impact fee promulgated in accordance with the requirements of the Impact Fees Act deposited in the appropriate ledger account. Interest earned on each fund or account shall be segregated to that account. Impact fees collected prior to the effective date of this Ordinance need not meet the requirements of this section.
    a. Reporting. At the end of each fiscal year, the City shall prepare a report on each fund or account generally showing the source and amount of all monies collected, earned and received by the fund or account and each expenditure from the fund or account.
    b. Impact Fee Expenditures. The City may expend impact fees covered by this Impact Fees Policy only for system improvements that are (i) public facilities identified in the City’s reasonable capital projects plans and (ii) of the specific public facility types for which the fee was collected.
    c. Time of Expenditure. Impact fees collected pursuant to the requirements of this Impact Fees Policy are to be expended, dedicated or encumbered for permissible use within six years of the receipt of those funds by the City, unless the City Council otherwise directs. For purposes of this calculation, the first funds received shall be deemed to be the first funds expended.
    d. Extension of Time. The City may hold previously dedicated or unencumbered fees for longer than six years if it identifies in writing (i) an extraordinary and compelling reason why the fees should be held longer than six years and (ii) an absolute date by which the fees will be expended.
4. Refunds. The City shall refund any impact fees paid by a developer, plus interest actually earned when (i) the developer does not proceed with the development activity and files a written request for a refund; (ii) the fees have not been spent or encumbered; and (iii) no impact has resulted. An impact that would preclude a developer from a refund from the City may include any impact reasonably identified by the City, including, but not limited to, the City having sized facilities and/or paid for, installed and/or caused the installation of facilities based, in whole or in part, upon the Developer’s planned development activity even though that capacity may, at some future time, be utilized by another development.
5. Other Impact Fees. To the extent allowed by law, the City Council may negotiate or otherwise impose impact fees and other fees different from those currently charged. Those charges may, in the discretion of the City Council, include, but not be limited to, reductions or increases in impact fees, all or part of which may be reimbursed to the developer who installed improvements that service the land to be connected with the City’s system.
6. Additional Fees and Costs. The impact fees authorized hereby are separate from and in addition to user fees and other charges lawfully imposed by the City, an other fees and costs that may not be included as itemized component parts of the Impact Fee Schedule. In charging any such fees as a condition of development approval, the City recognizes that the fees must be a reasonable charge for the service provided.
7. Fees Effective at Time of Payment. Unless the City is otherwise bound by a contractual requirement, the impact fee shall be determined from the fee schedule in effect at the time of payment in accordance with the provisions of Section 11.04.060 below.
8. Imposition of Additional Fee or Refund After Development. Should any developer undertake development activities such that the ultimate density or other impact of the development activity is not revealed to the City, either through inadvertence, neglect, a change in plans, or any other cause whatsoever, and/or the impact fee is not initially charged against all units or the total density within the development, the City shall be entitled to charge an additional impact fee to the developer or other appropriate person covering the density for which an impact fee was not previously paid.

11.04.050 Impact Fee Schedules.
+------------------+-----------------+------------+
| Water Meter Size | Equivalent ERUs | Impact Fee |
+------------------+-----------------+------------+
| 1"               | 1.0             | $1,557     |
+------------------+-----------------+------------+
| 1 ½”             | 1.70            | $2,647     |
+------------------+-----------------+------------+
| 2"               | 2.40            | $3,737     |
+------------------+-----------------+------------+
| 3"               | 6.40            | $9,964     |
+------------------+-----------------+------------+
| 4"               | 14.30           | $22,264    |
+------------------+-----------------+------------+
+------------------+--------+
| Development Type |  Fee   |
+------------------+--------+
| 1 ERU2           | $1,086 |
+------------------+--------+
1Per equivalent residential unit, with the exception of accessory apartments.
2An equivalent Residential Unit is a base of 30 fixture units or a single family unit.
+-----------------------------------------+-----------------------------+
|            Development Type             |         Impact Fee          |
+-----------------------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Single Family Dwelling Units (Detached) | $4,500.00 per Dwelling Unit |
+-----------------------------------------+-----------------------------+
| Other Residential Units                 | $1,500.00 per Dwelling Unit |
+-----------------------------------------+-----------------------------+

11.04.060 Fee Exceptions and Adjustments.
1. Waiver for “Public Purpose.” The City Council may, on a project by project basis, authorize exceptions or adjustments to the Impact Fee rate structure for those projects the City Council determines to be of such benefit to the community as a whole to justify the exception or adjustment. This option is available to: (i) respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases, (ii) ensure that the impact fees are imposed fairly and (iii) exempt low income housing and other development activities from impact fees and establish one of more sources of funds other than impact fees to pay for the development activity, and (iv) induce certain development that will generate sales, tax, property tax or franchise tax in an amount sufficient to defray a fair cost of the infrastructure being provided.
    a. Procedures. Applications for exceptions are to be filed with the City at the time the applicant first requests the extension of service to the applicant’s development or property.

11.04.070 Appeal Procedure.
1. Application. The appeal procedure applies both to challenges to the legality of impact fees, to similar and related fees of the City and to the interpretation and/or application of those fees. By way of illustration, in addition to the legality of the impact fee schedule, determinations of the density of a development activity or calculation of the amount of the impact fee due will also be subject to this appeal procedure.
2. Declaratory Judgment Action. Any person or entity residing in or owning property within the city and any organization, association or corporation representing the interests of persons or entities owning property within the City may file a declaratory judgment action challenging the validity of an impact fee only after having first exhausted their administrative remedies of this Section.
3. Request for Information Concerning the Fee. Any person or entity required to pay an impact fee may file a written request for information concerning the fee with the City. The City will provide the person with the impact fee analysis and other information relating to the impact fee within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the request for information.
4. Appeal to the City Before Payment of the Impact Fee. Affected or potentially affected person or entity wishing to challenge an impact fee prior to payment may file a written request for information concerning the fee and proceed under the appeal procedure.
5. Appeal to the City After Payment of the Impact Fee; Statue of Limitations for Failure to File. Any person or entity that has paid an impact fee and wishes to challenge the fee shall file a written request for information concerning the fee within thirty (30) days after having paid the fee and proceed under the City’s appeal procedure. If thirty (30)days has passed after payment of the impact fee and a written request for information or challenge has not been filed with the City, the person or entity is barred from filing an administrative appeal with the City or seeking judicial relief.
6. Appeal to the City. Any developer, landowner or affected party desiring to challenge the legality of any impact fee or related fee or exaction may appeal directly to the City Council by filing a written challenge with the City, provided that the affected party does so in writing within thirty (30) days after the action or decision to which the appeal relates. If no written challenge is filed with the City within the said thirty (30) day’s period, the affected party may neither process an administrative appeal with the City nor seek judicial relief.
    a. Hearing. An informal hearing will be held not sooner than five (5) nor more than twenty-five (25) days after a written appeal to the City Council is filed.
    b. Decision. After the conclusion of the informal hearing, the City Council, by majority vote, shall affirm, reverse, or take action with respect to the challenge or appeal as the City Council deems to be appropriate in light of the City’s policies and procedures and any applicable law, rule or regulation. The decision of the City Council may include the establishment of calculation of the impact fee applicable to the development activity at issue; any impact fee set by the City Council may include the establishment or calculation of the impact fee applicable to the development activity at issue. Fees set by the City Council may be the same as or higher or lower than that being appealed provided that it shall not be higher than the maximum allowed under the City’s lawful impact fee rate or formula which is either in existence on the effective date of the Act or as promulgated under the Impact Fees Policy, as appropriate. The decision of the City Council will be issued within thirty (30) days after the date the written challenge was filed with the City as mandated by Utah Code Annotated §11-36-401(4)(b). In light of the statutorily mandated time restriction, the City shall not be required to provide more than three (3) working days prior notice of the time, date and location of the informal hearing and the inconvenience of the hearing to the challenging party shall not serve as a basis of appeal of the City’s final determination.
7. Denial Due to Passage of Time. Should the city, for any reason, fail to issue a final decision on a written challenge to an impact fee, its calculation or application, within thirty (30) days after the filing of that challenge with the City, the Challenge shall be deemed to have been denied and any affected party to the proceedings may seek appropriate judicial relief from such denial.
8. Judicial Review. Any party to the administrative action who is adversely affected by the City’s final decision must petition the City Court for a review of the decision within ninety (90) days of a final City decision upholding an impact fee, its calculation or application, or within one hundred twenty (120) days after the written challenge to the impact fee, its calculation or application, was filed with the City, whichever is earlier.
    a. Record of Proceedings. After having been served with a copy of the pleadings initiating the City Court review, the City shall submit to the Court the record of the proceedings before the City, including minutes, and if available, a true and correct transcript of any proceedings. If the City is able to provide a record of the proceedings, the City Court’s review is limited, by Utah Code Annotated §11-36-401(5)(c) to the record of the Court may not accept or consider evidence outside of the record of proceedings before the City unless the evidence was offered to the City and improperly excluded in the proceeding before the City. If the record is inadequate, however, the Court may call witnesses and take evidence. The Court is to affirm the City’s decision if the decision is supported by substantial evidence in the record.

11.04.080 Miscellaneous.
1. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or phrase of this Impact Fee Policy shall be declared invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this Impact Fee Policy, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose, the provisions of this Impact Fee Policy are declared to be severable.
2. Interpretation. This Impact fee Policy has been divided into sections, subsections, paragraphs and clauses for convenience only and the interpretation of this Impact Fee Policy shall not be affected by such division or by any heading contained herein.
3. Effective Date. Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, this Impact Fee Policy shall not repeal, modify or affect any impact fee of the City in existence as of the effective date of this Ordinance. All impact fees established, including amendments and modifications to previously existing impact fees, after the effective date of this Ordinance shall comply with the requirements of this Impact Fee Policy. (Ord. 9-95, adopted, 1995; Ord. 97-12, adopted, 1997; Ord. 97-10, adopted, 1997; Ord. 97-9, repealed and replaced, 1997; Ord. 2002-22, repealed and replaced, 2002)

Chapter 11.05 PARKS, RECREATION AND TRAILS FACILITIES IMPACT FEES

Sections:
11.05.010    Short Title.
11.05.020    Purpose.
11.05.030    Definitions.
11.05.040    Written Impact Analysis.
11.05.050    Impact Fee Calculations.
11.05.060    Capital Facilities.
11.05.070    Impact Fee Schedule Formula.
11.05.080    Fee Exceptions and Adjustments.
11.05.090    Appeal Procedure.
11.05.100    Miscellaneous.

11.05.010 Short Title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Lindon City Parks Recreation and Trials Impact Fee Ordinance.”

11.05.020 Purpose.
This Impact Fee Ordinance establishes the City’s Parks, Recreation and Trails Impact Fee policies and procedures and repeals certain provisions of prior ordinances related to Parks, Recreation and Trails Impact Fees and conforms to the requirements of the Utah Impact Fees Act (§11-36). This Ordinance repeals any prior ordinances related to Parks, Recreation and Trails Impact Fees and establishes Impact Fees for parks, recreation, and trails facilities within the Lindon City-Wide Service Area, provides a schedule of Impact Fees for differing types of land-use development, and sets forth direction for challenging, modifying and appealing Impact Fees.

11.05.030 Definitions.
Words and phrases that are defined in the Act shall have the same definition in this Impact Fee Ordinance. The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
“Capital Facilities Plan” means the plan required by Section 11-36-201 of the Act. In Section 11-36-201(2)(e) there is an exception to the Capital Facilities Plan for cities of 5,000 or less in population, based on the latest census. Lindon City does not meet this exception and has thus completed a Capital Facilities Plans in accordance with the Act and has adopted the Capital Facilities Plans in conjunction with this Ordinance.
“Development Activity” means any construction or expansion of building, structure or use, any change in use of building or structure, or any change in the use of land located within the Lindon City-Wide Service Area that creates additional demand and need for Public Facilities related to parks, recreation facilities and trails.
“Development Approval” means any written authorization from the City that authorizes the commencement of Development Activity. Typically, development approval would be in the form of a building permit issued by the City’s building department.
“Dwelling Unit” has the same meaning as defined in Title 17 Chapter 2, Section 010 of the Lindon City Code.
“Dwelling, single-family” means a building containing only one (1) dwelling unit.
“Dwelling, multiple-family” means a building containing more than one (1) dwelling unit.
“City” means a local political subdivision of the State of Utah and is referred to herein as Lindon City.
“Impact Fee” means a payment of money imposed upon Development Activity as a condition of development approval. “Impact Fee” includes development Impact Fees, but is not a tax, a special assessment, a hookup fee, a building permit fee, a fee for project improvements, or other reasonable permit or application fees.
“Project Improvements” means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for development resulting from a Development Activity and are necessary solely for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of said Development Activity. “Project improvements” do not include “System Improvements” as defined below.
“Proportionate Share” of the cost of public facility improvements means an amount that is roughly proportionate and reasonably related to the service demands and needs of a Development Activity.
“Public Facilities” means, for purposes of this Ordinance, parks, recreation and trail improvements or facilities of the Lindon City-Wide Service Area.
“Service Area” refers to a geographic area designated by the City based on sound planning and engineering principles in which a defined set of the City’s Public Facilities provides service. For purposes of this Ordinance, the Lindon City-Wide Service Area shall have coterminous boundaries with the City. The Lindon City-Wide Service Area is identified in the attached map (Exhibit A: Map of the Lindon City-Wide Service Area).
“System Improvements” refer both to existing Public Facilities designed to provide services within the Lindon City-Wide Service Area and to future Public Facilities identified in the Parks, Trails, and Recreation Master Plan and Capital Facilities Plan adopted by the City that are intended to provide service to the Lindon City-Wide Service Area. “System Improvements” do not include “Project Improvements” as defined above.

11.05.040 Written Impact Analysis.
1. Executive Summary. A summary of the findings of the Written Impact Fee Analysis that is designed to be understood by a lay person is included in Parks, Recreation, and Trails Impact Fee Analysis and demonstrates the need for Impact Fees to be assessed on Development Activity. The Executive Summary has been available for public inspection at least fourteen (14) days prior to the adoption of this Ordinance.
2. Written Impact Fee Analysis. The City has commissioned the Written Parks, Recreation, and Trails Impact Fee Analysis for the Parks, Recreation, and Trails Impact Fees that identifies the impacts upon the park, recreation, and trail systems and the facilities required by Development Activity, demonstrates how those impacts on System Improvements are reasonably related to Development Activity, estimates the proportionate share of the costs of impacts on System Improvements that are reasonably related to the Development Activity and identifies how the Impact Fees are calculated. A copy of Written Parks, Recreation, and Trails Impact Fee Analysis has been available for public inspection at least fourteen (14) days prior to the adoption of this Ordinance.
3. Proportionate Share Analysis. The City has prepared a Proportionate Share Analysis which analyzes whether or not the proportionate share of the costs of future Public Facilities is reasonably related to new Development Activity. The Proportionate Share Analysis identifies the costs of existing Public Facilities, the manner of financing existing Public Facilities, the relative extent to which new development will contribute to the cost of existing facilities and the extent to which new development is entitled to a credit for payment towards the costs of new facilities from general taxation or other means apart from user charges in other parts of the City. A copy of the Proportionate Share Analysis is included in the Written Parks, Recreation, and Trails Impact Fee Analysis and has been available for public inspection at least fourteen (14) days prior to the adoption of this Ordinance.

11.05.050 Impact Fee Calculations.
1. Ordinance Enacting Impact Fees. The City Council will, by this Ordinance, approve Impact Fees in accordance with the Written Impact Fee Analysis.
    a. Elements. In calculating the Impact Fee, the City has included the construction costs, land acquisition costs, costs of improvements, fees for planning, surveying, and engineering services provided for and directly related to the construction of System Improvements, and outstanding or future debt service charges if the City might use Impact Fees as a revenue stream to pay principal and interest on bonds or other obligations to finance the cost of System Improvements.
    b. Notice and Hearing. In conjunction with the approval of this Ordinance, the City held a public hearing on April 7, 2009, and made a copy of the Ordinance available to the public, at least fourteen (14) days before the date of the hearing, all in conformity with the requirements of Utah Code Annotated 10-9-103(2). After the public hearing, the City Council adopted this Impact Fee Ordinance as presented herein.
    c. Contents of the Ordinance. The Ordinance adopting or modifying an Impact Fee contains such detail and elements as deemed appropriate by the City Council, including a designation of the Lindon City-Wide Service Area within which the Impact Fees are to be calculated and imposed. The Lindon City-Wide Service Area will be the only service area included in this analysis, with a map defining their boundaries included in Exhibit A: Map of the Lindon City-Wide Service Area. The Ordinance includes (i) a schedule of Impact Fees to be imposed for parks, recreation and trails and (ii) the formula to be used by the City in calculating the Impact Fee.
    d. Adjustments. The standard Impact Fee may be adjusted at the time the fee is charged in response to unusual circumstances or to fairly allocate costs associated with impacts created by a Development Activity or project. The standard Impact Fee may also be adjusted to ensure that Impact Fees are imposed fairly for affordable housing projects, in accordance with the local government’s affordable housing policy, and other development activities with broad public purposes. The Impact Fee assessed to a particular development may also be adjusted should the developer supply sufficient written information and/or data to the City showing a discrepancy between the fee being assessed and the actual impact on the system.
    e. Previously Incurred Costs. To the extent that new growth and development will be served by previously constructed improvements, the City’s Impact Fees may include public facility costs and outstanding bond costs related to the park, recreation and trail improvements previously incurred by the City. These costs may include all projects included in the Capital Facilities Plan which are under construction or completed but have not been utilized to their capacity, as evidenced by outstanding debt obligations. Any future debt obligations determined to be necessitated by growth activity will also be included to offset the costs of future capital projects.
2. Developer Credits. A developer may be allowed a credit against Impact Fees for any dedication or improvement to land or new construction of System Improvements provided by the developer provided that it is (i) identified in the City’s Capital Facilities Plan and (ii) required by the City as a condition of approving the Development Activity. Otherwise, no credit may be given.
3. Impact Fees Accounting. The City will establish a separate interest-bearing ledger account for the Impact Fees collected pursuant to this Ordinance and will conform to the accounting requirements provided in the Impact Fees Act. All interest earned on the collection of Parks, Recreation and Trails Impact Fees shall accrue to the benefit of the segregated account. Impact Fees collected prior to the effective date of this Ordinance need not meet the requirements of this section.
    a. Reporting. At the end of each fiscal year, the City shall prepare a report on each fund or account generally showing the source and amount of all monies collected, earned and received by the fund or account and each expenditure from the fund or account.
    b. Impact Fee Expenditures. The City may expend Impact Fees covered by the Impact Fees Policy only for System Improvements that are (i) Public Facilities identified in the City’s Capital Facilities Plans and (ii) of the specific public facility type for which the fee was collected. Impact Fees will be expended on a First-In First-Out (“FIFO”) basis.
    c. Time of Expenditure. Impact Fees collected pursuant to the requirements of this Impact Fees Ordinance are to be expended, dedicated or encumbered for a permissible use within six years of the receipt of those funds by the City, unless the City Council directs otherwise. For purposes of this calculation, the first funds received shall be deemed to be the first funds expended.
    d. Extension of Time. The City may hold previously dedicated or unencumbered fees for longer than six years if it identifies in writing (i) an extraordinary and compelling reason why the fees should be held longer than six years and (ii) an absolute date by which the fees will be expended.
4. Refunds. The City shall refund any Impact Fees paid by a developer plus interest actually earned when (i) the developer does not proceed with the Development Activity and files a written request for a refund; (ii) the fees have not been spent or encumbered; and (iii) no impact has resulted. An impact that would preclude a developer from a refund from the City may include any impact reasonably identified by the City, including, but not limited to, the City having sized facilities and/or paid for, installed and/or caused the installation of facilities based in whole or in part upon the Developer’s planned Development Activity even though that capacity may, at some future time, be utilized by another development.
5. Other Impact Fees. To the extent allowed by law, the City Council may negotiate or otherwise impose Impact Fees and other fees different from those currently charged. Those charges may, at the discretion of the City Council, include but not be limited to reductions or increases in Impact Fees, all or part of which may be reimbursed to the developer who installed improvements that service the land to be connected with the City’s system.
6. Additional Fees and Costs. The Impact Fees authorized hereby are separate from and in addition to user fees and other charges lawfully imposed by the City and other fees and costs that may not be included as itemized component parts of the Impact Fee Schedule. In charging any such fees as a condition of development approval, the City recognizes that the fees must be a reasonable charge for the service provided.
7. Fees Effective at Time of Payment. Unless the City is otherwise bound by a contractual requirement, the Impact Fee shall be determined from the fee schedule in effect at the time of payment in accordance with the provisions of Section 6 below.
8. Imposition of Additional Fee or Refund After Development Activity. Should any developer undertake Development Activities such that the ultimate density or other impact of the Development Activity is not revealed to the City, either through inadvertence, neglect, a change in plans, or any other cause whatsoever, and/or the Impact Fee is not initially charged against all units or the total density within the development, the City shall be entitled to charge an additional Impact Fee to the developer or other appropriate person covering the density for which an Impact Fee was not previously paid.

11.05.060 Capital Facilities.
1. Capital Facilities Plan. The City has developed a Parks, Trails, and Recreation Master Plan and Capital Facilities Plan for the City’s parks, recreation, and trail systems. The Parks, Trails, and Recreation Master Plan and Capital Facilities Plan has been prepared based on reasonable growth assumptions for the Lindon City-Wide Service Area, and analyzes the general demand characteristics of current and future users of each system.
Furthermore, the Capital Facilities Plan identifies the impact on System Improvements created by Development Activity and estimates the proportionate share of the costs of impacts on System Improvements that are reasonably related to new Development Activity.

11.05.070 Impact Fee Schedule Formula.
1. Maximum Supportable Impact Fees. The fee schedule included herein represents the maximum Impact Fees which the City may impose on development within the defined Lindon City-Wide Service Area and are based upon general demand characteristics and potential demand that can be created by each class of user. The City reserves the right under the Impact Fees Act (Utah Code 11-36-202(2)(c,d)) to assess an adjusted fee to respond to unusual circumstances to ensure that fees are equitably assessed.
This adjustment may result in a higher Impact Fee if the City determines that a user would create a greater than normal impact on any of the systems. The City may also decrease the Impact Fee if the developer can provide documentation that the proposed impact will be less than what could be expected given the type of user (Utah Code 11-36-202(3)(a)).
RECOMMENDED MAXIMUM PARKS, RECREATION AND TRAILS IMPACT FEE:
PER DWELLING UNIT – SINGLE FAMILY–$4,500
PER DWELLING UNIT – MULTI FAMILY –$4,000

11.05.080 Fee Exceptions and Adjustments.
1. Waiver for “Public Purpose”. The City Council may, on a project by project basis, authorize exceptions or adjustments to the Impact Fees due from development for those projects the City Council determines to be of such benefit to the community as a whole to justify the exception or adjustment. Such projects may include facilities being funded by tax-supported agencies, affordable housing projects, or facilities of a temporary nature. The City Council may elect to waive or adjust Impact Fees in consideration of economic benefits to be received from the developer’s activity.
    a. Procedures. Applications for exceptions are to be filed with the City at the time the applicant first requests the extension of service to the applicant’s development or property.

11.05.090 Appeal Procedure.
1. Any person or entity that has paid an Impact Fee pursuant to this Ordinance may challenge the Impact Fee by filing:
    a. An appeal to the City pursuant to paragraph 2, 3 and 4 of this Section 8;
    b. A request for arbitration as provided in Utah Code Ann. § 11-36-402(1), as amended; or
    c. An action in state district court as provided in Utah Code Ann. § 11-36-401(4)(c)(iii), as amended.
2. Application. Any person or entity that has paid an Impact Fee pursuant to this Ordinance may challenge or appeal the Impact Fee by filing a written notice of appeal with the City Council within 30 days of the date that the fee was paid.
3. Hearing. Upon receiving the written notice of appeal, the City shall set a hearing date to consider the merits of the challenge or appeal. The person or entity challenging or appealing the fee may appear at the hearing and present any written or oral evidence deemed relevant to the challenge or appeal. Representatives of the City may also appear and present evidence to support the imposition of the fee.
4. Decision. The hearing panel, which shall consist of the City Council or such other body as the City Council shall designate, shall hold a hearing and make a decision within 30 days after the date the challenge or appeal is filed.

11.05.100 Miscellaneous.
1. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or phrase of this Impact Fee Policy shall be declared invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this Impact Fee Policy, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose, the provisions of this Impact Fee Ordinance are declared to be severable.
2. Interpretation. This Impact Fee Ordinance has been divided into sections, subsections, paragraphs and clauses for convenience only and the interpretation of this Impact Fee Ordinance shall not be affected by such division or by any heading contained herein.
3. Effective Date. Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, this Impact Fee Ordinance shall not repeal, modify or affect any Impact Fee of the City in existence as of the effective date of this Ordinance, other than those expressly referenced in Section 1 above. All Impact Fees established, including amendments and modifications to previously existing Impact Fees, after the effective date of this Ordinance shall comply with the requirements of this Impact Fee Ordinance. (Ord. 2009-5, amended, 2009)

Chapter 11.08 LINDON CITY STORM WATER IMPACT FEE ORDINANCE

Sections:
11.08.010    Short title.
11.08.020    Intents and purposes.
11.08.030    Rules of construction.
11.08.040    Definitions.
11.08.050    Imposition of impact fee.
11.08.060    Computation of the amount of impact fee.
11.08.070    Payment of fee.
11.08.080    Storm water impact fee districts.
11.08.090    Impact fee trust funds established.
11.08.100    Use of funds.
11.08.110    Refund of fees paid.
11.08.120    Exemptions and credits.
11.08.130    Review.
11.08.140    Penalty Provision.
11.08.150    Challenges and appeals.

11.08.010 Short title.
This ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the “Lindon City Storm Water Impact Fee Ordinance.” (Ord. 97-11, adopted, 2000)

11.08.020 Intents and purposes.
1. This ordinance is intended to assist in the implementation of the Lindon City General Plan.
2. The purpose of this ordinance is to regulate the use and development of land so as to assure that new development bear a proportionate share of the cost of capital expenditures necessary for public facility improvements in Lindon City. (Ord. 97-11, adopted, 2000)

11.08.030 Rules of construction.
1. The provisions of this ordinance shall be liberally construed so as to effectively carry out its purpose in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare.
2. For the purpose of administration and enforcement, unless otherwise stated in this ordinance, the following rules of construction shall apply to the text of this ordinance:
    a. In the case of difference of meaning or implication between the text of this ordinance and any caption, illustration, summary table, or illustrative table, the text shall control.
    b. The word shall is always mandatory and not discretionary; the word may is permissive.
    c. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; words used in the singular shall include the plural, and the plural the singular, unless the context clearly indicates the contrary.
    d. The phrase used for includes arranged for, designed for, maintained for, or occupied for.
    e. The word person includes individual, a corporation, a partnership, an incorporated association, or any other similar entity.
    f. Unless the context clearly indicates the contrary, where a regulation involves two (2) or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction and, or or either...or, the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows:
        i. And indicates that all the connected terms, conditions, provisions or events shall apply.
        ii. Or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events may apply singly or in any combination.
        iii. Either...or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions, or events shall apply singly but not in combination.
    g. The word includes shall not limit a term to the specific example but is intended to extend its meaning to all other instances or circumstances of like kind or character.
    h. Mayor means the Mayor or the City officials he/she may designate to carry out the administration of this ordinance. (Ord. 97-11, adopted, 2000)

11.08.040 Definitions.
A “fee payer” is a person applying for the issuance of a building permit or permit for mobile home installation.
A “capital improvement” includes public facility planning and engineering, land acquisition, site improvements, buildings, and equipment but excludes maintenance and operation.
“Development order” means a regulatory approval by Lindon City.
“Private recreational facility” is any recreational facility which is not owned by or dedicated to any governmental entity. (Ord. 97-11, adopted, 2000)

11.08.050 Imposition of impact fee.
1. Any person who, after the effective date of this ordinance, seek to develop land within Lindon City, Utah, by applying for a land use permit or building permit for a building or permit for a mobile home installation, is hereby required to pay an impact fee in the manner and amount set forth in this ordinance.
2. No new building permit or new permit for mobile home installation for any activity requiring payment of an impact fee pursuant to Section 070 of this ordinance shall be issued unless and until the impact fee hereby required has been paid.
3. No extension of a building permit or permit for mobile home installation issued prior to the effective date of this ordinance for any activity requiring payment of an impact fee pursuant to Section 070 of this ordinance shall be granted unless and until the impact fee hereby required has been paid. (Ord. 97-11, adopted, 2000)

11.08.060 Computation of the amount of impact fee.
1. The amount of the impact fee shall be determined by the following formula:
    a. Development cost for storm water facilities related to new growth
    b. Total new growth households
    c. Credit for past payments
    d. Credit for future payments
    (a\b) = Total Cost
    TC - (TC*c) - d = Impact Fee
        i. If a land use application or building permit is requested for mixed uses, then the fee shall be determined using the above schedule by apportioning the space committed to uses specified on the schedule.
        ii. If the type of development activity that a land use applications or building permit is applied for is not specified on the above fee schedule, the Mayor shall use the fee applicable to the most comparable type of land use on the above fee schedules. The Mayor shall be guided in the selection of a comparable type by the Lindon City General Plan, supporting documents of the Lindon City General plan, and the Lindon City Zoning Ordinance. If the Mayor determines that there is not comparable type of land use on the above fee schedule then the Mayor shall determine the appropriately discounted fee by considering the demographic or other documentation which is available from state, local, and regional authorities.
        iii. In the case of change of use, redevelopment, or expansion or modification of an existing use which required the issuance of a land use application or building permit or permit for mobile home installation, the impact fee shall be based upon the net positive increase in the impact fee for the new use as compared to the previous use.
2. If the fee payer opts not to have the impact fee determined according to paragraph 1 of this section, then the fee payer shall prepare and submit to the Mayor an independent fee calculation study for the land development activity for which a land use application or building permit or permit for mobile home installation is sought. The documentation submitted shall show the basis upon which the independent fee calculation was made. The Mayor shall consider the documentation submitted by the fee payer but is not required to accept such documentation as he/she shall reasonably deems to be inaccurate or not reliable and may, in the alternative, require the fee payer to submit additional or different documentation for consideration. If an acceptable independent fee calculation study is not presented, the fee payer shall pay impact fees based upon the schedule shown in paragraph 1 of this section. If an acceptable independent fee calculation study is presented, the Mayor may adjust the fee to that appropriate to the particular development. Determinations made by the Mayor pursuant to this paragraph may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written appeal request with the Mayor within ten (10) days of the Mayor's determination. (Ord. 97-11, adopted, 2000)

11.08.070 Payment of fee.
1. The fee payer shall pay the Culinary Water Impact Fee required by this ordinance to the Mayor or his/her designee prior to the issuance of a land use permit or building permit or a permit for mobile home installation.
2. All funds collected shall be property identified by impact fee type and district and promptly transferred for deposit in the appropriate impact fee trust fund to be held in separate accounts as determined by Section 090 of this ordinance and used solely for the purpose specified in this ordinance. (Ord. 97-11, adopted, 2000)

11.08.080 Storm water impact fee districts.
There are hereby established Storm Water Impact Fee districts as shown in the Written Analysis as adopted by resolution of the City Council and incorporated herein by reference. (Ord. 97-11, adopted, 2000)

11.08.090 Impact fee trust funds established.
1. There are hereby established separate impact fee trust funds, one for each public facility type established by the Written Analysis and district as established in section 080 of this ordinance.
2. Funds withdrawn from these accounts must be used in accordance with the provisions of section 100 of this ordinance. (Ord. 97-11, adopted, 2000)

11.08.100 Use of funds.
1. Funds collected from impact fees shall be used solely for the purpose of acquiring and/or making capital improvements and their related costs to public facilities under the jurisdiction of Lindon City.
2. Funds shall be used exclusively for acquisitions, expansions, or capital improvements within the impact fee districts as identified in the Written Analysis, from which funds were collected or for projects in other impact fee districts which are of benefit to the impact fee district from which the funds were collected (e.g. The Main City Park). Funds shall be expended in the order in which they are collected.
3. In the event that bonds or similar debt instruments are issued for advanced provision of capital facilities for which impact fees may be expended, impact fees may be used to pay debt service on such bonds or similar debt instruments to the extent that the facilities provided are of the type described in paragraph 1 above and are located within the appropriate impact fee districts created by section 080 of this ordinance or as provided in paragraph 2 of this section.
4. At least once each fiscal period the Mayor shall present to the City Council a proposed capital improvements program for public facilities, assigning funds, including any accrued interest, from the several impact trust funds to specific public improvement projects and related expenses. Monies, including any accrued interest, not assigned in any fiscal period shall be retained in the impact fee trust funds until the next fiscal period, except as provided by the refund provisions of this ordinance.
5. Funds may be used to provide refunds as described in section 110.
6. The City shall be entitled to retain not more than twenty percent (20%) of the funds collected as compensation for the expense of collecting the fee and administering this ordinance. (Ord. 97-11, adopted, 2000)

11.08.110 Refund of fees paid.
1. If a land use permit, building permit or permit for mobile home installation expires without commencement of construction, the fees have not been spent or encumbered, and no impact has resulted, then the fee payer shall be entitled to a refund, with interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum, of the impact fee paid as a condition for its issuance except that the City shall retain ten percent (10%) of the fee to offset a portion of the cost of collection and refund. The fee payer must submit an application for such refund to the Mayor within thirty (30) days of the expiration of the permit.
2. Except as provided in Subsection (b) 11-36-302 of the UCA 1953. Any funds not expended or encumbered by the end of the calendar year immediately following six (6) years from the date the impact fee was paid shall, upon application of the then current landowner, be returned to such landowner with interest at the rate of six percent (6%) per annum, provided that the landowner submits an application for a refund to the Mayor of Lindon City within 180 days of the expiration of the six-year period. (Ord. 97-11, adopted, 2000)

11.08.120 Exemptions and credits.
1. The following may be exempted from payment of the impact fee:
    a. Alterations or expansion of an existing building where no additional residential units or equivalent residential units are created and where the use is not changed.
    b. The construction of accessory buildings or structures where no additional residential units or equivalent residential units are created and where the use is not changed.
    c. The replacement of a destroyed or partially destroyed building or structure with a new structure of the same size and use.
    d. The installation of a replacement mobile home on a lot or other such site when an impact fee for such mobile home site has previously been paid pursuant to this ordinance or where a mobile home legally existed on such site on or prior to the effective date of this ordinance.
    e. The construction of building by a government agency or other development activities with a broad public purpose as determined by the Mayor. In the event that an exemption is granted, the City Council shall establish the source of funding to pay for the impact of the development activity.
    Any claim of exemption must be made no later than the time of application for a building permit or permit for mobile home installation. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived.
2. Credits. 
    a. Public capital improvements may be offered by the fee payer as total or partial payment of the required impact fee. The offer must specifically request or provide for an impact fee credit. If the Mayor accepts such an offer, whether the acceptance is before or after the effective date of this ordinance, the credit shall be determined and provided in the following manner:
        i. Credit for the dedication of land shall be valued at 100 percent of the most recent assessed value by the Salt Lake County Property Appraiser; by such other appropriate method as the City Council may have accepted prior to the effective date of this ordinance for particular public improvements; or by fair market value established by private appraisers acceptable to the City. Credit for the dedication of park land shall be provided when the property has been conveyed to at no charge to, and accepted by, the City in a manner satisfactory to the City Council.
        ii. Applicants for credit for construction of public improvements shall submit acceptable engineering drawings and specifications, and construction cost estimates to the Mayor. The Mayor shall determine credit for construction based upon either these cost estimates or upon alternative engineering criteria and construction cost estimates if the Mayor determines that such estimates submitted by the applicant are either unreliable or inaccurate. The Mayor shall provide the applicant with a letter or certificate setting forth the dollar amount of the credit, the reason for the credit, and the legal description of other adequate description of the project or development to which the credit may be applied. The applicant must sign and date a duplicate copy of such letter or certificate indicating his agreement to the terms of the letter or certificate and return such signed document to the Mayor before credit will be given. The failure of the applicant to sign, date and return such document within sixty (60) days shall nullify the credit.
        iii. Except as provided in subparagraph (iv) below, credit against impact fees otherwise due will not be provided until:
            1. the construction is completed and accepted by the City;
            2. a suitable maintenance and warranty bond is received and approved by the Mayor of Lindon City, when applicable.
        iv. Credit may be provided before completion of specified public improvements if adequate assurances are given by the applicant that the standards set out in subparagraph (iii) above will be met and if the fee payer posts security as provided below for the costs of such construction. Security in the form of a cash escrow agreement shall be posted with and approved by the Mayor of Lindon City at one hundred and twenty-five percent (125%) of the amount determined by the City engineer. Twenty-five percent (25%) of the cash escrow account shall remain for two years after completion of the project, as a guarantee of the work, pursuant to Lindon City's Cash Bond Escrow Agreement. If the public improvement construction project will not be constructed within one (1) year of the acceptance of the offer by the Mayor, the amount of the security shall be increased by ten percent (10%) compounded for each year of the life of the security. The security shall be reviewed and approved by the Mayor prior to acceptance of the security by the City Council. If the public improvement construction project is not to be completed within five (5) years of the date of the fee payer's offer, the City Council must approve the public improvement project and its scheduled completion date prior to the acceptance of the offer by the Mayor.
    b. Any claim for credit must be made no later than the time of application for a land use permit, building permit or permit for mobile home installation. Any claim not so made shall be deemed waived.
    c. Credits shall not be transferable from one project or development to another without the approval of the City Council and may only be transferred to a development within a different impact fee district upon a finding by the City Council that the dedication for which the credit was given benefits such different impact fee district.
    d. Determinations made by the Mayor pursuant to this paragraph may be appealed to the City Council by filing a written appeal with the Mayor within ten (10) days of the Mayor's determination. (Ord. 97-11, adopted, 2000)

11.08.130 Review.
The fee schedule contained in section 060(1) shall be reviewed by the City Council at least once each fiscal biennium (i.e. every two years). (Ord. 97-11, adopted, 2000)

11.08.140 Penalty Provision.
A violation of this ordinance shall constitute a Class B misdemeanor. In addition to or in lieu of any criminal prosecution Lindon City shall have the power to sue in civil court to enforce the provisions of this ordinance. Any one, all, or any combination of the penalties and remedies set forth in this Section may be used to enforce the provisions of this Chapter. (Ord. 2010-6, amended, 2010; Ord. 97-11, adopted, 2000)

11.08.150 Challenges and appeals.
Any challenges or appeals of this impact fee must comply with Section 11/36/401 of the Utah Code Annotated 1953. (Ord. 97-11, adopted, 2000)

Chapter 11.12 IMPACT FEES FOR ROADWAY FACILITIES

Sections:
11.12.010    Purpose.
11.12.020    Definitions.
11.12.030    Impact Fee Analysis.
11.12.040    Impact Fee Calculations.
11.12.050    Roadways Impact Fee Schedule and Multipliers.
11.12.060    Fee--Exceptions and Adjustments.
11.12.070    Appeal Procedure.
11.12.080    Miscellaneous.

11.12.010 Purpose.
This Impact Fee Ordinance is promulgated pursuant to the requirements of the Impact Fees Act. This ordinance revises the existing impact fees for Roadway Facilities within the I-15 Region, describes certain capital improvements to be funded by impact fees, provides a schedule of impact fees for differing types of land-use development, and sets forth direction for challenging and appealing impact fees.

11.12.020 Definitions.
Words and phrases that are defined in the Impact Fees Act shall have the same definition in this Impact Fee Ordinance. The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
“Capital Facilities Plan” means the plan required by Section 11-36-201(2)(b) of the Impact Fees Act. In Section 11-36-201(2)(e) there is an exception to the Capital Facilities Plan for Cities of 5,000 or less population, based on the latest census. Lindon does not meet this exception, therefore, they have completed a comprehensive Capital Facilities Plan, in accordance with the Act and will adopt said plan on November 16, 2004, as included in Exhibit B.
“Development Activity” mean any construction or expansion of building, structure or use, any change in use of building or structure, or any change in the use of land that creates additional demand or need for public facilities. Development activity will include residential, commercial, industrial and institutional users who are not currently connected to the City’s Roadway system, but will locate within the Lindon I-15 Region.
“Development Approval” means any written authorization from the City that authorizes the commencement of development activity.
“City” means a local political subdivision of the State of Utah and is referred to herein as Lindon City (the “City”).
“Impact Fee” means a payment of money imposed upon development activity as a condition of development approval. “Impact fee” includes development impact fees, but does not include a tax, a special assessment, a hook up fee, a building permit fee, a fee for project improvements, or other reasonable permit or application fees.
“Project Improvements” means site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for development resulting from a development activity and are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupant or users of development resulting from a development activity. “Project improvements” do not include “system improvements” as defined below.
“Proportionate Share” means the cost of public facility improvements that are roughly proportionate and reasonably related to the service demands and needs of a development activity.
“Public Facilities” shall mean Roadway improvements which are owned or operated by the City and have useful lives of ten or more years and are defined in the Capital Facilities Plan as the 700 North and I-15 Interchange Projects.
“Service Area” shall mean the I-15 Regional Transportation Area, which includes service areas A, B, C, and D as defined above and refers to a geographic area designated by the City based on sound planning or engineering principles in which a defined set of the City’s public facilities provides service. The service areas for purposes of the Roadway System Impact Fee Ordinance include all of the area within the jurisdictional boundaries of the Lindon I-15 Region. (Exhibit A: Map of the Lindon I-15 Regional Transportation Area)
“System Improvements” refer both to existing public facilities designed to provide services within the Lindon I-15 Region and to future public facilities identified in reasonable plan for capital improvements adopted by the City that are intended to provide service to the Lindon I-15 Region. “System improvements” do not include “Project improvements” as defined above.

11.12.030 Impact Fee Analysis.
1. Executive Summary. A summary of findings and conclusions of the Written Impact Fee Analysis that is designed to be understood by a lay person is included in Exhibit C and demonstrates the need for impact fees to be charged. A copy of the Executive Summary is included in the Impact Fee Analysis and has been available for public inspection 14 days prior to adoption of this ordinance.
2. Written Analysis. The City has prepared a Written Analysis for the Roadway impact fees that identifies the impact upon the roadways system required by the development activity and demonstrates how those impacts on system improvements are reasonably related to the development activity, estimates the proportionate share of the costs of impacts on system improvements that are reasonably related to the development activity and identifies how the impact fees are calculated. A copy of the Written Analysis is included in the Impact Fee Study and has been available for public inspection 14 days prior to the adoption of this ordinance.
3. Proportionate Share Analysis. Part and parcel to the written study the City prepared a Proportionate Share Analysis analyzing whether or not the proportionate share of the costs of public facilities identified in the CFP are reasonably related to new development activity. The Proportionate Share Analysis identified the costs of existing public facilities, the manner of financing existing public facilities, the relative extent to which new development will contribute to the cost of existing facilities and the extent to which new development is entitle to a credit for payment towards the costs of new facilities from general taxation or other means apart from user charges in other parts of the City. A copy of the Proportionate Share Analysis is included in the Impact Fee Analysis and has been available for public inspection 14 days prior to the adoption of this ordinance.

11.12.040 Impact Fee Calculations.
1. Ordinance Enacting Impact Fees. The City Council will, by this ordinance, approve an impact fee in accordance with the impact fee analysis set forth in Exhibit C: Lindon City Roadway Impact Fee Analysis.
    a. Elements. In calculating the impact fee, the City has included the construction costs, land acquisition costs, costs of improvements, fees for planning, surveying, and engineering services provided for and directly related to the construction of system improvements, and debt service charges if the City might use impact fees as revenue stream to pay principal and interest on bonds or other obligations to finance the cost of system improvements.
    b. Notice and Hearing. Before approving the ordinance, the City shall hold a public hearing on November 16, 2004, and make a copy of the ordinance available to the public in the Pleasant Grove Library at least fourteen (14) days before the date of the hearing, all in conformity with the requirements of Utah Code Annotated 10-9-103(2). After the public hearing, the City Council adopted this impact fee ordinance as proposed.
    c. Adjustments. The standard impact fee may be adjusted at the time the fee is imposed in response to unusual circumstances or to fairly allocate costs associated with impacts created by a development activity or project. The standard impact fee may also be adjusted to insure that impact fees are imposed fairly for affordable housing projects, in accordance with the local government’s affordable housing policy, and other development activities with broad public purposes.
    d. Previously Incurred Costs. To the extent that the new growth and development will be served by previously constructed improvements, the city’s impact fee may include public facility costs and bond costs related to the roadway improvements and previously incurred by the City. These costs may include all projects included in the CFP which are under construction or completed but have not been utilized to their capacity, as evidenced by outstanding debt obligations. As of the date of this ordinance, there are no outstanding debt obligations to be included in the impact fee calculations.
2. Development Credits. Development may be allowed a credit against impact fees for any dedication or improvement to land or new construction of system improvements provided by the developer provided that it is (i) identified in the City’s Capital Facilities Plan and (ii) required by the City as a condition of approving the development activity. Otherwise, no credit may be allowed unless expressly provided by Section 11.12.060 below.
3. Impact Fees Accounting. The City will establish separate interest-bearing ledger accounts for each type of public facility for which an impact fee promulgated in accordance with the requirements of the Impact Fees Act deposited in the appropriate ledger account. Interest earned on each fund or account shall be segregated to that account.
    a. Reporting. At the end of each fiscal year, the City shall prepare a report on each fund or account generally showing the source and amount of all monies collected, earned and received by the fund or account and each expenditure from the fund or account.
    b. Impact Fee Expenditures. The City may expend impact fees covered by the Impact Fees Ordinance only for system improvements that are (i) public facilities identified in the City’s CFP and (ii) of the specific public facility type for which the fee was collected.
    c. Time of Expenditure. Impact fees collected pursuant to the requirements of this Impact Fees Ordinance are to be expended, dedicated or encumbered for a permissible use within six years of the receipt of those funds by the City, unless the City Council otherwise directs. For purposes of this calculation, the first funds received shall be deemed to be the first funds expended.
    d. Extension of Time. The City may hold previously dedicated or unencumbered fees for longer than six years if it identified in writing (i) an extraordinary and compelling reason why the fees should be held longer than six years and (ii) an absolute date by which the fees will be expended.
4. Refunds. The City shall refund any impact fees paid by a developer, plus interest actually earned when (i) the developer does not proceed with the development activity and files a written request for a refund; (ii) the fees have not been spent or encumbered; and (iii) no impact has resulted. An impact that would preclude a developer from a refund from the City may include any impact reasonably identified by the City, including, but not limited to, the City having sized facilities based, in whole or in part, upon the Developer’s planned development activity even though that capacity may, at some future time, be utilized by another development.
5. Other Impact Fees. To the extent allowed by law, the City Council may negotiate or otherwise impose impact fees and other fees different from those currently charged. Those charges may, in the discretion of the City Council, include, but not be limited to, reductions or increases in impact fees, all or part of which may be reimbursed to the developer who installed improvements that service that land to be connected to the City’s system.
6. Additional Fees and Costs. The impact fees authorized hereby are separate from and in addition to use fees and other charges lawfully imposed by the City, and other fees and costs that may not be included as itemized component parts of the Impact Fee Schedule. In charging any such fees as a condition of development approval, the City recognizes that the fees must be a reasonable charge for the service provided.
7. Fees Effective at Time of Payment. Unless the City is otherwise bound by a contractual requirement, the impact fee shall be determined from the fee schedule in effect at time of payment in accordance with the provisions of Section 11.12.050 below.
8. Imposition of Additional Fee or Refund after Development. Should any developer undertake development activities such that the ultimate density or other impact of the development activity is not revealed to the City, either through inadvertence, neglect, a change in plans, or any other cause whatsoever, and/or the impact fee is not initially charged against all units or the total density within the development, the City shall be entitled to charge an additional impact fee to the developer or other appropriate person covering the density for which an impact fee was not previously paid.

11.12.050 Roadways Impact Fee Schedule and Multipliers.
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
|                                   | Service Area A |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Capital Improvement               | 700 N / I-15   |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Proportionate Share of Costs      | 6/24% / 41.86% |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Capital Project Costs             | $198,066       |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Proposed Series 2006 Costs        | 295,964        |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| (Bond Proceeds from 2006 Bonds)   | (198,066)      |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Series 200o B Costs               | 812,322        |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Buy-In Cost                       | (45,901)       |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Impact Fee Analysis Updates       | 5,991          |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Fee Stabilization Charge (Credit) | 190,124        |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Total Costs                       | $1,258,501     |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Trip Ends Served                  | 26,775         |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Impact Fee per Trip End           | $47.00         |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
|                                   | Service Area B  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Capital Improvement               | 700 N / I-15    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Proportionate Share of Costs      | 33.66% / 12.67% |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Capital Project Costs             | $1,068,154      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Proposed Series 2006 Costs        | 1,596,115       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| (Bond Proceeds from 2003 Bonds)   | (1,068,154)     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Series 2000 B Costs               | 245,939         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Buy-In Cost                       | (13,897)        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Impact Fee Analysis Updates       | 20,615          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Fee Stabilization Charge (Credit) | (155,777)       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Total Costs                       | $1,692,996      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Trip Ends Served                  | 15,200          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Impact Fee per Trip End           | $111.38         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
|                                   | Service Area C  |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Capital Improvement               | 700 N / I-15    |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Proportionate Share of Costs      | 35.29% / 15.78% |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Capital Project Costs             | $1,119,760      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Proposed Series 2006 Costs        | 1,673,228       |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| (Bond Proceeds from 2006 Bonds)   | (1,119,760)     |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Series 2000 B Costs               | 306,163         |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Buy-In Cost                       | (17,300)        |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Impact Fee Analysis Updates       | 21,748          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Fee Stabilization Charge (Credit) | 37,238          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Total Costs                       | $2,021,077      |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Trip Ends Served                  | 22,862          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
| Impact Fee per Trip End           | $88.40          |
+-----------------------------------+-----------------+
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
|                                   | Service Area D |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Capital Improvement               | 700 N / I-15   |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Proportionate Share of Costs      | 1.5% / 8.85%   |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Capital Project Costs             | $47,574        |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Proposed Series 2006 Costs        | 71,088         |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| (Bond Proceeds from 2006 Bonds)   | (47,574)       |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Series 2000 B Costs               | 171,699        |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Buy-In Cost                       | 9,702          |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Impact Fee Analysis Updates       | 1,373          |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Fee Stabilization Charge (Credit) | 20,374         |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Total Costs                       | $254,832       |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Trip Ends Served                  | 6,431          |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
| Impact Fee per Trip End           | $39.62         |
+-----------------------------------+----------------+
Further calculation and presentation is included in the Written Impact Fee Analysis.
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
|        Land Use Categories        | Trip Ends | Adjustment Factors |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Non-Residential (Per 1000 Sq ft)                                   |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Office Building                   | 11.0      | 50%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Medical Office                    | 36.1      | 21%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Retail                            | 66.4      | 45%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Quality Restaurant                | 90.0      | 40%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Fast Food/Drive-Thru              | 587.0     | 10%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Convenience Market with Gas Pumps | 1448.3    | 5%                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Quick Lube Center                 | 41.0      | 5%                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Supermarket                       | 111.5     | 35%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Video Rental                      | 87.7      | 40%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Bank Drive Thru                   | 265.2     | 5%                 |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Automobile Care Centers           | 15.9      | 40%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Manufacturing                     | 3.8       | 45%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Specialty Retail                  | 40.7      | 45%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Hotel (per room)                  | 8.2       | 21%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| General Heavy Industrial          | 7.0       | 45%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| RV Park/Campground                | 4.1       | 50%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Golf Course (per acre)            | 5.6       | 35%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Driving Range                     | 21.6      | 35%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Recreational Community Center     | 11.4      | 21%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Residential (per Unit)                                             |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Low Density Residential           | 7.0       | 50%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+
| Medium Density Residential        | 7.0       | 50%                |
+-----------------------------------+-----------+--------------------+

11.12.060 Fee--Exceptions and Adjustments.
1. Waiver for “Public Purpose.” The City Council may, on a project by project basis, authorize exceptions or adjustments to the impact fee rate structure for those projects the City Council determines to be of such benefit to the community as a whole to justify the exception or adjustment. This option is available to: (i) respond to unusual circumstances in specific cases, (ii) ensure that the impact fees are imposed fairly, (iii) exempt low income housing and other development activities from impact fees to pay for the development activity, and (iv) induce certain development that will generate sales tax, property tax or franchise tax in an amount sufficient to defray a fair cost of the infrastructure being provided.
    a. Procedures. Applications for exceptions are to be filed with the City at the time the applicant first requests the extension of service to the applicant’s development or property. Upon receipt of an application, the City Council shall cause a study to be completed, which will evaluate the net economic value received compared to the magnitude of impact fees being waived.

11.12.070 Appeal Procedure.
1. Application. The appeal procedure applies to challenges to the legality of impact fees, to similar and related fees of the City and to the interpretation and/or application of those fees. By way of illustration, in addition to the legality of the impact fee schedule, determinations of the density of a development activity or calculation of the amount of the impact fee due will also be subject to this appeal procedure.
2. Declaratory Judgment Action. Any person or entity residing in or owning property within the City and any organization, association or corporation representing the interests of persons or entities owning property within a service area may file a declaratory judgment action challenging the validity of an impact fee.
3. Request for Information Concerning the Fee. Any person or entity required to pay an impact fee who believes the fee does not meet the requirements of law may file a written request for information concerning the fee with the City. The City will provide the person or entity with the City’s written impact fee analysis, capital facilities plan and other relevant information relating to the impact fee within two weeks of receipt of the request for information.
4. Appeal to the City After Payment of the Impact Fee; Statute of Limitations for Failure to File. Any person or entity who has paid an impact fee and wishes to challenge the fee shall file a written request for information concerning the fee and proceed under the City’s appeal procedure. A challenge may not be initiated unless it is initiated within:
    a. Challenge of Noticing Requirements. The person or entity has 30 days after paying an impact fee adopted on or after July 1, 2000 for a challenge of the noticing requirements of the Impact Fees Act.
    b. Challenge of Other Procedural Requirements. The person or entity has 180 days after paying an impact fee adopted on or after July 1, 2000 for a challenge of other procedural requirements for imposing impact fees.
    c. Challenge of Fees Adopted Prior to July 1, 2000. The person or entity has one year after paying an impact fee for a challenge to impact fees adopted prior to July 1, 2000.
5. Challenge by Arbitration. Each person or entity intending to challenge an impact fee shall file a written request for arbitration with the local political subdivision within the time limitation provided for the applicable type of challenge as is stated in §11-36-402(2). If a person or entity files a written request for arbitration, an arbitrator or arbitration panel shall be selected and a hearing on the challenge shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date the request for arbitration is filed. The arbitrator or arbitration panel shall then issue a decision in writing within ten (10) days from the date the hearing is completed.

11.12.080 Miscellaneous.
1. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or phrase of this Impact Fee Ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this Impact Fee Ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose, the provisions of this Impact Fee Ordinance are declared to severable.
2. Interpretation. This Impact Fee Ordinance has been divided into sections, subsections, paragraphs and clauses for convenience only and the interpretation of this Impact Fee Ordinance shall not be affected by such division or by any heading contained herein.
3. Effective Date. Except as otherwise specifically provided herein, this Impact Fee Ordinance shall not repeal, modify, or affect any impact fee of the City in existence as of the effective date of this Ordinance. All impact fees established, including amendments and modifications to previously existing impact fees, after the effective date of this Ordinance shall comply with the requirements of this Impact Fee Ordinance. (Ord. 2004-12, amended, 2004; Ord. 2003-8, adopted, 2003)

Chapter 11.13 LINDON CITY PUBLIC SAFETY IMPACT FEES ORDINANCE

Sections:
11.13.010    Short Title.
11.13.020    Purpose.
11.13.030    Definitions.
11.13.040    Impact Fee Facilities Plan and Impact Fee Analysis.
11.13.050    Impact Fee Calculations.
11.13.060    Impact Fees Imposed.
11.13.070    Exceptions and Adjustments.
11.13.080    Appeal Procedures.
11.13.090    Miscellaneous.

11.13.010 Short Title.
This Ordinance shall be known as and cited to as the “Lindon City Public Safety Impact Fee Ordinance.”

11.13.020 Purpose.
1. This Impact Fees Ordinance is promulgated pursuant to the requirements of the Utah Impact Fees Act. This Ordinance establishes impact fees for public safety facilities within Lindon City, and describes certain capital improvements to be funded in part by impact fees, provides a schedule of impact fees for differing types of land-use development, and sets forth direction for challenging and appealing these impact fees.
2. In enacting and approving the Fire Impact Fee Facilities Plan/Impact Fee Analysis and the Police Impact Fee Facilities Plan/Impact Fee Analysis, the Lindon City Council has taken into consideration, and in certain situations will consider on a case-by-case basis in the future, the future capital facilities and public safety needs of Lindon City, the capital financial needs of Lindon City which are the result of Lindon City's future facilities needs, the distribution of the burden of costs to different properties within Lindon City based on the use of public safety services and the corresponding facilities of Lindon City by such properties, the financial contribution of those properties and other properties similarly situated in Lindon City at the time of computation of the required fee and prior to the enactment of this Ordinance, all revenue sources available to Lindon City, and the impact on future public safety facilities that will be required by growth and new development activities in Lindon City.
3. The provisions of this Ordinance shall be liberally construed in order to carry out the purpose and intent of the Lindon City Council in establishing the Public Safety Impact Fees Ordinance.

11.13.030 Definitions.
Except as provided below, words and phrases that are defined in the Utah Impact Fees Act shall have the same definition in this Impact Fees Ordinance. The following words and phrases shall have the following meanings:
“City” means the local political subdivision of the State of Utah and is referred to herein as Lindon City, Utah.
“Development Activity” means any construction or expansion of building, structure or use, any change in use of building or structure, or any change in the use of land that creates additional demand and need for public facilities. Development activity will include all residential, commercial, industrial and institutional users in the service area.
“Development Approval” means any written authorization from the City that authorizes the commencement of development activity.
“Facilities and/or System Improvements” refer both to existing public facilities designed to provide public safety services within Lindon City and to future public facilities identified in a reasonable plan for capital improvements adopted by the City which are intended to provide service to Lindon City.
“Impact Fee” means a payment of money imposed upon development activity as a condition of development approval. “Impact Fee” includes development impact fees, but does not include a tax, a special assessment, a hookup fee, a building permit fee, a fee for project improvements, or other reasonable permit or application fees.
“Proportionate Share” means the cost of public facility improvements that are roughly proportionate and reasonably related to the service demands and needs of a development activity.
“Public Safety Facilities” shall mean public safety buildings, fixtures, structures and improvements which are owned or operated by or on behalf of the City, but for the purposes of this Ordinance shall not include fire suppression vehicles or incarcerations cells.
“Service Area” shall mean the municipal boundaries of Lindon City.
“Utah State Impact Fees Act” shall mean Title 11, Chapter 36a, Utah Code annotated or its successor state statute if that title and chapter or renumbered, re-codified, or amended.

11.13.040 Impact Fee Facilities Plan and Impact Fee Analysis.
1. Executive Summary. A summary of findings and conclusions of the Fire Impact Fee Facilities Plan/Impact Fee Analysis and the Police Impact Fee Facilities Plan/Impact Fee Analysis that is designed to be understood by a lay person, is included in Exhibits “A” and “B” and demonstrates the need for impact fees to be charged. A copy of the Executive Summary is included in Fire Impact Fee Facilities Plan/Impact Fee Analysis and the Police Impact Fee Facilities Plan/Impact Fee Analysis and has been available for public inspection at least ten (10) days prior to the adoption of this Ordinance at the City offices and on the City’s public website as required by §11-36a-504 of the Utah Code.
2. Written Analysis. The City has prepared the Fire Impact Fee Facilities Plan/Impact Fee Analysis and the Police Impact Fee Facilities Plan/Impact Fee Analysis Fees that identifies the impact upon the public safety system required by the development activity and demonstrates how those impacts on system improvements are reasonably related to the development activity, estimates the proportionate share of the costs of impacts on system improvements that are reasonably related to the development activity and identifies how the impact fees are calculated. A copy of these plans and analyses have been made available for public inspection ten (10) days prior to the adoption of this Ordinance both at the City offices and on the City’s public website.
3. Proportionate Share Analysis. Part and parcel to the written study, the City prepared a Proportionate Share Analysis analyzing whether or not the proportionate share of the costs of public facilities identified in the Impact Fee Facilities Plans are reasonably related to new development activity. The Proportionate Share Analysis identified the costs of existing public facilities, the manner of financing existing public facilities, the relative extent to which new development will contribute to the cost of existing facilities and the extent to which new development is entitled to a credit for payment towards the costs of new facilities from general taxation or other means apart from user charges in other parts of the City. A copy of the Proportionate Share Analysis is included in the Impact Fees Analysis and has been available for public inspection 10 days prior to the adoption of this Ordinance both at the City offices and on the City’s public website.
4. Continuing Availability of Written Analyses. Pursuant to 11-36a-504, the Executive Summary, Written Analysis, and proportionate Share Analysis shall be posted and maintained on the City’s website found at www.lindoncity.org.

11.13.050 Impact Fee Calculations.
1. Ordinance Enacting Impact Fees. The City Council has, by this Ordinance, approved an impact fee in accordance with the Impact Fee Analysis set forth in Exhibits “A” and “B”: Fire Impact Fee Facilities Plan/Impact Fee Analysis and the Police Impact Fee Facilities Plan/Impact Fee Analysis.
2. Elements. In calculating the impact fee, the City has included the construction costs, land acquisition costs, costs of improvements, fees for planning, surveying, and engineering services provided for and directly related to the construction of system improvements, debt service charges if the City might use impact fees as revenue stream to pay principal and interest on bonds or other obligations to finance the cost of system improvements, and professional services in preparing the impact fee facility plans and the impact fee analyses.
3. Notice and Hearing. Before approving the Ordinance, the City held a public meeting on March 15, 2016 to review the proposed impact fees, then also held a public hearing on April 19, 2016, and made copies of the Fire Impact Fee Facilities Plan/Impact Fee Analysis, the Police Impact Fee Facilities Plan/Impact Fee Analysis, and the Public Safety Impact Fee Ordinance available to the public in the Lindon City Offices located at 100 North, State Street, Lindon, Utah, and at the City’s public website at www.lindoncity.org, for at least ten (10) days before the date of the hearing, all in conformity with the requirements of Utah Code Annotated §§11-36a-504 and 10-9a-205. After the public hearing, the City Council adopted this Lindon City Public Safety Impact Fees Ordinance.
4. Previously Incurred Costs. To the extent that the new growth and development will be served by previously constructed improvements, the City’s impact fee may include public facility costs and bond costs related to the public safety facility improvements previously incurred by the City. These costs may include all projects included in the Fire Impact Fee Facilities Plan/Impact Fee Analysis and the Police Impact Fee Facilities Plan/Impact Fee Analysis which are under construction or completed but have not been utilized to their capacity, as evidenced by outstanding debt obligations.
5. Tax Credit. Property taxes have not been pledged as a source of revenue for the payment of bonds used to fund construction of the public safety facilities contemplated in the impact fee facilities plan. As such, property taxes have not been specifically identified in the impact fee analysis as a funding source. However, to the extent that the General Fund, or other Funds, which ultimately may include some property tax revenues, are shown to have been used to help pay for the construction of the public safety facilities, development activity will be entitled to an appropriate credit in relation to the property taxes actually used so as to ensure new users are not charged both an impact fee and property taxes.
6. [No text in file]
7. Development Credits. A developer, including a school district or a charter school, may receive a credit against, or a proportionate reimbursement of the Public Safety Impact Fee if the developer, school district, or charter school;
    a. dedicates land for a system improvement;
    b. builds and dedicates some or all of a system improvement; or
    c. dedicates a public facility that the City agrees will reduce the need for a system improvement.
8. Impact Fees Accounting. The City will establish separate interest-bearing ledger accounts for each type of public facility for which an impact fee promulgated in accordance with the requirements of the Utah Impact Fees Act deposited in the appropriate ledger account. Interest earned on each fund or account shall be segregated to that account.
9. Reporting. At the end of each fiscal year, the City shall prepare a report on each fund or account generally showing the source and amount of all monies collected, earned and received by the fund or account and each expenditure from the fund or account.
10. Impact Fee Expenditures. The City may expend impact fees covered by the Impact Fees Ordinance only for system improvements that are of the specific public facility type for which the fee was collected.
11. Time of Expenditure. Impact fees collected pursuant to the requirements of this Impact Fees Ordinance are to be expended, dedicated or encumbered for a permissible use within six years of the receipt of those funds by the City, unless the City Council otherwise directs. For purposes of this calculation, the first funds received shall be deemed to be the first funds expended.
12. Extension of Time. The City may hold previously dedicated or unencumbered fees for longer than six years if it identifies in writing (i) an extraordinary and compelling reason why the fees should be held longer than six years and (ii) establishes an absolute date by which the fees will be expended.
13. Refunds. The City shall refund any impact fees paid by a developer, plus interest actually earned when (i) the developer does not proceed with the development activity and files a written request for a refund; (ii) the fees have not been spent or encumbered; and (iii) no impact has resulted. An impact that would preclude a developer from a refund from the City may include any impact reasonably identified by the City, including, but not limited to, the City having sized facilities and/or paid for, installed and/or caused the installation of facilities based, in whole or in part, upon the Developer’s planned development activity even though that capacity may, at some future time, be utilized by another development.
14. Other Impact Fees. To the extent allowed by law, the City Council may negotiate or otherwise impose impact fees and other fees different from those currently charged. Those charges may, in the discretion of the City Council, include, but not be limited to, reductions or increases in impact fees, all or part of which may be reimbursed to the developer who installed improvements related to and improving the services and/or facilities for which the impact fees are imposed.
15. Additional Fees and Costs. The Public Safety Impact Fees authorized hereby are separate from and in addition to user fees and other charges lawfully imposed by the City, and other fees and costs that may not be included as itemized component parts of the Impact Fee Schedule. In charging any such additional fees as a condition of development approval, the City recognizes that the fees must be a reasonable charge for the service provided.
16. Fees Effective at Time of Payment. Unless the City is otherwise bound by a contractual requirement, the impact fee shall be determined from the fee schedule in effect at the time of application for a building permit in accordance with the provisions of § 11.13.060 below.
17. Imposition of Additional Fee or Refund after Development. Should any developer undertake Development Activities such that the ultimate density or other impact of the development activity is not revealed to the City, either through inadvertence, neglect, a change in plans, or any other cause whatsoever, and/or the impact fee is not initially charged against all units or the total density within the development, the City shall be entitled to charge an additional impact fee to the developer or other appropriate person covering the density for which an impact fee was not previously paid.

11.13.060 Impact Fees Imposed.
Impact fees are hereby imposed as a condition of the issuance of a building permit by Lindon City for any development activity which creates additional demand and need for public facilities or makes demands on the public safety system. The formula used to establish these fees is the total calls, per specified land use, multiplied by the cost per call, equals the impact fee (total calls, per land use, * cost per call = impact fee). The Public Safety Impact Fees imposed are as follows:
+------------------------------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+
|             Zone             | Fire Impact Fee | Police Impact Fee |  Combined Public  |
|                              |                 |                   | Safety Impact fee |
+------------------------------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+
| Residential (per residential | $152.00         | $162.00           | $314.00           |
| unit)                        |                 |                   |                   |
+------------------------------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+
| Non-Residential (Per 1000 SF Floor Space)                                              |
+------------------------------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+
| Commercial                   | $78.00          | $84.00            | $162.00           |
+------------------------------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+
| Industrial                   | $31.00          | $41.00            | $72.00            |
+------------------------------+-----------------+-------------------+-------------------+

11.13.070 Exceptions and Adjustments.
1. Waiver for “Public Purpose”: The City Council may, on a project-by-project basis, authorize exceptions or adjustments to the impact fee rate structure for those projects the City Council determines to be of such benefit to the community as a whole to justify the exception or adjustment. Such projects may included low income housing.
2. Adjustments For Non-Standard Land Uses. The City reserves the right under the Utah Impact Fee Act to assess an adjusted impact fee that more closely matches the true impact that a land use will have on the Public Safety facilities. The Council may adjust impact fees imposed pursuant to this Ordinance as necessary in order to respond to unusual circumstances in specific areas, to ensure that impact fees are imposed fairly, or to permit the adjustments of the amount of the impact fees based upon studies and data submitted by an applicant in order to ensure that the impact fee represents the proportionate share of the cost of providing such public safety facilities which are reasonably related to and necessary in order to provide the services in question to anticipate future growth and development activities.
    a. This adjustment could result in a higher impact fee if the City determines that a particular user creates a greater impact than what is standard for its land use. The City may also decrease the impact fee if the developer can provide documented evidence or other credible analysis that the proposed use will have a lower impact than is standard for its land use
    b. Any analysis upon which an adjustment is made must adequately demonstrate that the modification is appropriate for both the Fire and Police portions of the Public Safety Impact Fee. Adequate documentation justifying the adjustment in one portion of the impact fee shall not be presumed to justify a modification of the other portion of the impact fee.
    c. The formula for determining a non-standard impact fee will assume the buy-in/fair share approach and will be as follows:
    Total call, per the specified land use, multiplied by the cost per call equal the impact fee. (total calls * cost per call = impact fee)
3. Government Entity or School. The City Council may also adjust impact fees to respond to a request for a prompt and individualized impact fee review for the development activity of an agency of the State of Utah, a school district, or charter school.
4. Procedures. Applications for Waiver or Adjustments shall be filed with the City at the time the applicant first requests the extension of service to the applicant’s development or property. Upon receipt of an application, the City Council shall cause a study to be completed, which will evaluate the net economic value received compared to the magnitude of impact fees being waived.

11.13.080 Appeal Procedures.
1. Application. The appeal procedure applies to challenges to the legality of impact fees, to similar and related fees of the City, and to the interpretation and/or application of those fees. By way of illustration, in addition to the legality of the impact fee schedule, determinations of the density of Development activity or calculation of the amount of the impact fee due will also be subject to this appeal procedure.
2. Declaratory Judgment Action. Any person or entity residing in or owning property within the City and any organization, association or corporation representing the interests of persons or entities owning property within a service area may file a declaratory judgment action challenging the validity of an impact fee.
3. Request for Information Concerning the Fee. Any person or entity required to pay an impact fee under this Ordinance may file a written request for information concerning the fee with Lindon City. Lindon City will provide the person or entity with Lindon City’s written impact fee facility plans and impact fees analyses and other relevant information relating to the impact fee within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the request for information.
4. Appeal to the City. After Payment of the Impact Fee; Statute of Limitations for Failure to File. Any person or entity that has paid an impact fee and wishes to challenge the fee shall file a written request for information concerning the fee and proceed under the City’s appeal procedure. A challenge may not be initiated unless it is initiated within:
    a. Challenge of Noticing Requirements. The person or entity has thirty (30) days after paying an impact fee to challenge whether Lindon City complied with the noticing requirements of the Utah Impact Fees Act with respect to the imposition of the impact fee; and
    b. Challenge of Other Procedural Requirements. The person or entity has 180 days after paying an impact fee to challenge whether Lindon City complied with any other procedural requirements of the Utah Impact Fees Act for imposing impact fees; and
    c. Challenge of Impact Fee. The person or entity has one year after paying the impact fee to challenge the impact fee.
5. Appeal to Lindon City. Any developer, landowner or affected party desiring to challenge the legality of any impact fee or related fee or exaction under this Ordinance may appeal directly to Lindon City by filing a written challenge with the City before the deadlines provided in Subsection 4 of this Section.
    a. Hearing. An informal hearing will be held not sooner than five (5) days nor more than twenty-five (25) days after the written appeal to Lindon City is filed.
    b. Decision. After the conclusion of the informal hearing, the City Council, by majority vote, shall affirm, reverse, or take action with respect to the challenge or appeal as the Council deems appropriate. The decision of the Council will be issued within thirty (30) days after the date the written challenge was filed. In light of the statutorily mandated time restriction, Lindon City shall not be required to provide more than three (3) working days prior notice of the time, date and location of the informal hearing and the inconvenience of the hearing to the challenging party shall not serve as a basis of a judicial appeal of Lindon City’s final determination.
6. Denial Due to Passage of Time. Should Lindon City, for any reason, fail to issue a final decision on a written challenge to an impact fee, its calculation or application, within thirty (30) days after the filing of that challenge with the City, the challenge shall be deemed to have been denied.
7. Challenge by Arbitration. Each person or entity intending to challenge an impact fee shall file a written request for arbitration with the local political subdivision within the time limitation provided for the applicable type of challenge as is stated in §11-36a-705. If a person or entity files a written request for arbitration, an arbitrator or arbitration panel shall be selected and a hearing on the challenge shall be held within thirty (30) days after the date the request for arbitration is filed. The arbitrator or arbitration panel shall then issue a decision in writing within ten (10) days from the date the hearing is completed.
8. Judicial Review. Nothing in this Ordinance shall be interpreted to alter the statutory deadlines before which an action to challenge an impact fee must be initiated in the District Court. After having been served with a copy of the pleadings initiating a court review, Lindon City shall submit to the court the record of the proceedings before the City Council, including minutes, and if available, a true and correct transcript of any proceedings.

11.13.090 Miscellaneous.
1. Severability. If any section, subsection, paragraph, clause or phrase of this Impact Fees Ordinance shall be declared invalid for any reason, such decision shall not affect the remaining portions of this Impact Fees Ordinance, which shall remain in full force and effect, and for this purpose, the provisions of this Impact Fees Ordinance are declared to be severable.
2. Interpretation. This Impact Fees Ordinance has been divided into sections, subsections, paragraphs and clauses for convenience only and the interpretation of this Impact Fees Ordinance shall not be affected by such division or by any heading contained herein. (Ord. 2016-13, adopted, 2016)

Title 12 STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES

Chapters:
12.04        Use of Sidewalks, Trails, and Pedestrian Ways
12.08        General Use of Streets and Rights-of-Way
12.12        Meetings, Assemblies and Parades
12.16        Excavations
12.20        City Parks

Chapter 12.04 USE OF SIDEWALKS, TRAILS, AND PEDESTRIAN WAYS

Sections:
12.04.010    Obstructions.
12.04.020    Discharges of water.
12.04.030    Receiving goods.
12.04.040    Driving or riding upon.
12.04.050    Maintenance and snow removal in front of property.

12.04.010 Obstructions.
It is unlawful for any person to place, or permit to be placed, upon or across a public sidewalk, trail, or other public pedestrian way:
1. Any broken ware, glass, filth, rubbish, refuse matters, snow, ice, water, mud, garbage, ashes, dirt or other like substances;
2. Any vehicles, lumber, wood, boxes, fencing, building materials, landscaping materials, tree limbs, shrubbery or other vegetation, dead trees, tree stumps, merchandise or other thing which shall obstruct such public street or sidewalk or any part thereof, or the free use and enjoyment thereof, or the free passage over and upon the same, or any part thereof, without the permission of the city. (Ord. 2018-13 § 1, amended, 2018; Prior code §15-1)

12.04.020 Discharges of water.
It is unlawful for any person owning, occupying or having control of any premises to suffer or permit irrigation or well water or water from the roof or eaves of any house, building or other structure, or from any other source under the control of such person, to be discharged and spread upon the surface of any sidewalk, trail, pedestrian way, or street. (Ord. 2018-13 § 1, amended, 2018; Prior code §15-2)

12.04.030 Receiving goods.
It is unlawful for any person to place or keep, or suffer to be placed or kept upon any sidewalk, trail, or pedestrian way, any goods, wares or merchandise which he may be receiving or delivering, without leaving a six (6) foot passageway clear upon such sidewalk; and it is unlawful for any person receiving or delivering such goods, wares or merchandise to suffer the same or remain on such sidewalk for a longer period than one (1) hour. (Ord. 2018-13 § 1, amended, 2018; Prior code §15-3)

12.04.040 Driving or riding upon.
It is unlawful for any person to drive or operate a motorized vehicle (excluding electric-assist bicycles, skateboards, and scooters) upon any sidewalk, trail, or pedestrian way, except across a sidewalk at established crossings. (Ord. 2018-13 § 1, amended, 2018; Prior code §15-4)

12.04.050 Maintenance and snow removal in front of property.
It is unlawful for the owners or occupants of residences or places of business within this city to fail to cause the sidewalk, trail, or pedestrian way abutting thereon to be cleared of snow and ice, swept or cleaned each morning before the hour of nine a.m. Snow, ice, leaves, grass clippings and other similar items removed from sidewalks, trails, pedestrian ways, driveways, or parking lots shall be removed and/or placed upon the property adjacent to the surfaces where the snow, ice, leaves, or other similar items were removed and shall not be placed on the street, sidewalk, trail, pedestrian way, or public right-of-way. Landscaping or other vegetation, including vegetation within the public right-of-way, abutting or adjacent to streets, street shoulders, sidewalks, trails, or pedestrian ways shall be maintained by the abutting or adjacent owners or occupants of residences or places of business. (Ord. 2018-13 § 1, amended, 2018; Prior code §15-5)

Chapter 12.08 GENERAL USE OF STREETS AND RIGHTS-OF-WAY

Sections:
12.08.010    Depositing material prohibited.
12.08.020    Streamers, banners and signs.

12.08.010 Depositing material prohibited.
1. It is unlawful for any person intentionally or carelessly to throw, cast, put into, drop or leave in any street, street shoulder, gutter, sidewalk, trail, pedestrian way, public right-of-way or public place any snow, ice, stones, gravel, sand, coal, dirt, manure, garbage, leaves, lawn or hedge clippings, construction materials, rubbish or similar items of any kind or any other substance which shall render such street, sidewalk, trail, or right-of-way unsafe or unsightly or shall interfere with travel thereon, or to direct or instruct another person to do the same. The liability for the removal of such material shall rest with:
    a. The owner of the material, if the material is placed at the owner's direction or through the actions of the owner, or if the material is deposited adjacent to the owner's property; or
    b. The person or persons who placed the material, whether intentional or not, in violation of this section; or
    c. Both the owner of the material and the person or persons who placed the material in violation of this section.
2. Any person cited for violating this section shall remove the material within forty-eight (48) hours of the citation or be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Each day a violation of this chapter continues after the notice, shall constitute a separate offense. The city may prescribe a shorter time for removal in cases where the city determines that the material poses an extreme hazard to the public. If the person or persons cited under this section fail to remove the material within the required time, the city may remove the material to another location or dispose of the material at the expense of the person or persons cited. Persons cited in violation of this section may also be liable for any cost incurred by the city for the erection of barricades or warning signs when the city deems it necessary to protect the safety of the public. (Ord. 2018-13 § 1, amended, 2018; Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000; Prior code §15-9)

12.08.020 Streamers, banners and signs.
It is unlawful for any person to construct, erect or maintain any streamers, banners, or signs, or suspend the same over any public street, sidewalk, trail, pedestrian way or public right-of-way of this city without obtaining a permit so to do from the city, applications for which shall specify the width and length of such streamers, banners or signs, the height the same shall be suspended from the pavements, and the length of time the same is desired to remain. (Ord. 2018-13 § 1, amended, 2018; Prior code §15-12)

Chapter 12.12 MEETINGS, ASSEMBLIES AND PARADES

Sections:
12.12.010    Definitions.
12.12.020    Permit-Required.
12.12.030    Exceptions.
12.12.040    Permit--Application.
12.12.050    Permit--Required findings.
12.12.060    Authority to impose conditions.
12.12.070    Prior application.
12.12.080    Issuance or denial--Notice.
12.12.090    Appeal procedure.
12.12.100    Permit--Issuance conditions.
12.12.110    Permittee duties.
12.12.120    Permit—Revocation.
12.12.130    Public Conduct--Obstruction prohibited.
12.12.140    Public conduct--Vehicle parking.
12.12.150    Violations and Penalties.

12.12.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter:
"Activity" means a parade, public meeting or assembly.
"Funeral procession" means a single direct movement from a mortuary or church to the place of burial of a human body, under direction of an authorized funeral director.
"Parade" means a march or procession of any kind.
"Public meeting or assembly" means a planned or organized gathering of a group of persons or any ceremony, show, exhibition or pageant which may reasonably be expected to result in the gathering of a group of persons, upon any public streets park or other public grounds. (Ord. 130 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §15-10(1))

12.12.020 Permit-Required.
It is unlawful for any person to hold, manage, conduct, aid, participate in, form, start or carry on any parade or public meeting or assembly, as defined herein in or upon any public street, park or other public grounds in the city unless and until a permit to conduct such meeting, assembly or parade has been obtained in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, except as herein provided. (Ord. 130 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §15-10(2))

12.12.030 Exceptions.
This chapter shall not apply to any of the following:
1. Funeral processions;
2. A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions; and
3. Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, providing such activity is authorized by the school district and is under the immediate direction and supervision of the school authorities authorized by the school district to approve and supervise such activity. (Ord. 130 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §15-10(3))

12.12.040 Permit--Application.
1. Application for permits under this chapter must be filed with the chief of police not less than five days in advance of the proposed activity. Late application may be accepted if filed sufficiently in advance of the date of the proposed activity to enable the chief of police to determine that such activity will meet the requirements set forth in Section 12.12.050.
2. The application shall be in writing and shall give the following information:
    a. The name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the permit. If the activity is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by any organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the authorized head of such organization shall be stated;
    b. The name address and telephone number of the person who will be directly in charge of and responsible for the activity;
    c. The purpose of the activity;
    d. The date, time and location or route of the proposed activity;
    e. The approximate number of persons who will participate in the activity and the number and kind of vehicles, equipment and animals which will be used;
    f. Plans for the assembly and dispersal of the parade, including times and locations thereof;
    g. A statement as to whether the parade will occupy all or only a portion of the streets proposed to be traversed;
    h. A statement as to whether a permit has been requested or obtained from any other city within which such activity shall commence, terminate or occur in part; and
    i. Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a determination of the findings required by Section 12.12.050. (Ord. 130 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §15-10(4))

12.12.050 Permit--Required findings.
The chief of police or his designated representative shall issue a permit as provided for hereunder when from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained he finds that:
1. The conduct of such activity will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic;
2. The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas where the activity will take place or areas contiguous to such area;
3. The conduct of such activity will not unduly interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire, or the movement of other emergency equipment;
4. The conduct of such activity is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property; and
5. Such activity is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising the goods, wares, or merchandise of a particular business establishment or vendor. (Ord. 130 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §15-10(5))

12.12.060 Authority to impose conditions.
The chief of police shall have authority to impose such conditions as are necessary to ensure that all of the findings mentioned in Section 12.12.050 shall exist during the continuation of the activity. (Ord. 130 § l, amended, 1985; Prior code §15-10(6))

12.12.070 Prior application.
If a prior permit application shall have been made for an activity proposed to be held at the same time or place, the chief of police may refuse approval of the later application. In case of such refusal, he shall forthwith send the applicant a written notice that he may apply for an alternate time and place. (Ord. 130 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §15-10(7))

12.12.080 Issuance or denial--Notice.
The chief of police shall act upon the permit application within three days of the filing thereof. If he disapproves of the application, he shall mail to the applicant within that three-day period notice of the denial and the reason for it. (Ord. 130 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §15-10(8))

12.12.090 Appeal procedure.
The applicant shall have the right to appeal the denial of a permit to the city council. A notice of appeal shall be filed with the city recorder within two days after receipt of notice of the denial. The city council shall act upon the appeal at its next meeting following receipt of the notice of appeal. (Ord. 130 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §15-10(9))

12.12.100 Permit--Issuance conditions.
Conditions to the issuance of any permit shall be set forth in the permit. (Ord. 130 §1,1985, amended, 1985; Prior code §15-10 (101))

12.12.110 Permittee duties.
1. A permittee hereunder shall comply with all terms and conditions of such permit and with all applicable laws and ordinances.
2. The written permit obtained pursuant to this chapter shall be carried by the person heading or leading the activity for which the permit was issued. (Ord. 130 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §15-10(11))

12.12.120 Permit—Revocation.
The chief of police may revoke any permit issued hereunder upon the failure of the permitter to comply with the terms and conditions of such permit or if the activity, because of the manner in which it is being conducted, or for any other reason, is jeopardizing those elements of the public safety or welfare set forth in Section 12.12.050. (Ord. 130 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §15-10 (12))

12.12.130 Public Conduct--Obstruction prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to unreasonably obstruct, impede or interfere with any parade or public meeting or assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating in such parade, meeting or assembly for which a permit has been granted in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 130 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §15-10 (13)(a))

12.12.140 Public conduct--Vehicle parking.
The chief or police shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting part of the route of a parade, the chief of police shall post signs to such effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. (Ord. 130 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §15-10(13)(h))

12.12.150 Violations and Penalties.
Any person violating, causing, or permitting a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Each day a violation of this Chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense.

Chapter 12.16 EXCAVATIONS

Sections:
12.16.010    Permit--Required.
12.16.020    Bond-Required.
12.16.030    Commencement and completion.
12.16.040    Inspection.
12.16.050    Work guarantee.
12.16.060    Barricades and lights.
12.16.070    Violation--Penalty.

12.16.010 Permit--Required.
It is unlawful for any person to make any excavation in any public street or road or to remove any asphalt, pavement or other materials forming any street or road without first obtaining a permit from the city building inspector. Such permit shall be issued in accordance with the provisions of this chapter and only if said excavation can be accomplished in such a manner as to protect the safety of the general public. (Ord. 66 §1, amended, 1979)

12.16.020 Bond-Required.
The person applying for an excavation permit shall be required to deposit with the city treasurer the sum of $300 cash or such person may obtain a bond in said amount in form and content acceptable to the city attorney. Such deposit or bond must be provided before the permit may be issued. (Ord. 66 §2, amended, 1979)

12.16.030 Commencement and completion.
The person issued an excavation permit shall be required to commence and complete the excavation work covered by the permit within 10 days. If the last day of the time period falls on a weekend or holiday the time for performance shall automatically be extended to the next regular working day. In the event such excavation work is not completed, in full, within the said 10 day time period, the permit holder shall forfeit the cash deposit or bond proceeds to the city. If any person, firm, or corporation installs, places, constructs, alters, repairs, or maintains any approach road, driveway, pole, pipeline, conduit, sewer, ditch, culvert, outdoor advertising sign, or any other structure or object of any kind or character within the right-of-way of any highway without complying with this chapter, the city may remove the installation from the right-of-way, require the person, firm, or corporation to remove the installation, or give written notice to the person, firm, or corporation to remove the installation from the right-of-way. Such written notice shall comply with section 27-12-135 of the Utah Code Annotated. If the installation is not removed within ten days after the notice is complete, the city may remove the installation at the expense of the person, firm, or corporation. The city may recover the costs and expenses incurred in removing the installation, serving notice, and the costs of a lawsuit, if any, and $10 for each day the installation remained within the right-of-way after notice was complete. (Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000; Ord. 66 §3, amended, 1979)

12.16.040 Inspection.
The permit holder shall comply with the specifications of the city with respect to repair of the street or road excavated and shall be responsible to call for an inspection of the work by the city building inspector when it is completed. The fact that the permit holder has obtained an excavation permit does not relieve such permit holder from the responsibility to maintain appropriate barricades, lights and other necessary equipment in order to protect the general public from harm. (Ord. 66 §4, amended, 1979)

12.16.050 Work guarantee.
The permit holder shall warrant and guarantee that any street and road repair shall remain in good condition for a period of one year after inspection by the city building inspector. The city may, in its discretion, cause the permit holder to furnish the city with a bond in an amount sufficient to correct any defective repairs during said guarantee period. (Ord. 66 §5, amended, 1979)

12.16.060 Barricades and lights.
It is unlawful for any person, by or for whom any excavation is made in a public street for any purpose, to fail to cause a barricade, rail or other sufficient fence to be placed so as to enclose such excavation, together with the dirt, gravel or other material thrown therefrom, and to maintain such barricade during the whole time for which such excavation continues; and it is unlawful for any person to fail to have lighted lanterns or some other proper and sufficient lights fixed to parts of such barricade, or in some other proper manner over or near the excavation, and over and near the dirt, gravel or other material taken therefrom and so kept from the beginning of twilight through the whole of every night during all the time such excavation exists. It is unlawful for any person willfully and unlawfully to extinguish, remove, diminish, deface or interfere with such light or any highway sign, signal, notice, or warning or to tear down, remove, or interfere with any rail, fence or barricade fixed in accordance with the provisions of this section. (Ord. 97-1, amended, 2000; Prior code § 15-8)

12.16.070 Violation--Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of Sections 12.16.010 through 12.16.050 shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Each day a violation of this Chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 66 §8, amended, 1979)

Chapter 12.20 CITY PARKS

Sections:
12.20.010    Purpose.
12.20.020    Definitions.
12.20.030    Hours of use.
12.20.040    Motor Vehicles.
12.20.050    Commercial vehicles.
12.20.060    Bicycles.
12.20.070    Paths, trails or roads.
12.20.080    Animals.
12.20.090    Tethering animal to tree or structure prohibited.
12.20.100    Interference with animals or fowl prohibited.
12.20.110    Hunting and fishing.
12.20.120    Restroom facilities.
12.20.130    Concession stands.
12.20.140    Distribution of advertising material.
12.20.150    Camping.
12.20.160    Fires.
12.20.170    Littering prohibited.
12.20.180    Discharge and Possess of Fireworks, Explosives or Firearms.
12.20.190    Defacing or destruction of property.
12.20.200    Alcohol.
12.20.210    Archery.
12.20.215    Smoking and vaping.
12.20.220    Golf.
12.20.230    Games restricted to designated areas.
12.20.240    Prohibited activities.
12.20.250    Noise restrictions.
12.20.260    Commercial use.
12.20.270    Violation--Penalty.

12.20.010 Purpose.
This chapter shall be for the purpose of establishing regulations for the use of city parks, to provide for the maximum enjoyment of the city parks by the citizens of Lindon City. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.020 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the term "park" includes any piece of ground located either within the city limits, or that is under control of the city, that is operated and maintained by the city and set apart for the use of the general public, whether developed or undeveloped, and that is usually, or may be, planted with trees, lawns and other shrubbery. The term "park" also includes those facilities located within a park which are established for recreational, sporting, and entertainment activities. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.030 Hours of use.
The hours of use for city parks shall be between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 11:00 p.m. unless otherwise established by resolution of the Lindon City Council. No person shall be permitted in city parks, either on foot or in any type of vehicle or conveyance during the hours of prohibited use, unless it shall be for the express purpose of traveling directly through the park on a public street. (Ord. 2008-9, amended, 2008; Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.040 Motor Vehicles.
1. No motor vehicle may be operated or driven within any park at a speed in excess of that speed posted on the particular road, trail or pathway within the park, which speed shall not, in any event, exceed the speed of 15 miles per hour.
2. No motor vehicle may be driven within a city park, other than in those areas specifically designated and posted for that particular purpose. This restriction shall not apply to motorized or self -propelled equipment used within the park by city employees for transportation, maintenance, and service of city parks and park facilities, or to emergency vehicles.
3. No person shall operate or drive any motor vehicle upon any street or path within a public park in the city which is designated, by appropriate signage, to be used only for city maintenance vehicles.
4. Motor vehicles shall include, but shall not be limited to, automobiles, trucks, tote goats, motorcycles, three wheelers, four wheelers, motor bikes, snow mobiles, and any and all other self-propelled mechanical vehicles. No motor vehicle, even though operated within the speed permitted and in or on the places provided for such vehicles, shall be operated in a careless or reckless manner within the park area. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.050 Commercial vehicles.
No person shall drive or operate any commercial vehicle upon any road or driveway in any city park, except as may be specifically provided or designated for such use, by appropriate signage. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.060 Bicycles.
No person shall operate or ride a bicycle in any area in any city park which is designated, by appropriate signage, as not allowing bicycle use, or in any area where such use may damage park facilities, plants, or other vegetation. Bicycles shall not be operated in a careless or reckless manner. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.070 Paths, trails or roads.
When a trail, path or road within a park is designated, by appropriate signage, to be used for a specific purpose or purposes, then such trail, path or road may only be used for the purpose designated. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.080 Animals.
1. Except as specifically provided in this chapter, no person shall lead, ride or permit any animal to be within a city park, except in the Lindon City Arena and related facilities, and other areas specifically designated for such use, and except that dogs properly licensed with Lindon City, and in compliance with all city regulations are allowed in city parks.
2. Obedience class instructors and animal show promoters shall not use city parks unless a permit has been obtained from the city. A permit for an obedience class or animal show may be granted by the city upon compliance with the following conditions:
    a. The permit must be obtained prior to the use of the city park.
    b. The applicant must pay the fee as established by resolution of the city Council.
    c. A clean-up bond, in such amount as determined by the city Council, must be deposited by the applicant with the city to assure the proper clean-up of the city park.
    d. A written plan must be provided by the permit applicant demonstrating the physical means for restraining and confining the permitted animals to the designated area.
    e. The applicant, immediately following the activity or event, must clean the park area of all refuse, trash and animal waste.
    f. Animals officially registered for obedience classes or animal shows for which a permit has been obtained, may be permitted within the city parks during the obedience class or animal show. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.090 Tethering animal to tree or structure prohibited.
No person shall hitch or fasten any horse or other animal to any tree or other place or structure within a city park not specifically designated and provided for such purpose. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.100 Interference with animals or fowl prohibited.
No person shall annoy, injure, release from confinement, or in any manner interfere with any swan, duck, goose, bird or other animal in a city park.

12.20.110 Hunting and fishing.
No person shall hunt or fish in any park unless there are specific facilities set aside for that purpose and then only in accordance with such use, as designated by appropriate signage. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.120 Restroom facilities.
No person over six years of age shall enter or utilize any restroom facility designated for members of the opposite sex, at a facility located within the city park. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.130 Concession stands.
The city shall have control over all concession stands or dispensaries that sell any items to the public in any city park, and before any concession shall be permitted in any park, an approval and license must first be obtained from the city. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.140 Distribution of advertising material.
No person shall distribute any commercial advertisement, or post, place or erect any commercial advertisement, of any nature, within any city park or on any recreational facility located within the city parks, except as may be authorized by the city. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.150 Camping.
No person shall camp or erect any tent or shelter within any city park without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.160 Fires.
No person shall build or ignite any fire within any city park, except in receptacles provided for that purpose, without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.170 Littering prohibited.
1. No person shall leave or deposit rubbish or refuse anywhere within the city parks, or related facilities, except in containers provided for that purpose.
2. No person shall bring rubbish or refuse onto any public park, or leave or deposit rubbish or refuse generated from off-park activities, in any park refuse container.
3. No person shall pollute any stream of water located within any city park (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.180 Discharge and Possess of Fireworks, Explosives or Firearms.
1. Discharge. No person shall discharge any firearm, firecrackers, rockets, torpedoes, powder, or any other fireworks or explosives, within any city park, except persons who have obtained a permit from the City.
2. Possession. No person shall have possession of any of the items identified in subpart (1) within any city park, except persons who have obtained a permit from the City, or possess an item over which the state legislature has retained jurisdiction to regulate and control under §53-5a0192, §76-10-500 and §78B-4-511 of the Utah Code. (Ord. 2011-9, amended, 2011; Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.190 Defacing or destruction of property.
No person shall cut, break, remove, injure, deface, destroy, damage, or pick any flower, vine, shrub, plant life, or other park improvement or park facilities. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.200 Alcohol.
No person shall consume or have possession of any beer or other alcoholic beverage within a city park. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.210 Archery.
No person shall engage or be involved in any archery activity, or the discharge of any arrow or similar device, within any city park. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.215 Smoking and vaping.
1. In all city parks, smoking and vaping is prohibited within twenty-five feet (25') of children’s play areas, pavilions, restrooms, or sports fields as designated by “No Smoking” signs.
2. During any sporting or recreation event(s), smoking and vaping is prohibited within twenty-five feet (25') of the athletic fields, sports courts, trails and play areas where the sporting or recreation event(s) are taking place, and is only permitted in associated parking areas.
3. In all city parks, the city shall post “No Smoking” signs which shall read “No Smoking or Vaping in Lindon City Parks Pursuant to City Code Section 12.20.215”.
4. This section shall be enforced by the police department of Lindon City and any person may initiate enforcement by registering a complaint with the police department. Any person found in violation of this section shall be guilty of a class B misdemeanor and fined, upon conviction, an amount not to exceed one hundred dollars ($100).
5. For purposes of this section, the following definitions will apply:
    a. “Smoking” means the burning of, inhaling from, exhaling the smoke from, or the possession of a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or any other matter or substance which contains tobacco or any other substance that can be smoked, or the inhaling or exhaling of smoke or vapor from an electronic smoking device.
    b. “Vaping” means inhaling vapor or liquid through a personal vaporizer, e-cigarette, or other electronic smoking device. (Ord. 2016-18 §1, adopted, 2016)

12.20.220 Golf.
No person shall engage or be involved in any golf activity, or the playing or practice of the sport of golf, within any city park. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.230 Games restricted to designated areas.
No person shall engage or be involved in any sport or recreational activity which normally requires the use of a specific physical facility, except within the physical confines of park facilities which are provided for such use, including but not limited to softball and baseball. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.240 Prohibited activities.
No person shall engage or be involved in any activity, sport, or recreational activity which is stated, by appropriate signage, as a prohibited activity, sport or recreational activity. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.250 Noise restrictions.
No person shall play or cause to be played amplified sound without obtaining a permit from the city to do so. Such permit may be denied by the city where it is the reasonable belief of the city that such sound or music would have the propensity to disturb the peaceful enjoyment of the park facilities by the members of the public or annoy residents adjoining park facilities. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.260 Commercial use.
No person shall use a city park for any commercial purpose without first obtaining a written permit to do so from the city. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

12.20.270 Violation--Penalty.
Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. Each day a violation of this Chapter continues shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 171, adopted, 1989)

Title 13 PUBLIC SERVICES

Chapters:
13.04        General Provisions
13.08        Water and Sewer Department
13.12        Administration of Public Services
13.13        Public Sewage Treatment System
13.16        Rates and Fees
13.18        Pressurized Irrigation
13.19        City Pressurized Irrigation System
13.20        Wastewater Discharges
13.22        Storm Water Utility
13.23        Storm Drainage
13.24        Connections to Mobile Homes or Trailers
13.26        City Culinary Water System, Sewer System, and Pressurized Irrigation System--User Fees
13.28        Requirements for the Control of Back Flow and Cross-Connections
13.30        Drinking Water Source Protection
13.32        Water Conservation Plan Ordinance

Chapter 13.04 GENERAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
13.04.010    Injury to system.
13.04.020    Fire hydrants.
13.04.030    Water scarcity.
13.04.040    Sewer manholes.
13.04.050    Pipe Repairs.
13.04.060    Waste of water.
13.04.070    Non-liability for damages.
13.04.080    Violation--Penalty.

13.04.010 Injury to system.
No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with, any structure, appurtenance, or equipment, which is a part of the city water or sewer system, without prior authorization from the superintendent of the water and sewer department. (Ord. 121 §51, amended, 1985)

13.04.020 Fire hydrants.
All public fire hydrants shall be under the control and shall be kept in repair by the water and sewer department, and in case of fire the fire department shall have free access to such hydrants. No other person shall open or operate any fire hydrant or attempt to draw water therefrom without special permission of the superintendent of the water and sewer department. (Ord. 121 §52, amended, 1985)

13.04.030 Water scarcity.
In time of scarcity of water, whenever it shall in the judgment of the mayor or the city council be necessary, the mayor or the city council shall by proclamation limit the use of water for other than domestic purposes to such extent as may be necessary for the public good. It is unlawful for any person, or his family, servants, or agents, to violate any proclamation made pursuant to this section. (Ord. 121 §51, amended, 1985)

13.04.040 Sewer manholes.
It is unlawful for any person to open any sewer manhole without written permission from the superintendent. (Ord. 121 §54, amended, 1985)

13.04.050 Pipe Repairs.
All users of city water and sewer services shall keep their service pipes, connections, and other apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at their own expense. No person, except under the direction of the water and sewer superintendent, shall be allowed to dig into the street for the purpose of removing or repairing any water or sewer service pipe or main. (Ord. 121 §55, amended, 1985)

13.04.060 Waste of water.
It is unlawful for any water user to waste water, or to allow it to be wasted, by imperfect stops, taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes, or to allow tanks or water troughs to leak or overflow or to wastefully run water from hydrants, faucets, or stops or through basins, water closets, urinals, sinks, or other apparatus or to use water in violation of the rules, regulations, or ordinances controlling the city water system. (Ord. 121 §25,1985, amended, 1985)

13.04.070 Non-liability for damages.
The city shall not be liable for any damage to a water service user by reason of stoppage or interruption of his or her water supply service caused by fires, scarcity of water, accidents to the water system or its mains or which occurs as the result of maintenance and extension operations, or from any other unavoidable cause. This section shall not be construed to extend the liability of the municipality beyond that provided in the Governmental Immunity Act. (Ord. 121 §56, amended, 1985)

13.04.080 Violation--Penalty.
It is unlawful for any person or entity to violate any of the provisions of this Title and any violation of this Title or failure to comply with any of the provisions of this Title shall be punishable as a Class B misdemeanor. Each day a violation of this Title shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 121 §57, amended, 1985)

Chapter 13.08 WATER AND SEWER DEPARTMENT

Sections:
13.08.010    Creation.
13.08.020    Superintendent--Appointment.
13.08.030    Superintendent--Duties.

13.08.010 Creation.
There is created a water and sewer department which shall consist of a superintendent and such other employees as shall be provided for by the city council. (Ord. 121 §1, amended, 1985)

13.08.020 Superintendent--Appointment.
The mayor may appoint by and with the approval of the city council a competent person to the position of superintendent of the water and sewer department who shall hold office during the pleasure of the city council. (Ord. 121 §2, amended, 1985)

13.08.030 Superintendent--Duties.
The superintendent of the water and sewer department shall be responsible for the proper care and the efficient operation of the water works and sewer system; He shall have charge of the city reservoirs, water tanks, water mains, sewer lines, fire hydrants, and all equipment and appurtenances of the water works and sewer system. He shall direct the laying of the water and sewer mains, the installation of all service lines, and the regulation of the supply of water. He shall inspect all plumbing installations, or provide for such inspection by other city personnel and may condemn and order removed any plumbing installation or fixture which violates any provision of state law or city ordinance. (Ord. 121 §3, amended, 1985)

Chapter 13.12 ADMINISTRATION OF PUBLIC SERVICES

Sections:
13.12.010    Collection of charges.
13.12.020    Application for public utility services.
13.12.025    Repealed.
13.12.030    Application for public utility services by non-owner--Property owner responsibility.
13.12.040    Billing statement.
13.12.050    Termination--Notice.
13.12.060    Termination--Appeal.
13.12.070    Termination without notice.
13.12.080    Use after disconnection.
13.12.090    Access to premises.
13.12.100    Utility connection/road cut permit.
13.12.110    Water meters.
13.12.120    Use of sewer and culinary water required.
13.12.130    Service lateral.
13.12.140    Multiple connections.
13.12.150    Water use only on connected premises.
13.12.160    Public utility services specifications and requirements.
13.12.170    Repealed.
13.12.180    Inspection of installations.
13.12.190    Connections.
13.12.200    Extension--Petition.
13.12.210    Extension--Advance payment of costs.
13.12.220    Repealed.
13.12.230    Extension--Design and specifications.
13.12.240    Extension--Subdivision approval.
13.12.250    Extension--Full lot width extension.
13.12.260    Owner to bear costs of installation/connection.

13.12.010 Collection of charges.
The city council provides that in order to enforce the collection of any charge relative to the cost of construction, reconstruction, maintenance, control, operation, replacement, and provision of any public utility services provided by the city, one (1) charge shall be made for the combined use of the public utility services provided. However, the charges for each service shall be separately stated on the bill. For purposes of this chapter “public utility services” shall mean culinary water services, sewer services, secondary water irrigation services, storm water utility services, solid waste disposal, and recycling services. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §4, amended, 1985)

13.12.020 Application for public utility services.
Any person desiring, or who is required, to secure public utility services from the city, when such services are available, shall apply therefor to the city and consent to a utility agreement with the city, which shall set forth the terms and conditions of the use, maintenance, and termination of public utility services and shall be in a form approved by the city council. This agreement shall be reviewed from time to time and changed, as approved the by city administration, to ensure continued compliance with any municipal, county, or state requirements. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 178, amended, 1990; Ord. 121 §5, amended, 1985)

13.12.025 Rental Utility Agreement.
(Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), repealed, 2019)

13.12.030 Application for public utility services by non-owner--Property owner responsibility.
1. Pursuant to Chapter 13.16 and any other sections applicable to rental units or other rental or leased properties, the city shall apply fees for public utility services, at the rates and terms established in the Lindon City Fee Schedule, as adopted and amended from time to time by city council resolution, to all rental units or other rental or leased properties.
2. The owner of any rental units or other rental or leased properties will be responsible for all fees and charges for public utility services provided to such rental properties.
3. Owners of rental properties shall, upon request, be entitled to receive copies of monthly billing statements for rental properties they own. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §9, amended, 1985)

13.12.040 Billing statement.
The city shall provide a written statement to each user of the public utility services once each month, or at such other interval as is established by the city council. Said statement may be provided electronically with authorization from the account holder. Said statement shall separately specify the amount of the bill for each of the public utility services provided and the place of payment and date due. If any person fails to pay the charges for the public utility services provided within fifteen (15) days of the due date, or within such other time as established in the terms of the utility agreement, the city shall notify the public works department and the city shall have authority to direct said department to shut off all water service to the premises involved after compliance with the procedure set out in Section 13.12.050. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019)

13.12.050 Termination--Notice.
According to terms established within the utility agreement, prior to a proposed termination of water service, the city shall give written notice of proposed termination for nonpayment to the account holder. The notice time period shall be computed from the date such notice is deposited in the mail or sent electronically. The notice shall be given by first-class mail, electronically (for those receiving electronic billing statements), or posted on the premises and shall contain a summary of the following information:
1. The date of proposed termination.
2. The amount of the delinquency.
3. A description of the account holder’s appeal rights. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §9(1), amended, 1985)

13.12.060 Termination--Appeal.
Any person whose water service is to be terminated may appeal to the city council, acting as the board of equalization, by filing a written appeal in the office of the city administrator within ten (10) days of the receipt of the notice of proposed termination. Any appeal shall be solely for the purpose of reviewing the interpretation given the terms of this chapter by the city and not to vary the terms in any way. Such appeal shall be considered by the city council within thirty (30) days of receipt of notice. Upon filing of the appeal, the city shall take no further action with regard to the termination until the city council makes a final decision on the appeal. If the city council affirms the decision of the city, the water may be shut off immediately. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §10, amended, 1985)

13.12.070 Termination without notice.
Notwithstanding any provision or agreement to the contrary the city may terminate public utility services without notice where, in the city’s judgment, a clear emergency or serious health or safety hazard exists for so long as such conditions exist or where there is unauthorized use of or connection to the city public utility services or where there is evidence or suspicion of tampering with pipes, meters, or other public utility services equipment. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §10, amended, 1985)

13.12.080 Use after disconnection.
It is unlawful for any person, after the water has been turned off from their premises on account of nonpayment of service fees or other violation of the rules, regulations or ordinances pertaining to the public utility services, to turn the water on, or allow the water to be turned on or used, without authorization from the city. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §11, amended, 1985)

13.12.090 Access to premises.
Free access shall at all reasonable times be allowed to the public works department or other authorized personnel to all places supplied with public utility services to examine the apparatus, the amount of water used, the manner of use of any public utility service, or to perform such duties as they may have under this title. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §12, amended, 1985)

13.12.100 Utility connection/road cut permit.
It is unlawful for any person to make any extension of any pipe or connect any fixture to the public utility services systems for any purpose whatever without first obtaining a permit or authorization therefor from the public works department and paying the permit fee which may be required. All persons must, after the completion of any plumbing work connected to the public utility systems, report the same to the public works department. All plumbing shall be done in compliance with all applicable city ordinances. No connection shall be made or permitted until the plumbing work has been inspected and approved by the public works department or other authorized city inspector. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §13, amended, 1985)

13.12.110 Water meters.
All structures, dwellings, units, and establishments using water from the city water system must have such number, size and type of water meters connected to their water system as are necessary in the judgment of the public works department to adequately measure the water used by the respective water users. Meters will be paid for at the expense of the property holder, at rates established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Meter readings shall be taken at regular intervals as determined by the public works department and shall be submitted to the city for the purpose of making necessary billings for water and sewer service. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §14, amended, 1985)

13.12.120 Use of sewer and culinary water required.
It is unlawful for the owner or any other person occupying or having charge of any premises used for human occupancy, employment or recreation, or other purposes within the city limits, which premises are situated within three hundred feet (300') of a sewer and/or culinary water main to fail to install suitable toilet facilities therein, to fail to connect such facilities to the city sewer system as provided herein, to fail to connect to the city culinary water system as provided herein, or to dispose of sewage therefrom by any means other than by use of the city sewer system. Connection to the culinary water system shall not be required for existing buildings and structures serviced by wells in existence at the time culinary water lines are extended to within three hundred feet (300') of subject property. This provision shall not prohibit connection to neighboring municipalities’ water systems. If a property served by a well is permitted to connect to the city’s water and sewer system the city may require reasonable designs, plans, and inspection of the connections to ensure there is no cross-connection between the well and the public water system. It is unlawful to construct or continue the use of any other sewage disposal system, such as a privy, vault, cesspool or septic tank. Each such owner or other person shall, within ninety (90) days after having been given notice by the city that a public sewer and/or culinary water main is ready to receive connections therewith, cause such premises to be connected with said public utility services in accordance with the provisions of this title and other city ordinances. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §15, amended, 1985)

13.12.130 Service lateral.
A separate and independent service lateral shall be provided for every lot or, for nonresidential properties, each building, for both culinary water and sewer service. Pressure irrigation services from the water main to the property line may be shared by two (2) property owners, as illustrated in the city’s standard drawings, which may be amended from time to time. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §16, amended, 1985)

13.12.140 Multiple connections.
Where two (2) or more buildings or units are supplied public utility services from the same service lateral, the failure on the part of either of such parties to comply with this title and all other applicable ordinances shall be grounds for the city to withhold the supply of water to the property until the property is in full compliance. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §17, amended, 1985)

13.12.150 Water use only on connected premises.
It is unlawful for any water user to permit any person from other premises to regularly use or obtain water from their premises or water fixtures, either outside or inside their building. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §18, amended, 1985)

13.12.160 Public utility services specifications and requirements.
The size, slope, alignment, and materials of construction of all public utility services pipelines, including building sewer laterals, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling of trenches, shall conform to the requirements of the city’s construction standards and specifications, adopted building and plumbing codes, and all other applicable rules and regulations of the city and the state. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the city before installation or connection is made. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §19, amended, 1985)

13.12.170 Connections--Conformance to building codes.
(Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), repealed, 2019; Ord. 121 §20, amended, 1985)

13.12.180 Inspection of installations.
The inspection of public utility service connections between the utility mains and three feet (3') outside of the building line shall be made by or under the direction of the public works department. The entire length of the utility connection including the connection at the utility main shall be fully exposed. No backfilling shall be done until the inspection is made and the work accepted. If any portion of the work is not done in accordance with this title and all other applicable city ordinances and the instruction of the public works department, or authorized inspectors, it shall be rectified promptly. No permit shall be issued to any licensed contractor during the time that he/she shall fail to remedy any defective work, after he/she has been notified that he/she has been held responsible therefor under these regulations. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §21, amended, 1985)

13.12.190 Connections.
A licensed contractor is required. It is unlawful for any person to connect to any public utility service pipe, drain, or other utility infrastructure, unless such person is a duly licensed contractor or other person authorized by the city to perform said work. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §22, amended, 1985)

13.12.200 Extension--Petition.
All persons or groups of persons desiring public utility services outside of a conventionally subdivided area for which an extension of the public utility system is required may make petition to the city, attaching thereto a map indicating the property to be served and the streets, alleys, highways, or easements in which the extension to the utility system is to be installed. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §23(a), amended, 1985)

13.12.210 Extension--Advance payment of costs.
The petitioners will advance such an amount as in the opinion of the city and its engineers will defray the cost of the extensions and the city may thereupon cause to be constructed the water or sewer system extensions. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §23(b), amended, 1985)

13.12.220 Extension--Refunds.
(Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), repealed, 2019; Ord. 121 §23(c), amended, 1985)

13.12.230 Extension--Design and specifications.
The design and specifications of the water and sewer extension shall be subject to approval of the city engineer, who shall have wide latitude with regard to requirements associated with extensions outside of a conventionally subdivided area. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §23(d), amended, 1985)

13.12.240 Extension--Subdivision approval.
All conventional subdivisions shall be complete with water, sewer, and storm water utility systems installed before the subdivisions are accepted by the city. Subdivisions shall have completed secondary irrigation systems where access to the city’s system is reasonably available. The design and specifications for these required systems shall be subject to the approval of the city engineer. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §23(e), amended, 1985)

13.12.250 Extension--Full lot width extension.
All main pipeline extensions shall be extended the full width of the lot to which service is to be provided, unless it is clear to the city engineer that such extension will not serve any future purpose. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §23(f), amended, 1985)

13.12.260 Owner to bear costs of installation/connection.
All costs and expenses incident to the installation, connection, and/or extension of a property’s public utility services systems shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation and/or extension of a property’s public utility services systems. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §24, amended, 1985)

Chapter 13.13 PUBLIC SEWAGE TREATMENT SYSTEM

Sections:
13.13.100    General Provisions
    13.13.101    Purpose.
    13.13.102    Definitions.
    13.13.103    Abbreviations.
13.13.200    Use of Public Sewers
    13.13.201    Use of public sewer required.
    13.13.202    Prohibited Discharge.
    13.13.203    Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
    13.13.204    Modification of Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
    13.13.205    Specific pollutant limitations.
    13.13.206    State requirements.
    13.13.207    POTW’s right of revision.
    13.13.208    Dilution prohibited.
    13.13.209    Damaging sewer prohibited.
    13.13.210    Special agreements and contracts.
    13.13.211    Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
    13.13.212    Prohibited connections.
    13.13.213    Private sewage disposal.
13.13.300    Sanitary Sewer, Building Sewers and Connections
    13.13.301    Permit required.
    13.13.302    Permit classifications.
    13.13.303    Cost of connection.
    13.13.304    Maintenance.
    13.13.305    Separate connections required.
    13.13.306    Old building sewers.
    13.13.307    Design and construction.
    13.13.308    Connection to POTW system.
    13.13.309    Inspection.
    13.13.310    Separation from other utilities.
    13.13.311    Connection on unlike pipe.
    13.13.312    Sewer specifications.
    13.13.313    Earth cover required.
13.13.400    Powers and Authority of Inspectors
    13.13.401    Access.
    13.13.402    Information.
    13.13.403    Liability--personnel.
    13.13.404    Easements.
13.13.500    Construction, Connection and Repair Permits
    13.13.501    Permit required.
    13.13.502    Application for permit.
    13.13.503    Denial of permit.
    13.13.504    Inspection fees.
    13.13.505    Permits must be procured before starting work.
    13.13.506    Sewer engineering.
    13.13.507    Failure to remedy defective work.
    13.13.508    Permit not transferable.
    13.13.509    Work must be completed within thirty days.
    13.13.510    Revocation of permit.
    13.13.511    Inspection required.
    13.13.512    Re-inspection - Additional fee.
    13.13.513    Permit not to be issued until special sewer assessment is paid.
13.13.600    Industrial Wastewater Permits
    13.13.601    Authorization to discharge.
    13.13.602    Restrictions.
    13.13.603    Permit application.
    13.13.604    Permit modifications.
    13.13.605    Permit Conditions.
    13.13.606    Permit duration.
    13.13.607    Approval.
    13.13.608    Compliance date report.
    13.13.609    Periodic compliance reports.
    13.13.610    Monitoring facilities.
    13.13.611    Accidental discharge of prohibited materials.
    13.13.612    Inspection.
    13.13.613    Failure to permit inspection.
    13.13.614    Sampling.
    13.13.615    Pretreatment.
    13.13.616    Confidential information.
    13.13.617    Pretreatment administrative option.
    13.13.618    Amendments.
    13.13.619    Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment Program.
13.13.700    Fees and Charges
    13.13.701    Fees and charges.
13.13.800    Administrative Enforcement Remedies
    13.13.801    Enforcement authority.
    13.13.802    Notification of violation.
    13.13.803    Methods of notification.
    13.13.804    Consent Orders.
    13.13.805    Compliance Orders.
    13.13.806    Cease and Desist Orders.
    13.13.807    Administrative Fines.
    13.13.808    Emergency suspensions.
    13.13.809    Termination of Discharge.
    13.13.810    Permit Revocation.
    13.13.811    Civil liability for expenses.
    13.13.812    Civil fine pass through.
    13.13.813    Show Cause Hearing.
    13.13.814    Appeal procedure.
13.13.900    Judicial Enforcement Remedies
    13.13.901    Injunctive Relief.
    13.13.902    Civil Penalties.
    13.13.903    Criminal Prosecution.
    13.13.904    Referral to State.
    13.13.905    City standards.
    13.13.906    Remedies Nonexclusive.

13.13.100 General Provisions

13.13.101 Purpose.
It is necessary for the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the City of Lindon to regulate the collection and treatment of wastewater and to provide for maximum public benefit. The provisions of this Chapter set forth uniform requirements for direct and indirect contributors into the wastewater collection and treatment system for the Publicly Owned Treatment Works (POTW), and enable the POTW to comply with all applicable local, state and federal laws.
The objectives of this Chapter are:
1. To prevent the introduction into the POTW wastewater system of pollutants which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting biosolids?
2. To prevent the introduction into the POTW wastewater system of pollutants which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or which would be incompatible with the system;
3. To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim waste waters and biosolids from the system; D. To provide for equitable distribution among users of the cost of the POTW wastewater system; and
4. To provide for and promote the general health, safety and welfare of the citizens residing within the POTW service area.
The provisions herein provide for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the POTW wastewater system through the issuance of permits and through enforcement of general requirements for all users. They authorize monitoring and enforcement activities, require user reporting, assume that existing users’ capability will not be preempted, and provide for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. The provisions herein shall apply to the POTW, users of the POTW, and any person or entity otherwise regulated by this Chapter.

13.13.102 Definitions.
Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this Chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated:
“Act” or “The Act” means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as The Clean Water Act, 33 U.S.C. §1251 et seq., as amended.
“Administrative fine” means a fine assessed by the Director against a User for violating one or more of the provisions of this Chapter.
“Approval authority” means the Director in an NPDES state with an approved state pretreatment program and the Administrator of the EPA in a non-NPDES state or NPDES state without an approved state pretreatment program. A.S.T.M. The American Society for Testing and Materials.
“Authorized representative of an industrial user” may be:
    a. A principal executive officer of at least the level of vice president, if the industrial user is a corporation;
    b. A general partner or proprietor if the industrial user is a partnership or proprietorship, respectively; or
    c. A duly authorized representative of the individual designated above if such representative is responsible for the overall operation of the facilities from which the indirect discharge originates.
“Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD)” means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedure, five (5) days at twenty degrees centigrade (20/C), usually expressed in terms of weight and concentration (milligrams per liter (mg/L). Laboratory determinations shall be made in accordance with procedures set forth in standard methods.
“Biosolid” means a primarily organic solid product, produced by wastewater treatment processes that can be beneficially recycled. (Previously referred to as “sludge”.)
“Building or lateral sewer” means a sewer conveying the wastewater of a user from a resident building or other structure to a POTW sewer line, including direct connections to a POTW sewer where permitted by the POTW. A lateral sewer is a building sewer line. The lateral sewer extends from the outside wall of a building to a POTW line.
“Business classification code (BCC)” means a classification of dischargers based on the 1972 Standards Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget of the United States of America.
“Categorical pretreatment standards or categorical standards” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Section 307 b. and c. of the Act (33 U.S.C. §1317) as amended, which apply to a specific category of user and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or Pretreatment Standards.
“Categorical user” means any user subject to categorical pretreatment standards or categorical standards.
“Chemical oxygen demand (COD)” means the oxygen equivalent of that portion of organic matter in a wastewater sample that is susceptible to oxidation by a strong chemical oxidant.
“City” means the City of Lindon, Utah. “In the City” shall mean and include all territory over which the City now has or shall hereafter acquire jurisdiction for the exercise of its police powers or other regulatory powers.
“City Manager” means the City Manager of the City of Lindon, or his or her designee.
“Chlorine Demand” means the amount of chlorine required to produce a free chlorine residual of 0.1 mg/L after a contact time of 15 minutes as measured by the DPD (N,N, Diethylp-Phenylene-Diamine) Method on a sample at a temperature of 20 degrees centigrade in conformance with standard methods.
“Compatible Pollutant” means Biochemical oxygen demand, suspended solids, pH and fecal coliform bacteria; plus any additional pollutants identified in the Publicly Owned Treatment Work’s NPDES permit, where the POTW is designed to treat such pollutants and, in fact, does treat such pollutants to the degree required by its NPDES permit.
“Construction standards” means the general construction requirements adopted by the POTW for installation of wastewater facilities.
“Contamination” means an impairment of the quality of the waters of the State by waste to a degree which creates a hazard to the environmental and/or public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease, as described in Standard Methods.
“Control authority” means the term “control authority” shall refer to the “Approval Authority”, defined herein above; or the Director, if the POTW has an approved Pretreatment Program under provisions of 40 CFR, 403.11.
“Cooling water” means the water discharged from any use such as air conditioning, cooling or refrigeration, to which the only pollutant added is heat.
“Council” means the City Council of the City of Lindon, Utah.
“Direct Discharge” means the discharge of treated or untreated wastewater directly into the waters of the State of Utah.
“Director” means the director of public works of the City of Lindon or his duly appointed deputy, agent or representative.
“Discharger” means any person who discharges or causes the discharge of wastewater into a POTW sewer system.
“Easement” means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others.
“Environmental Protection Agency, or EPA” means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, or where appropriate, the term may also be used as a designation for the Administrator or other duly authorized official of said agency.
“Floatable oil" means oil, fat or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. Wastewater shall be considered free of floatable fat if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system.
“Garbage” means every waste accumulation of animal, fruit or vegetable matter, or food, liquid or otherwise, that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in, or storing of meat, fish, fruit, vegetables or edible materials.
“Grab sample” means a sample which is taken from a waste stream on a one-time basis with no regard to the flow in the waste stream and without consideration of time.
“Holding tank sewage” means any wastewater from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, sealed vaults, and vacuum-pump tank trucks.
“Incompatible pollutant” means all pollutants other than compatible pollutants as defined under compatible pollutant.
“Indirect discharge” means the discharge or the introduction of non-domestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1317), into the POTW (including holding tank sewage discharged into the system). Industrial user. Any user that discharges wastewater from commercial and/or industrial processes.
“Industrial waste permit” means a permit to deposit or discharge industrial waste into any sanitary sewer under jurisdiction of the City.
“Industrial waste surcharge” means a charge, as outlined in Article 7, levied on industrial users of the wastewater treatment works for the additional cost of treating waste discharges of abnormal strength wastewater. This charge includes capital, as well as operating and maintenance costs.
“Industrial wastes” means the wastewater from industrial processes, trade or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes.
“Inspector” means an authorized inspector of the City.
“Interference” means the inhibition or disruption of the POTW treatment processes or operations which contributes to a violation of any requirement of the POTW NPDES Permit. The term includes prevention of sewage biosolid use or disposal by the POTW in accordance with Section 405 of the Act, (33 U.S.C. 1345) or any criteria, guidelines or regulations developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act (SWDA), the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or more stringent state criteria (including those contained in any State biosolid management plan prepared pursuant to Title IV of SWDA) applicable to the method of treatment and disposal or use employed by the POTW.
“Main sewer” means a sewer that receives wastewater from the collecting sewer.
“Manager” means the POTW Manager or his designated representative.
“Maximum cap” means the maximum cap designates when the user will be considered in violation of their permit.
“National categorical pretreatment standard or pretreatment standard” means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by the EPA in accordance with Section 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1347) which applies to a specific category of Industrial User.
“National prohibitive discharge standard or prohibitive discharge standard” means any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR, Section 403.5.
“Natural outlet” means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a water course, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater.
“New source” means any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that:
1. The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a sight at which no other source is located; or
2. The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or
3. The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility or installation is substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered.
“National pollution discharge” means elimination system or NPDES Permit. A permit issued pursuant to section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342).
“Pass through” means a discharge which exits the POTW into the waters of the United States in quantities which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City’s NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation.
“Person” means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine, the singular shall include the plural where indicated by context.
“pH” means a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, numerically equal to 7 for neutral solutions, increasing with increasing alkalinity and decreasing with increasing acidity. The pH scale commonly in use ranges from 0 to 14.
“Pollution or pollutant” means the man-made or man-induced alteration of the chemical, physical, biological, and radiological integrity of water, including, but not limited to, any dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, sewage, garbage, sewage biosolids, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discharged equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt and industrial, municipal, and agricultural waste discharge into water.
“Potential heavy metal contributor” means (“PHMC”). Any User that may, through normal business operations, discharge heavy metals into the POTW. Examples of PHMC Users include, but are not limited to:
    •. Automotive repair shops, including auto body and transmission businesses
    •. Bus Depots
    •. Radiator repair shops
    •. Tire centers
    •. Battery Outlets
    •. Car and Truck washes
    •. Machine shops
    •. Equipment rental centers
    •. Small engine repair shops
    •. Recreational rental and/or repair centers
    •. Any industry that has process flow with detectable metal concentrations.
    •. Schools that teach mechanics or engine repair
“Pretreatment or treatment” means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into a POTW. The reduction of alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes, or process changes by other means, except as prohibited by 40 CFR Section 403.6(d).
“Pretreatment requirements” means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment, other than a National Pretreatment Standard imposed on an industrial user.
“Pretreatment standards or standards” means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits.
“Process wastewater” means any wastewater discharge which during manufacturing or processing comes into direct contact with, or results from the production or use of, any raw material, intermediate product, finished product, byproduct, or waste product.
“Process wastewater pollutants” means pollutants present in process wastewater. Properly shredded garbage. The wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than ½ inch (1.27 centimeters) in any dimension.
“Publicly owned treatment works (POTW)” means a treatment works as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1291) which the city owns or has contractual rights to use, having statutory authority to collect and treat wastewater. This definition includes the wastewater treatment plant, all lift stations, all equipment, machinery and appurtenances to the plant and the lift stations, and any wastewater lines and appurtenances used in the conveyance of wastewater to the treatment plant, except building or lateral sewer lines. For the purposes of this Chapter, POTW shall also include any wastewater lines that convey wastewater to the POTW from persons outside the POTW boundaries who are by contract or agreement with the POTW actual users of the POTW.
“POTW governing authority” means the term”POTW Governing Authority” shall refer to the City Council for those portions of the POTW owned by Lindon City, and to the Orem City Council for those portions of the POTW owned by Orem City.
“POTW treatment plant” means that portion of the Publicly Owned Treatment Works designed to provide treatment for wastewater.
“Receiving water quality requirements” means requirements for the POTW’s treatment plant effluent established by the POTW or by applicable State or Federal regulatory agencies for the protection of receiving water quality. Such requirements shall include effluent limitations, and waste discharge standards, requirements, limitations, or prohibitions which may be established or adopted from time to time by State or Federal laws or regulatory agencies.
“Residential user” means a user under 25,000 gallons per month which is free from industrial waste, and of such character as to permit satisfactory disposal without special treatment into the public wastewater system. Disposal flow of a residential user is based on the winter-time culinary water usage.
“Sanitary sewer” means the pipe or conduit system and appurtenances, for the collection, transportation, pumping, and treatment of wastewater. This definition shall also include the terms “public sewer”, “sewer system”, “POTW sewer” and “sewer”.
“Sewer” means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water.
“Significant Industrial User” means (1) Any industrial users subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or (2) any other industrial user that discharges an average of 25,000 gallons per day or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater), contributes a process wastestream which makes up 5% or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plan, or has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW’s operation or for violating any pretreatment standards or requirement (see 40 CFR 403.3(t)); or (3) an industrial user that has in its wastes, toxic pollutants as defined pursuant to Section 307 of the Act or Utah Statutes and rules, or (4) an industrial user that is found by the POTW, Utah State Water Pollution Committee, or the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to have significant impact, either singly or in combination with other contributing industries, on the wastewater treatment system, the quality of biosolids, the system’s effluent quality, or air emissions generation by the system.
“Sludge” means settleable solids separated from liquids during natural or manmade processes.
“Slug” means a slug discharge is any discharge of non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or non-customary batch discharge (see 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v)).
“Standard methods” means Procedures described in the latest edition of “Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater as published by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, and the Water Pollution Control Federation, or such other procedures as may be adopted by the POTW, State of Utah.
“Standard industrial classification (SIC)” means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the Executive Office of the President, Office of Management and Budget, 1972. Storm sewer. A sewer that carries only storm, surface and ground water drainage.
“Storm water” means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation and resulting therefrom.
“Surcharge mode” means Surcharge mode designates when the user will begin being subject to surcharges.
“Suspended solids” means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquids, and which is removable by laboratory filtering in accordance with procedures set forth in Standard Methods.
“Toxic pollutants” means any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed in Schedule I as toxic or in regulations promulgated by the Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency under Section 307(a) of the Act.
“Unpolluted water” means water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided.
“User” means any person who contributes, causes or permits the contribution of wastewater into the POTW.
“Viscosity” means the property of a fluid that resists internal flow by releasing counteracting forces.
“Wastewater” means the liquid and water-carried industrial or domestic wastes from dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial facilities, institutions, recreational vehicles and other human occupied premises. The term shall include the substance commonly referred to as sewage or sewerage.
“Wastewater facilities” means the structures, equipment, and processes required to collect, carry away, and treat domestic and industrial wastes and dispose of the effluent.
“Wastewater strength” means the quality of wastewater discharged as measured by its elements, constituents and characteristics.
“Wastewater treatment works” means an arrangement of devices and structures for treating wastewater, industrial wastes, and biosolids. Sometimes used as synonymous with “waste treatment plant” or “wastewater treatment plant” or “water pollution control plant.”
“Watercourse” means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently.
“Waters of the State” means all streams, lakes, ponds, marshes, water courses, waterways, wells, springs, reservoirs, aquifers, irrigation systems. drainage systems, and all other bodies or accumulations of water, surface or underground, natural or artificial, public or private, which are contained within, flow through or border upon the State or any portion thereof.

13.13.103 Abbreviations.
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings:
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| BOD   | Biochemical Oxygen Demand                                      |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| CFR   | Code of Federal Regulations                                    |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| cp    | Centipoise = 0.01 poise = c.g.s.                               |
|       | unit of absolute viscosity gm sec x cm                         |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| COD   | Chemical Oxygen Demand                                         |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| CWA   | Clean Water Act                                                |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| EPA   | United States Environmental Protection Agency or its successor |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| IU    | Industrial User                                                |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| L     | Liter                                                          |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| mg    | milligrams                                                     |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| mg/L  | milligrams per liter (parts per million)                       |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| ng/L  | nanograms per liter (parts per trillion)                       |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| NPDES | National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System                |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| O&G   | Oil and Grease                                                 |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| O & M | Operation and Maintenance Costs                                |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| POTW  | Publicly Owned Treatment Works                                 |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| PPM   | Parts Per Million                                              |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| SIC   | Standard Industrial Classification                             |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| SIU   | Significant Industrial User                                    |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| SWDA  | Solid Waste Disposal Act, 42 USC 6901, et seq.                 |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| TSS   | Total Suspended Solids                                         |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| ug/L  | micrograms per liter (parts per billion)                       |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| USC   | United States Code                                             |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+
| WRF   | Water Reclamation Facility                                     |
+-------+----------------------------------------------------------------+

13.13.200 Use of Public Sewers

13.13.201 Use of public sewer required.
1. Discharge into POTW System. It shall be unlawful for any person to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited in any unsanitary manner on public or private property within the City, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the City, any human or animal excrement, garbage, or similar objectionable waste.
2. Discharge of wastewater. It shall be unlawful to discharge into any natural outlet within the City, or in any area serviced by the POTW, any wastewater or other polluted water, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of this Chapter.
3. Private disposal. Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater.
4. Discharge from recreational vehicles. Wastewater shall be discharged into the POTW from recreational vehicles only at locations designated by the Director.
5. Connection required. Any owner or resident of a house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes, situated within the City and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary or combined sewer of the City, is hereby required at his own expense to install suitable toilet facilities on the property, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, within ninety (90) days from the time such resident or property owner is notified by registered mail, provided that the public sewer is reasonably available and is within three hundred (300) feet of the property line.
6. Enforcement. In the event any resident or property owner should fail to connect to the public sewer after receiving notice of the availability thereof, or should fail to comply with the requirements of this Chapter, or should fail to pay for any fees or charges required by this Chapter, the City may cause the water to be shut off from such premises and shall not be required to turn it on again until the resident or property owner has connected to the public sewer at his own expense and all arrears for service furnished have been paid in full.

13.13.202 Prohibited Discharge.
1. Storm sewer. No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any waters such as storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sanitary sewer, except storm water runoff from limited areas, which stormwater may be polluted at times and may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the Director and Board of Health. Stormwater other than that exempted above and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers, storm sewers or storm sumps or to a natural outlet approved by the Director and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the Director, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet.
2. General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW, whether or not the users are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other Federal, State, or local pretreatment standards or requirements.
3. Prohibited discharges – specific categories. No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW, whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to the POTW:
    a. Explosives. Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. Also, any pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 6 degrees Centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21. At no time shall two successive readings on any explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent (5%) nor any single reading over ten percent (10%) of the Lower Explosive Limit [LEL]) of the meter.
    b. Solids. Except as authorized in Schedule 1, Controlled Limited Pollutants, solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction of the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited to: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-quarter inch (1/4”) in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides, or fleshings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, waste paper, wood, plastics, gas, tar, asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes, petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin in amounts that will cause interference or pass through.
    c. Corrosive. Any wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 9.0, or wastewater having any other corrosive property capable of causing damage or hazard to structures, equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW.
    d. Toxic. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants, which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may impair worker health or cause safety problems. Controlled limited pollutants, which either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, cause injury or interference with any wastewater treatment process, or hazard to humans or animals, or a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, or contaminate the biosolids of any POTW systems. Not to exceed the limitation set forth in a categorical pretreatment standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not be limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 40 CFR 403, APP.B.
    e. Noxious. Any malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or cumulatively or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair.
    f. Untreatable. Any substance which may cause the POTWs effluent or any other product of the POTW, such as residues, biosolids, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharged into the POTW cause the POTW to be in non-compliance with biosolid use or disposal criteria, guidelines, or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting biosolid use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clear Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or State criteria applicable to the biosolid management method being used.
    g. NPDES permit violation. Any substances which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES or State Disposal System Permit or the receiving water quality standards.
    h. Objectionable color. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions.
    i. Temperature. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference, or which will cause temperature at the headworks of the POTW treatment plant to exceed 40 degrees Centigrade or 104 degrees Fahrenheit.
    j. Slug loads. Any discharge of a non-routine, episodic nature, including but not limited to an accidental spill or non-customary batch discharge (see 40 CFR 403.8(f)(2)(v)).
    k. Radioactive. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotope or such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the POTW Manager in compliance with applicable State or Federal regulations.
    l. Hazard. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance.
    m. Holding tank sewage. Holding tank sewage, or trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW Manager. Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW.
4. Commercial garbage grinders. Mechanically operated grinders or disposers for producing ground garbage are permitted in commercial establishments. Every such grinder or disposer shall be so designed and installed:
    a. That it shall use a wet process pulping system, including a pulper and a dewater press, or other devices, which discharge at least 75% of the volume of pulp or solid wastes run through it into a garbage can or other container for transport to a proper and lawful garbage or waste disposal site approved by the Utah State Department of Health.
    b. That it shall utilize a closed 1oop or other design which provides for a minimum of 85% use of recirculated water.
    c. That the fluid discharged therefrom into the sewer shall flow readily through an approved trap or interceptor, drain line or soil line in a manner which prevents clogging or stoppage of the drain line.
    d. That the entire installation shall comply with the applicable provisions of state and local plumbing and electrical codes.
    e. That the grinders will be operated with only cold water flowing into the grinder while connected to the POTW sewer. The final decision regarding the sufficiency of the grinder installation for the foregoing requirements rests solely with the POTW manager.

13.13.203 Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
Upon the promulgation of any Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard for a particular industrial subcategory, developed pursuant to 40 CFR, Sec. 403.6, the Federal Standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed herein for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed herein. The POTW manager shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, Sec.12.

13.13.204 Modification of Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards.
Where the POTW’s wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by Federal Pretreatment Standards, the POTW may apply to the Approval Authority for modification of specific limits in the Federal Pretreatment Standards. “Consistent removal” shall mean reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in ninety-five percent (95%) of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of (Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403) - “General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution” promulgated pursuant to the Act. The POTW may modify pollutant discharge limits in the Federal Pretreatment Standards if the requirements obtained in 40 CFR, Part 403, Section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the Approval Authority is obtained.

13.13.205 Specific pollutant limitations.
No person shall discharge wastewater containing pollutants in excess of the limitations set forth in Controlled Limited and Controlled Admissible Pollutants, Schedules 1 and 2, and as established by other EPA regulations and the POTW.
Maximum Discharge per User. No User of the POTW shall discharge wastewater containing concentrations exceeding the following limits (in the case of pH, the discharge shall be within the designated parameters):
+----------------+--------------+--------------+----------+
| BOD            | 200 mg/L COD | 400 mg/L TSS | 250 mg/L |
+----------------+--------------+--------------+----------+
| Oil and Grease | 100 mg/L pH  | 5.0 to 9.0   |          |
+----------------+--------------+--------------+----------+
Surcharge Mode. Any User (other than Significant Industrial Users or Categorical Users) discharging more than the above listed concentrations of BOD, COD, TSS, and/or oil and grease in its wastewater shall be deemed to be in surcharge mode and shall pay a surcharge to the POTW. The amount of the surcharge shall be established by the POTW governing authority. Surcharge mode is an intermediate penalty for exceeding designated discharge limitations.
Maximum Cap. A User shall be in surcharge mode if the discharge exceeds the designated limit, but does not exceed the maximum cap set forth below. Any User exceeding the maximum cap shall be subject to surcharges, plus the administrative enforcement remedies set forth in Section 13.13.800 et al.
+----------------+----------+-------------+
|                |  LOWER   |    UPPER    |
+----------------+----------+-------------+
| BOD            | 200 mg/L | 10,000 mg/L |
+----------------+----------+-------------+
| COD            | 400 mg/L | 20,000 mg/L |
+----------------+----------+-------------+
| TSS            | 250 mg/L | 1,500 mg/L  |
+----------------+----------+-------------+
| Oil and Grease | 100 mg/L | 1,200 mg/L  |
+----------------+----------+-------------+
*In no case shall any load be accepted which will cause interference in the collection system or Reclamation Plant. (40 CFR 403.5)
Local Limits on Metals/Chemical Pollutants. In addition to any limitations established by the CWA, the CFRs, the EPA, or the State of Utah, no Categorical User, Significant Industrial User, or PHMC shall discharge wastewater containing concentrations exceeding the following local limits:
+----------+--------------+
| Aluminum | 83.1 mg/L    |
+----------+--------------+
| Arsenic  | 0.11 mg/L    |
+----------+--------------+
| Cadmium  | 0.007 mg/L   |
+----------+--------------+
| Copper   | 0.89 mg/L    |
+----------+--------------+
| Lead     | 0.36 mg/L    |
+----------+--------------+
| Mercury  | 0.00015 mg/L |
+----------+--------------+
| Nickel   | 2.18 mg/L    |
+----------+--------------+
| Selenium | 0.090 mg/L   |
+----------+--------------+
| Silver   | 1.10 mg/L    |
+----------+--------------+
| Zinc     | 5.52 mg/L    |
+----------+--------------+
| Cyanide  | 0.09 mg/L    |
+----------+--------------+
Categorical Users, Significant Industrial Users, and or PHMC shall be subject to the administrative enforcement remedies for exceeding the above limits. The above limits were established based on the assumption that the total discharge from Categorical Users and Significant Industrial Users will not exceed one million gallons per day. If the total discharge from Categorical Users and Significant Industrial Users exceeds one million gallons per day, the above limits will be adjusted.
Categorical Users and Significant Industrial Users will also be subject to the following wastewater discharge limitations:
+-----+--------------+----------+
| BOD | 225 mg/L TSS | 479 mg/L |
+-----+--------------+----------+
Categorical Users and Significant Industrial Users exceeding these limitations shall not be eligible to pay surcharges, but shall be subject to the administrative enforcement remedies.

13.13.206 State requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those contained herein.

13.13.207 POTW’s right of revision.
The POTW reserves the right to establish more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives present in Section 204-1 hereof.

13.13.208 Dilution prohibited.
No user shall ever increase the amount of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate pretreatment to achieve compliance with limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutant specific limitation developed by the POTW or State.

13.13.209 Damaging sewer prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any person to damage, break, deface, uncover or remove any part or portion of the POTW or any sewer lines connecting onto the POTW.

13.13.210 Special agreements and contracts.
1. Special user agreement. No statement contained in this section shall be construed as prohibiting special written agreements between the POTW and any other person allowing industrial waste or wastewater of unusual strength or character to be admitted to the POTW, provided said person compensates the POTW for any additional costs of treatment. Such agreement, however, may not violate any of the specific prohibitions provided herein.
2. Contracts with other POTW’s. whenever the existing sewage treatment capacity is adequate therefore, the POTW may contract with any other organized and established POTW or with any other governmental agency, for the discharge into the POTW from any part or parts of such POTWS, or person or persons living outside the boundaries of the POTW, upon such terms and conditions and for such periods of time as may be deemed reasonable.

13.13.211 Grease, oil and sand interceptors.
1. Requirements. Grease, oil, and sand interceptors, as described by the International Plumbing Code, shall be required of any user when, in the opinion of the POTW Manager, they are necessary for the proper handling of liquid wastes containing grease in excessive amount, or any flammable wastes, sand and other harmful ingredients; except that such interceptors shall not be required for dwelling units. All interceptors shall be of a type and capacity approved by the POTW Manager according to plans on file in the POTW’s office and shall be located as to be readily accessible for cleaning by the user and inspection by POTW employees.
2. Construction. All grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be constructed of impervious materials capable of withstanding abrupt and extreme changes in temperature. They shall be of a substantial construction, water tight, and equipped with easily removable covers which, when bolted in place shall be gas and watertight. The smallest grease trap or interceptor in any application will be no smaller than 20 gallons - 40 pound capacity. All outside grease traps shall be at least 750 gallon capacity. The required size and location of grease traps and interceptors shall be based on minimum and maximum flows and established as set forth in a policy adopted by the POTW. All outside grease traps will be constructed of water tight concrete and will have at least a four inch (4") inlet and a four inch (4") riser formed in the baffle. All outside traps must have POTW Manager approval prior to installation. It shall be unlawful to install any self cleaning grease trap or interceptor in any building or at any location.
3. Maintenance. Where installed, all grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be cleaned and maintained in continuous efficient operation at all times by and at the sole expense of the user. It shall be unlawful to use any kind of emulsifier in any grease trap, interceptor, or drain in any building or at any location, unless approved in writing by the POTW.

13.13.212 Prohibited connections.
No person, either in person or through an agent, employee, or contractor, shall make, allow or cause to be made any sewer connection to the POTW for service, or for the purpose of servicing property outside the boundaries of the POTW, except upon recommendation of the POTW Manager and the express approval of the POTW’s governing board. Such connection to the POTW shall be made by a person who is either a bonded, state-licensed sewer contractor or a plumber who has obtained the necessary permits.

13.13.213 Private sewage disposal.
1. Provision. Where a public sanitary or combined sewer is not available under the provisions of Sec. 13.13.201 the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this Article.
2. Construction. Before commencement of construction of a private wastewater disposal system, the owner shall first obtain a written permit signed by the County Health Department of Utah County. The applications for such permit shall be made on a form furnished by the County Health Department, which the applicant shall supplement with any plans, specifications, and other information as are deemed necessary by the County Health Department.
3. Design. The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the Utah Department of Health. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge the waste material collected and gathered in cleaning cesspools or septic tanks at any place in the City except at a specified location in the City sewer system so designated by the Director. The Director shall have the authority to change the site of such dumping from time to time as in his judgment shall not overload the City sewer system at any one time. It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge the waste material collected from any source except where such persons have a permit from the City for the discharging of such material into the City sewer system.
4. Mandatory connection. At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, as provided in Sec. 13.13.201(5), a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within ninety (90) days from notification of the availability of the public sewer, and any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall be cleaned of biosolids and filled with suitable material.
5. Maintenance. The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the City.
6. Other requirements. No statement contained in this Article shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the County Health Department of Utah County.

13.13.300 Sanitary Sewer, Building Sewers and Connections

13.13.301 Permit required.
No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof, or any portion of the POTW, without first obtaining a written permit from the Department of Public Works. The permit must be at the job site during the whole time the work is in progress, and must be exhibited to any City Inspector demanding to see it.

13.13.302 Permit classifications.
There shall be two (2) classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and commercial service, and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a form furnished by the City. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the inspection office.

13.13.303 Cost of connection.
All costs and expense incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner of the property to be served. The owner and the contractor taking out the permit shall indemnify and hold the City harmless from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be caused by the installation of the building sewer.

13.13.304 Maintenance.
The duty and cost of maintenance and keeping open of the building sewer line from the private property owner’s premises to the point where the sewer line is connected onto the POTW sewer line shall be borne by the property owner.

13.13.305 Separate connections required.
A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building and for every dwelling unit in buildings having more than one dwelling unit, except that multiple family buildings may perform a fixture count analysis to justify multiple dwelling connections on a single lateral. The analysis will be approved by the Director before the lateral is installed. Where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the City does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection.

13.13.306 Old building sewers.
Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by an inspector, to meet all the requirements of this Chapter.

13.13.307 Design and construction.
The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of all sanitary sewers including building sewers, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. Once a building sewer lateral leaves a building, the sewer lateral cannot reenter a building again.

13.13.308 Connection to POTW system.
The connection of the building sewer into the POTW sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the City. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by an inspector before installation. No lateral shall connect to the POTW sewer in a manhole without the Director’s approval.

13.13.309 Inspection.
The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the Department of Development Services when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of an inspector.

13.13.310 Separation from other utilities.
All utility lines or conduits shall be separated from the building sewer as required by State law.

13.13.311 Connection on unlike pipe.
Any connection of pipes of unlike materials shall comply with the International Plumbing Code and the POTW Construction Standards.

13.13.312 Sewer specifications.
The size of building sewers, type of pipe allowed, bed and grade of pipe, changes in direction of pipe clean outs and construction details shall conform to the current specifications of the City.

13.13.313 Earth cover required.
No sewer line shall have less than three (3) feet of earth cover at finished grade.

13.13.400 Powers and Authority of Inspectors

13.13.401 Access.
The Director and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge into the POTW system in accordance with the provisions of this Chapter.

13.13.402 Information.
The Director or other duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. The industry may not withhold information from the POTW concerning industrial processes which have direct bearing on the discharge to the POTW. If the user is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the Director that the release of this information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable State law, the information shall be kept confidential. Any such request shall be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing the report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of the report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES permit or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and other “effluent data” will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available (GRAMA).

13.13.403 Liability--personnel.
While performing the necessary work on private properties referred to in Sec. 13.13.401. above, the Director or duly authorized employees of the City shall observe all safety rules applicable to the premises established by the company, and the company shall be held harmless for injury or death to the City employees, and the City shall indemnify the company against loss or damage to its property by City employees and against liability claims and demands for the personal injury or property damage asserted against the company growing out of the gauging and sampling operation, except as such may be caused by negligence or failure of the company to maintain safe conditions as required in Sec. 13.13.611.

13.13.404 Easements.
The Director and other duly authorized employees of the City bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all private properties through which the City holds an easement for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, repair, maintenance of any portion of the wastewater facilities lying within the easement, or the performance of any other duties pertinent to the operation of the POTW. All entry and subsequent work, if any, on an easement, shall be done in full accordance with the terms of the easement pertaining to the private property involved.

13.13.500 Construction, Connection and Repair Permits

13.13.501 Permit required.
No person shall commence or carry on the work of laying, repairing, altering, or connecting any building sewer, directly or indirectly, to the POTW sewer, without first having received a permit from the Department of Public Works as required herein.

13.13.502 Application for permit.
Application for permits for sewer connections must be made in writing by a contractor licensed to do work on sewer systems, on an application blank furnished by the City. Any permit issued shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the City.

13.13.503 Denial of permit.
The City may deny a permit to perform work on any portion of the POTW in cases where the applicant has a history of violations of the regulations or specifications of the City with respect to the type of work for which the permit application is made.

13.13.504 Inspection fees.
The installation, repair or replacement of any sewer line shall be tested and inspected in accordance with standards set by the City. A fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council shall be collected by the City for each inspection.

13.13.505 Permits must be procured before starting work.
It shall be unlawful to commence any work requiring a permit without first obtaining a permit therefore. In the event that any person begins work without a permit, the POTW may immediately issue a stop work order until the proper permits are obtained, and an offender shall be required to pay an additional fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council.

13.13.506 Sewer engineering.
Any engineering necessary to determine the feasibility of connecting to the POTW sewer shall be the responsibility of the building or property owner.

13.13.507 Failure to remedy defective work.
No further permit shall be issued to any licensed sewer contractor who has failed to remedy defective work to the satisfaction of the Public Works Director after he has been notified in writing.

13.13.508 Permit not transferable.
No sewer contractor shall use or allow his license to be used in any way for the purpose of procuring a permit for any person other than himself, or his duly authorized representative. The duly licensed sewer contractor shall be responsible for any and all work done pursuant to the issuance of any permit specified hereunder, regardless of whether the work is actually done by the contractor or his duly authorized representative.

13.13.509 Work must be completed within thirty days.
The work authorized by a permit shall be done with all possible speed and in accordance with POTW rules and regulations. If the work is not completed within thirty (30) days (unless a special extension is granted in writing by the POTW) the permit shall be void. No refund shall be made for a voided permit, and a new permit must be obtained to finish the work.

13.13.510 Revocation of permit.
The POTW Manager may, at any time, revoke a permit because of defective work which has not been corrected after written notice and within the time specified in the notice by the POTW Manager.

13.13.511 Inspection required.
The inspection of sewer lines between the POTW sewer main and a building foundation shall be under the direction of the Director or by his duly authorized inspectors. The City shall be notified on a regular working day at least four (4) hours in advance of the time the permittee wants the inspection done. The entire length of the sewer lateral, including the junction at the POTW sewer shall be fully exposed. Any portion of the work not done in accordance with these requirements, the instructions of the POTW or its inspectors and the specifications of the City, shall be corrected promptly. There shall be no backfilling until the inspection is made and the work accepted. Work covered prior to inspection shall be uncovered to permit inspection.

13.13.512 Re-inspection - Additional fee.
In the event that the inspector finds the installation not to be in conformity with the City’s specifications or if changes are necessary, a second inspection shall be made with no additional charge. After two inspections, a fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council and payable in advance shall be charged for each additional inspection required.

13.13.513 Permit not to be issued until special sewer assessment is paid.
No permit for a sewer connection shall be issued until the POTW has been paid all fees, charges and assessments required pursuant to Section 13.13.701.

13.13.600 Industrial Wastewater Permits

13.13.601 Authorization to discharge.
No categorical or significant industrial user shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any industrial wastewaters directly or indirectly into the POTW without first obtaining a permit for industrial wastewater discharge.

13.13.602 Restrictions.
1. The Permit for Industrial Wastewater Discharge may require pretreatment of industrial wastewaters before discharge, restriction of peak flow discharges, discharge of certain wastewaters only to specified sewers, relocation of points of discharge, prohibition of discharge of certain wastewater components, restriction of discharge to certain hours of the day, payment of additional charges to defray increased costs of the City created by the wastewater discharges and such other conditions as may be required to effectuate the purpose of these regulations.
2. No City Permit for Industrial Wastewater Discharge is transferable without the prior written consent of the Director.
3. No person shall discharge industrial wastewaters in excess of the quantity or quality limitations set by his Permit for Industrial Wastewater Discharge. Any person desiring to discharge wastewaters or use facilities which are not in conformance with his industrial wastewater permit must apply to the Director for an amended permit. Such amended permit shall be granted, provided its terms comply with these regulations.
4. It is the purpose of this Article to achieve the following: (1) protect the POTW, its operation, and its personnel, (2) to prevent inadequately treated pollutants from passing through the POTW, and (3) to insure the City’s compliance with its NPDES Permit.

13.13.603 Permit application.
Users required to obtain a Permit for Industrial Wastewater Discharge shall complete and file with the POTW an application in the form prescribed by the POTW and accompanied by a fee in an amount established by resolution of the City Council. Application shall be made at least ninety (90) days prior to connecting to or contributing to the POTW. In support of the application, the users shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation, the following information:
1. Name, address, and location of discharge (if different from the business address or the business license address).
2. SIC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended.
3. Wastewater quantity and quality. Quality characteristics include, but are not limited to, those mentioned in Section13.13.202. as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 204(h) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 135, as amended.
4. Time(s) and duration of discharge.
5. Average daily and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any.
6. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. If deemed necessary by the POTW, such plans shall provide for separate systems for handling sanitary and industrial wastewater.
7. Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged.
8. Where known, the quantity and specific nature of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by any POTW, State or Federal Pretreatment Standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional O and M and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable Pretreatment Standards.
9. If additional pretreatment and/or O and M will be required to meet the Pretreatment Standards, the schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment requirements.
The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
    a. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment requirements.
    b. No increment referred to in paragraph (1) shall exceed nine (9) months.
    c. Not later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the User shall submit a progress report to the POTW Manager including, as a minimum, whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay, and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established.
10. Any other information as required by the POTW to evaluate the permit application.
After evaluation and acceptance of the data furnished, the POTW may issue a wastewater discharge permit.

13.13.604 Permit modifications.
Upon enactment of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard and within the time scribed thereby, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance therewith. Where a user, subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days after notice of the enactment of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. The user with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the POTW Manager within thirty (30) days after such notice, the information required by paragraphs (H) and (I) of Section 13.13.603. In addition to the foregoing, the terms and conditions of the permit shall be subject to modification by the POTW during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements are modified or other just cause exists. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance, as determined by the POTW Manager.

13.13.605 Permit Conditions.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions hereof and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the City. Permits may contain, but are not limited to, the following information:
1. The current unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to a POTW sewer.
2. Limits on the average surcharge mode and maximum cap constituents and characteristics. The limits for surcharge mode and maximum cap shall be as set forth in Section 13.13.205. of this Chapter.
3. Limits on any other parameter which may apply according to City, State or E.P.A. regulations, including but not limited to the local limits on metals/chemical pollutants set forth in Section 13.13.205. of this Chapter.
4. Limits on the average surcharge and maximum cap rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization.
5. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities.
6. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedule.
7. Compliance schedules.
8. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports.
9. Requirements for maintaining and retaining records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the POTW, and affording the POTW access thereto.
10. Requirements for notification of the POTW of any new introduction of wastewater components or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system.
11. Requirements for notification of the POTW of slug discharges.
12. Requirements for separate systems to handle sanitary and industrial wastewater, such that in the event that the users industrial wastewater is or could cause an interference or a potential interference with the POTW, that the industrial wastewater could be severed, preventing discharge into the POTW and still allowing the users sanitary wastewater to discharge into the POTW.
13. Requirements that each industrial user provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated herein.
14. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the POTW.

13.13.606 Permit duration.
A Permit for Industrial Wastewater Discharge shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five (5) years. A permit may be issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specified date. The user shall apply for permit reissuance a minimum of 180 days prior to the expiration of the users existing permit. Any permit may be cancelled or terminated for failure to comply with the requirements of this Article.

13.13.607 Approval.
Upon receipt of all required information, the application shall be processed. When properly executed by the City, the application form shall constitute a valid Permit for Industrial Wastewater Discharge. The application shall be approved if the applicant has complied with all applicable requirements of these Regulations.

13.13.608 Compliance date report.
Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the POTW Manager a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average, minimum, and maximum daily flow and times for these process units in the user’s facility which are limited by the pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional O and M and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user, and certified to by a qualified professional engineer.

13.13.609 Periodic compliance reports.
1. Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the POTW, shall submit to the POTW Manager a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by the pretreatment standards. This report shall be submitted during the months of April and October for the respective preceding six month period, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the POTW Manager. In addition, the report shall include a record of all daily flows during the reporting period. At the discretion of the POTW Manager and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles, etc., the POTW Manager may alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted.
2. The POTW Manager may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the impositions of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subparagraph (A) of this Section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the POTW Manager, of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA Administrator pursuant to Section 304(h) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR. Part 136 and amendments thereto, or with any other test procedures approved by techniques approved by the EPA Administrator.

13.13.610 Monitoring facilities.
The user shall provide and operate, at its expense, monitoring equipment and facilities approved by the POTW Manager, sufficient to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer systems. The monitoring equipment and facilities shall be situated on the user’s premises or such other location as allowed by the POTW. There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a proper operating condition at the expense of the user. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring equipment and facilities shall be provided in accordance with the POTW’s requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety (90) days following written notification to the user by the POTW.

13.13.611 Accidental discharge of prohibited materials.
1. Facilities. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the industrial user’s own cost and expense. A description of stored chemicals along with detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures, including non-routine batch discharge to provide this protection shall be submitted to the POTW for review, and shall be approved by the POTW before construction of the facility. No industrial user who commences contribution to the POTW after the effective date hereof shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the POTW. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the industrial user’s facility as necessary to meet the requirements hereof In the case of an accidental discharge; it is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the POTW of the incident. The notification shall include the location of the discharge, the type of waste, the concentration and volume, and corrective actions.
2. Written notice. Within five (5) days following an accidental discharge, the industrial user shall submit to the POTW Manager a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this Chapter or any other applicable law.
3. Notice to employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user’s bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall insure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedures.

13.13.612 Inspection.
All users shall allow employees or representatives of the City ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination or for the performance of any of its duties. The POTW, Approval Authority, State and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user’s property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the POTW will be permitted to enter, without unreasonable delay, for the purpose of performing their specific responsibilities.

13.13.613 Failure to permit inspection.
In the event a duly authorized officer or agent of the POTW is refused admission for any reason, the POTW Manager may cause sewer service to the premises in question to be discontinued until the POTW agents have been afforded reasonable access to the premises and sewer system to accomplish the inspection and/or sampling.

13.13.614 Sampling.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made herein shall be determined in accordance with standard methods. In the event that no special facility has been required, the point of inspection shall be considered to be the downstream manhole in the POTW sewer nearest to the point at which the building sewer discharges into the POTW. Any industrial user who is sampled from a downstream manhole and found to be in violation of any local limits more than two (2) consecutive times will be required to install a sampling point in their own line, on their own property, at the user’s expense. The sampling point shall be constructed according to POTW specifications.

13.13.615 Pretreatment.
Users shall provide all necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply herewith. Any monitoring equipment and facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the POTW shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user’s expense. Such facilities required by the POTW may include the requirement for separate systems to handle sanitary and industrial wastewater so that both can be discharged into the POTW collection system independently of each other. Detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the POTW for review, and shall be approved in writing by the POTW Manager before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the POTW under the provisions hereof. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or methods of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the POTW prior to the user’s initiation of the changes. The POTW shall annually publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the boundaries of the POTW, a list of the users in significant non-compliance (SNC) during the twelve (12) previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user during the same twelve (12) months. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment shall be made available to officials of the EPA or Approval Authority upon request.

13.13.616 Confidential information.
Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or to governmental agencies without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the POTW Manager that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. When requested by the user furnishing a report, the portion of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related thereto. Information accepted by the POTW as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency by the POTW without first providing ten (10) days written notice to the user by certified mail or personal service.

13.13.617 Pretreatment administrative option.
The POTW has the option to contract with any governmental or private entity to provide such administrative services as deemed necessary. Such governmental entity could provide the following services, but would not be limited to the following except by contract with each entity:
1. Permit processing
2. Monitoring facilities
3. Inspection and sampling
4. Pretreatment processing
5. Enforcement action
6. Laboratory analysis

13.13.618 Amendments.
As EPA adds or amends specific pretreatment and effluent requirements, or as the City deems necessary, the restrictions or conditions of a Permit for Industrial Wastewater Discharge may require amendment. The City shall require an industrial discharger to establish an abatement time schedule to comply with any changes in the permit.

13.13.619 Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment Program.
All industrial users of the POTW shall comply with the Industrial Wastewater Pretreatment Program adopted by the POTW.

13.13.700 Fees and Charges

13.13.701 Fees and charges.
1. Purpose. It is the purpose of this Chapter to provide for payment by the users of all the POTW capital costs, debt service, and the costs of maintenance and operation. The total annual cost of operation and maintenance shall include, but need not be limited to, labor, repairs, equipment replacement, maintenance, necessary modifications, power, sampling, laboratory tests, and a reasonable contingency fund. The charges will be based upon the quality and quantity of the users’ wastewater, and also upon the POTW’s capital and operating costs to intercept, treat, and dispose of wastewater. The applicable charges shall be set forth in a schedule of rates for the POTW adopted by resolution of the City Council. The City Council shall review the user charge system on an annual basis and will revise the system as necessary to assure the equity of the system and to assure that sufficient funds will be collected from the system to adequately operate and maintain the wastewater treatment works. Users of the system shall be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rates and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to wastewater treatment services.
2. Classification of users. The users of the POTW may be divided into various classifications, including but not limited to: single dwelling units, duplexes, multiple dwelling units and non-residential. Further, classifications may be established by the City Council for each non-residential user class.
3. Surcharges. Users may be subject to a surcharge for exceeding any City pretreatment limitation, exceeding any pretreatment permit, exceeding the surcharge mode for any BOD, suspended solids, COD, oil and grease, pH, toxic pollutants or other parameters, and for service outside the POTW boundaries as provided for in the resolution establishing the schedule of rates and charges.
4. Fees. The following fees shall be charged as established by resolution of the City Council:
    a. Fees for all POTW costs, including debt service, maintenance and operation.
    b. Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the POTW’s Pretreatment Program.
    c. Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures, to include but not be limited to laboratory analysis.
    d. Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction.
    e. Fees for permit applications.
    f. Fees for filing appeals.
    g. Fees for consistent removal (by the POTW) of the pollutants otherwise subject to Federal Pretreatment Standards.
    h. Fees for connection.
    i. Fees for repairs and disconnection.
    j. Fees for inspections and surveys.
    k. Fees for development and expansion.
    l. Other fees as the POTW may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein.
5. Charges for discontinuing or restoring services. In the event POTW service to any building or premises in the POTW is shut off, a fee to be set by resolution of the City Council shall be charged for restoring sewer service.
6. Damage to facilities. When a user’s discharge causes an obstruction or damage, or because of the nature of the discharge, toxic pollutants increase the costs for managing the effluent or the biosolids of the POTW, the user shall pay for the damages or the increased cost.

13.13.800 Administrative Enforcement Remedies

13.13.801 Enforcement authority.
The POTW may adopt procedures and rules for the implementation and administration of this Chapter and to provide for the enforcement of the provisions contained herein.

13.13.802 Notification of violation.
Whenever the POTW finds that any user has (1) exceeded the maximum cap parameter as outlined in 13.13.205, or (2) violated or is violating its wastewater discharge permit, or any prohibition, limitation or requirement contained therein, or (3) violated any provision of this Chapter. The POTW shall serve upon such user a written notice stating the nature of the violation, which may include a cease and desist order. Also, within the time specified in the notice, a plan for the satisfactory correction of the violation shall be submitted to the POTW by the user. An industrial user is in significant noncompliance (SNC) if its violation meets one or more of the following criteria:
1. Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six percent (66%) or more of all the measurements taken during a six (6) month period exceed (by any magnitude) the daily maximum limit or the average limit for the same pollutant parameter.
2. Technical Review Criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three percent (33%) or more of all of the measurements for each pollutant parameter taken during a six (6) month period equal or exceed the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH).
3. Any other violation of a pretreatment effluent limit (daily maximum or longer-term average) that the Control Authority determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through (including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public).
4. Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to human health, welfare, or to the environment, or has resulted in the POTW’s exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge.
5. Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days after the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a local control mechanism or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance.
6. Failure to provide, within thirty (30) days after the due date, required reports such as baseline monitoring reports, 90-day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules.
7. Failure to accurately report noncompliance.
8. Any other violation or group of violations which the Control Authority determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program.

13.13.803 Methods of notification.
Any notification required herein shall be served either personally or by registered or certified mail.

13.13.804 Consent Orders.
The Director may enter into Consent Orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to Sections 13.13.805. and 13.13.806. of this ordinance and shall be judicially enforceable.

13.13.805 Compliance Orders.
When the Director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user comes into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.

13.13.806 Cease and Desist Orders.
When the Director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the users past violations are likely to recur, the Director may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to:
1. Immediately comply with all requirements; and
2. Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.

13.13.807 Administrative Fines.
1. When the Director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director may fine such user in an amount not to exceed One Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation.
2. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the Director to reconsider the fine along with fill payment of the fine amount within ten (10) days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the Director may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user’s appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The Director may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine.
3. Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.

13.13.808 Emergency suspensions.
The Director may immediately suspend a users discharge, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The Director may also immediately suspend a users discharge that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. If time and circumstances permit, the Director shall attempt to give the user notice of the suspension and an opportunity to be heard before the suspension takes effect.
1. Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a users failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the Director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The Director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the Director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in Section 13.13.810. of this ordinance are initiated against the user.
2. A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the Director prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under Sections 13.13.813. or 13.13.810. of this ordinance. Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section.

13.13.809 Termination of Discharge.
In addition to other provisions set forth in this ordinance, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination:
1. Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions;
2. Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge;
3. Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge;
4. Refusal of reasonable access to the users premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or
5. Violation of the pretreatment standards in this ordinance.
Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under Section 13.13.813. of this ordinance why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the Director shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.

13.13.810 Permit Revocation.
Any user who violates the following conditions, or other applicable state and federal regulations, is subject to having his permit revoked:
1. Failure of a user to factually report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge.
2. Failure of the user to report significant changes in operations, or wastewater constituents and characteristics.
3. Refusal of reasonable access to the user’s premises for the purpose of inspection or monitoring.
4. Violation of any condition of a permit
5. Failure to pay any fees or charges.

13.13.811 Civil liability for expenses.
Any person violating the provisions herein shall be liable for any expense, loss, or damage caused the POTW by reason of such violation, including the increased costs, if any, for managing effluent or biosolids, when such increases are the result of the user’s discharge of toxic pollutants. The POTW Manager shall add such charge to the discharger’s treatment charge.

13.13.812 Civil fine pass through.
In the event that a user discharges such pollutants which cause the POTW to violate any condition of its NPDES Permit and the POTW is fined by EPA or the State for such violation, then such user shall be fully liable for the total amount of the fine assessed against the POTW by EPA or by the State.

13.13.813 Show Cause Hearing.
The POTW Manager may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the Director and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least five (5) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user.

13.13.814 Appeal procedure.
Any permit applicant, permit holder, or other user affected by any administrative order, decision, action, or determination, including cease and desist orders, made by the POTW in interpreting or implementing the provisions herein, or any permit issued hereunder, may file with the Lindon City Manager a written request for reconsideration within ten (10) days of such decision, action, or determination, setting forth in detail the facts supporting the request. The Lindon City Manager may elect to hold a hearing on the request. The request for reconsideration shall be acted upon by the Lindon City Manager within ten (10) days from the date of filing or the close of the reconsideration hearing. The decision, action, or determination shall remain in effect during the period of review by the Lindon City Manager.

13.13.900 Judicial Enforcement Remedies

13.13.901 Injunctive Relief.
When the Director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the Director may petition the appropriate Court through the City Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this ordinance on activities of the user. The Director may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for taking any other action against a user.

13.13.902 Civil Penalties.
1. A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the City for a maximum civil penalty of Ten Thousand Dollars ($10,000.00) per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation.
2. The Director may recover reasonable attorneys’ fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City.
3. In determining the amount of civil liability the Court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the users violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires.
4. Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for taking. Any other action against a user.

13.13.903 Criminal Prosecution.
1. User who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this ordinance, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than one Thousand Dollars ($1,000.00) per violation, per day, or by imprisonment for not more than six (6) months, or by both such fine and imprisonment. Each day a violation continues shall be deemed separate offense.
2. A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under State law.
3. A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this ordinance, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this ordinance shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.

13.13.904 Referral to State.
The POTW may refer violations of pretreatment standards, Federal law, State law, and this Chapter to the State of Utah to supplement or take the place of enforcement by the POTW.

13.13.905 City standards.
In compliance with Public Laws 84-660 and 92-500 of the Water Pollution Control Act and amendments hereto, these regulations adopt and use as a guide the national pretreatment standards and the Environmental Protection Agency’s (EPA) pretreatment guidelines. The City recognizes that in some cases these pretreatment standards may not be sufficient to protect the operation of its treatment works, or to allow it to comply with the terms of its NPDES Permit. In such cases, the City reserves the right to impose more stringent standards than those specified in the EPA regulations.

13.13.906 Remedies Nonexclusive.
The remedies provided for in this Chapter are not exclusive. The Director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the City’s enforcement response plan. However, the Director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the Director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any non-compliant user. (Ord. 2006-12, adopted, 2006)

Chapter 13.16 RATES AND FEES

Sections:
13.16.010    Authority.
13.16.020    Purpose and rate review.
13.16.030    Waste discharge surcharge.
13.16.040    User class determination.
13.16.050    Repealed.
13.16.060    Rate notification.
13.16.070    Board of equalization.

13.16.010 Authority.
The Lindon city council shall from time to time, by resolution, establish such rates, deposits, procedures and fees as it deems proper and reasonable for the public utility services provided by the city and the uses made thereof by the users. For purposes of this chapter “public utility services” shall mean culinary water services, sewer services, secondary water irrigation services, storm water utility services, solid waste disposal, and recycling services. All rates and fees promulgated by the city council shall be made a matter of public record, shall be filed with the city recorder, and shall be available for inspection by any person during normal business hours. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §7, amended, 1985)

13.16.020 Purpose and rate review.
User rates and fees shall be established in the Lindon City Fee Schedule in an amount sufficient to generate revenue to pay all costs for the operation and maintenance and replacement of the public utility services systems. The city shall review the user rates and fees not less often than every two (2) years and shall revise the rates and fees as necessary to assure equity of the service charge established herein. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §7(2), amended, 1985)

13.16.030 Waste discharge surcharge.
The city, or its city engineer, shall assess a surcharge rate for all nonresidential users discharging wastes with BOD and TSS strengths greater than the average residential user. Such users will be assessed a surcharge sufficient to cover the cost of treating their above-normal-strength wastes. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §7(2), amended, 1985)

13.16.040 User class determination.
Residential users may be considered to be one (1) class of user and an equitable service charge may be determined for each user based on an estimate of the total wastewater contribution of this class of user. The governing body may, upon recommendation of the city engineer, classify industrial, commercial, and other nonresidential establishments as a residential user; provided, that the wastes from these establishments are equivalent to the wastes from the average residential user with respect to volume, total suspended solids, and BOD. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §7(3), amended, 1985)

13.16.050 Rate review.
(Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), repealed, 2019; Ord. 121 §7(4), amended, 1985)

13.16.060 Rate notification.
Each user shall be notified at least annually, in conjunction with a regular bill, of the rates and that portion of the user charges which are attributable to the delivery of public utility services, including wastewater treatment services. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §7(5), amended, 1985)

13.16.070 Board of equalization.
The city council is designated a board of equalization for public utility services rates and fees and to hear complaints and make corrections of any assessments deemed to be illegal, unequal, or unjust. (Ord. 2018-18 §1 (Exh. A), amended, 2019; Ord. 121 §8, amended, 1985)

Chapter 13.18 PRESSURIZED IRRIGATION

Sections:
13.18.010    Pressurized Irrigation Water Department and System.
13.18.020    Superintendent.
13.18.030    Powers and Duties.
13.18.040    Initial Rates and connection Fees.
13.18.050    Special Rates.
13.18.060    Board of Equalization, Rates and Rebates.
13.18.070    Use without Payment Prohibited.
13.18.080    Connections and Extensions.
13.18.090    Connection to be kept in Good Repair.
13.18.100    Waste of Water Prohibited.
13.18.110    City to Have Unrestricted Access.
13.18.120    City Not Liable for Damage.
13.18.130    Water Not for Motors.
13.18.140    Water Shortage.
13.18.150    Connection Required.
13.18.160    Taker Only to Use Water.
13.18.170    Turning on Pressurized Irrigation Without Authority.
13.18.180    Destruction of or Interference with System.
13.18.190    Introducing Substances.
13.18.200    Cross-Connections.
13.18.210    Flood-Irrigating from Pressurized System.
13.18.220    Wasting of Water, Flooding, or Use of Water on Unauthorized Property–Termination Notice and Appeal.
13.18.230    Users Outside City Limits.
13.18.240    Mailing of Billing Statement.
13.18.250    Failure to Pay for Service–Termination.
13.18.260    Termination for Non Payment–Notice.
13.18.270    Termination for Non Payment, Wasting of Water, Flooding, or Use of Water on Unauthorized Property–Appeal to City Council.
13.18.280    Termination Without Notice.
13.18.290    Application for Pressurized Irrigation System Connection and Service.
13.18.300    Non owner Applicants–Agreement of Owner.
13.18.310    Separate Connections.
13.18.320    Shut-off Valves.
13.18.330    Water Meters.
13.18.340    Extension of Pressurized Irrigation Water Mains Within the City.
13.18.350    Schedule of Use.
13.18.360    Unlawful to Use Water on Other Property.
13.18.370    Building Permit.
13.18.380    Penalties.

13.18.010 Pressurized Irrigation Water Department and System.
The Pressurized Irrigation Department of Lindon City is hereby created. It shall administer the operation and maintenance of the Lindon City Pressurized Irrigation System.

13.18.020 Superintendent.
The Lindon City Pressurized Irrigation System shall be under the supervision of the City Public Works Superintendent.

13.18.030 Powers and Duties.
It shall be the duty of the City Public Works Superintendent to supervise, manage, operate and maintain the City’s Pressurized Irrigation System in accordance with the provision of the City ordinances and the rules and regulations adopted by the City Council. It shall be his duty to authorize all connections to the City’s Pressurized Irrigation System, to keep suitable maps and records of the system and of all connections, repairs, and extensions made to the system. He shall supervise the maintenance of the Pressurized Irrigation System and any and all extension or repairs thereof, inspect all connections made to the system, and shall make periodic inspections of the system and keep a record showing when each part of the system was inspected. He shall, upon request, report to the City Council the condition of the Pressurized Irrigation System and shall furnish such information regarding the same as the Mayor and City Council may from time to time require.

13.18.040 Initial Rates and connection Fees.
The rates, penalty fees for delinquency in payment, connection fees, inspection fees and other charges incidental to connection and services from the Pressurized Irrigation System shall be fixed from time to time by resolution enacted by the City Council. The City Council may from time to time promulgate rules for levying, billing, guaranteeing and collection charges for Pressurized Irrigation System services and all other rules necessary for the management and control of the Pressurized Irrigation System. Rates for services furnished shall be uniform with respect to each class or classes of service established or that may hereafter be established.

13.18.050 Special Rates.
The City Council may from time to time fix by agreement or resolution special rates and conditions for users using exceptionally large amount of water service or making use of the secondary water system under exceptional circumstances, upon such terms and conditions as the City Council may deem proper.

13.18.060 Board of Equalization, Rates and Rebates.
The City Council is constituted as a Board of Equalization of Pressurized Irrigation rates to hear complaints and make corrections of any Assessments deemed to be illegal, unequal or unjust.

13.18.070 Use without Payment Prohibited.
It is unlawful for any person to utilize the Pressurized Irrigation System without paying therefore, as herein provided, or, without authority, to open any stopcock, valve, or other fixtures attached to the system of water supply unless it is done pursuant to proper application, agreement, or resolution.

13.18.080 Connections and Extensions.
No connection shall be made to the City’s Pressurized Irrigation System and no extension shall be made to any installation served by the Pressurized Irrigation System until a permit has been issued by the City Public Works Superintendent. The City Public Works Superintendent shall not issue a permit until the required water shares have been conveyed to the City and all required fees have been paid.

13.18.090 Connection to be kept in Good Repair.
All Pressurized Irrigation System users shall keep their service pipe connections and other Apparatus in good repair and protected from frost at their own expense, but no person, except Under the direction of the City Public Works Superintendent, shall dig into the street, parking strip, sidewalk, or other public property or right-Of-way for the purpose of laying, removing, or repairing any service pipe.

13.18.100 Waste of Water Prohibited.
It shall be unlawful for any Pressurized Irrigation System user, person, or entity to use water from the Pressurized Irrigation System to create, fill, or provide water to any natural or artificial pond or reservoir, or to waste water, or to waste water, or to allow it to be wasted by imperfect stop-taps, valves, leaky joints or pipes, or to allow tanks or watering troughs to continually flow, leak or overflow, or wastefully to run water from faucets or stops or through basins, or other apparatus, or to use the water in such a manner as to cause it to overflow into the neighboring yards, property, streets or sidewalks, or to use water in such quantities as to cause the water to pool, flood, or accumulate on the property so that standing water remains on the ground for a period of more than 30 minutes after the water has been turned off or otherwise diverted from the area, or in violation of the rules and regulations set forth by resolution for controlling the Pressurized Irrigation System service. Any use of water in violation of Section 13.18.360 of this Chapter shall constitute a waste of water. (Ord. 97-2, amended, 1997; Ord. 3-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 1-92, adopted, 1992)

13.18.110 City to Have Unrestricted Access.
The City, by its agents, shall at all reasonable hours have unrestricted access to places supplied With water from the Pressurized Irrigation System for the purpose of examining the apparatus to ascertain the amount of water used and the manner of its use.

13.18.120 City Not Liable for Damage.
The City shall not be liable for any damage to a Pressurized Irrigation System user by reason of stoppage or interruption of the pressurized irrigation supply caused by fires, scarcity of water, accidents to works or mains, alterations, additions, repairs, or from any other cause. This section shall not be construed to extend the liability of the City beyond that provided under the Utah Governmental Immunity Act.

13.18.130 Water Not for Motors.
No water shall be supplied from the pipes of the City’s Pressurized Irrigation System for the purposes of driving any motor, siphon, turbine, or other wheels, or any hydraulic engines, or elevators, or from driving or propelling machinery of any kind whatsoever, nor shall any license be granted or issued for any such purpose except by special permission of the City Council.

13.18.140 Water Shortage.
In time of shortage of water, the Mayor, with concurrence of the Council, shall by proclamation, limit the use of Pressurized Irrigation water to such extent as may be necessary. The Mayor shall have this authority without concurrence of the Council in the case of an emergency. In this event, the proclamation shall be reviewed at the next available regular meeting of the Council. It is unlawful for any person to violate any proclamation made by the Mayor pursuant to this section.

13.18.150 Connection Required.
All record owners and occupants of (I) all residential properties or lots located within the corporate boundaries of Lindon City, and (ii) all institutional properties, school properties, religious institution properties, commercial properties, lots or sites located with the corporate boundaries of Lindon City, whose properties lie within three hundred (300) feet of a Pressurized Irrigation System main line shall connect their properties to the Lindon City Pressurized Irrigation System and pay the applicable fees and charges. This section shall not apply to a record owner or occupant of a residential property who both (I) as of the effective date of the Ordinance enacting this Chapter, has connected the residential property to the Lindon City culinary water system and (ii), prior to the first day of June, 1992, has elected to not connect to the Pressurized Irrigation System. (Ord. 1-96, amended, 1996; Ord. 13-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 1-92, adopted, 1992)

13.18.160 Taker Only to Use Water.
It shall be unlawful to use water from the Pressurized Irrigation System on any portion of the user’s property, or any other property, which has not been authorized for such use by Lindon City as evidenced by the map or legal description attached, upon approval, by Lindon City to the user’s permit application. Use of Pressurized Irrigation System water on unauthorized portions of a user’s parcel or on any other property is grounds for termination of pressurized irrigation water service. A copy of the description of the property approved for pressurized irrigation water service shall be given to the use, either in person or by first-class mail to the address of the property authorized for water use, upon approval of the application. (Ord. 97-2, amended, 1997; Ord. 1-92, adopted, 1992)

13.18.170 Turning on Pressurized Irrigation Without Authority.
It shall be unlawful for any person, after the Pressurized Irrigation has been turned off by the City, to turn on or allow the water to be turned on or used without authorization from the Lindon Public Works Superintendent. (Ord. 13-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 1-92, adopted, 1992)

13.18.180 Destruction of or Interference with System.
It shall be unlawful for any person to destroy, deface, damage, injure, or interfere with the operation of any part, pipe, fixture, appliance, or appurtenance of the Lindon Pressurized Irrigation System.

13.18.190 Introducing Substances.
It shall be unlawful for any person to place, cause to be placed, or to introduce into the Lindon Pressurized Irrigation System or any source of water supplying said system any matter, substance, chemical, or compound without authorization from the Lindon Public Works Superintendent.

13.18.200 Cross-Connections.
It shall be unlawful for any person to connect any part of the Pressurized Irrigation System to any part of any culinary water system so as to create a potential cross-connection whereby irrigation water could be introduced into any system that provides culinary water.

13.18.210 Flood-Irrigating from Pressurized System.
1. It shall be unlawful for any person to use substantial quantities of water from the Pressurized Irrigation System for the purpose of flood irrigation any property.
2. Flood irrigation for purposes of this section is defined as use of water in such quantities as to cause the water to pool, flood, or accumulate on the property to an average depth of one-half inch or more, or so that standing water remains on the ground for a period of more than thirty minutes after the water has been turned of or otherwise diverted from the area.
3. Except for incidental watering of shrubs, flowers, and other limited use applications, water from the Pressurized Irrigation System used for irrigation of lawns, gardens, and other irrigation applications shall be applied through either a sprinkler or drip irrigation system, including sprinklers attached to garden hoses. (Ord. 97-2, amended, 1997; Ord. 1-92, adopted, 1992)

13.18.220 Wasting of Water, Flooding, or Use of Water on Unauthorized Property–Termination Notice and Appeal.
1. In the case of violations of provisions of this Chapter regarding the wasting of water, flooding, or the use of pressurized irrigation water on unauthorized property, the City Administrator shall give written notice of the termination for violations of provisions of this Chapter to the user. The notice shall be given by first class mail or delivery to the premises and shall contain a summary of the following information:
    a. The date of the termination;
    b. The alleged violation and the date or dates of the alleged violation;
    c. A description of the account holder’s Appeal rights.
2. In the case of violation of provisions of this Chapter regarding the wasting of water, flooding or use of water on unauthorized property, the user must appeal directly to the City Administrator within 48 hours of the receipt of the notice of termination. The Administrator may waive termination upon receipt of a signed written agreement of compliance from the user. The agreement shall be provided by the City and shall include language to insure future compliance by the user. If the user’s appeal is denied by the Administrator, the Administrator shall issue a written denial along with the reason for the denial to the user within 24 hours of the appeal.
3. If the user fails to appeal to the City Administrator within 48 hours of receipt of the notice of termination, the user forfeits the right of appeal to the Administrator, is subject to immediate termination of pressurized irrigation water service, and must appeal to the City Council by filing an appeal with the City Administrator as provided in Section 13.18.270.
4. If the user has made a timely appeal to the City Administrator or the City Council, the user’s pressurized water service will not be terminated while the user’s appeal is pending under appeals procedures provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 97-2, amended, 1997; Ord. 1-92, adopted, 1992)

13.18.230 Users Outside City Limits.
The City may sell Pressurized Irrigation water to users outside the City limits only if approved by A resolution of the City Council and at such rates And under such terms and conditions as the City Council may determine by resolution.

13.18.240 Mailing of Billing Statement.
The City Treasurer shall mail a written statement to each user of the Pressurized Irrigation System once each month, or at such other interval as is established by the City Council. The statement shall be a single statement for all sewer, culinary water and pressurized irrigation water service and shall separately specify the amount of the bill for the Pressurized Irrigation System. Payment of the charges for sewer service and culinary water service shall be accepted only when the charge for pressurized irrigation water service is paid at the same time, to the extent allowed by Utah law.

13.18.250 Failure to Pay for Service–Termination.
In case the owner of any of the premises mentioned in Section 13.18.150, or the tenant or Occupant of such premises, shall fail to pay the required fees and charges applicable to the Pressurized Irrigation System, the City, pursuant to the procedure as set forth in this Chapter, may cause the pressurized irrigation water service to be shut off from such premises and the City shall not be required to turn the same on again until all arrears, reconnection fees, and other fees shall be paid in full, to the extent allowed by law. (Ord. 97-2, amended, 1997; Ord. 1-92, adopted, 1992)

13.18.260 Termination for Non Payment–Notice.
At least ten calendar days prior to a proposed termination for non payment of pressurized irrigation water service, the City Treasurer shall give written notice of proposed termination for nonpayment to the account holder. The ten-day period shall be computed from the date such notice is deposited in the mail or the date of actual delivery, whichever occurs first. The notice shall be given by first-class mail or delivery to the premises and shall contain a summary of the following information:
a. The date of the proposed termination;
b. The amount of the delinquency;
c. A description of the account holder’s appeal rights. (Ord. 97-2, amended, 1997; Ord. 1-92, adopted, 1992)

13.18.270 Termination for Non Payment, Wasting of Water, Flooding, or Use of Water on Unauthorized Property–Appeal to City Council.
Any person whose water, sewer, or pressurized irrigation water service is to be terminated for non payment, may appeal to the City Council by filing a written appeal in the office of the City Administrator within ten days of the effective date of the notice of proposed termination. Any person whose pressurized irrigation water service has been terminated due to violations of provisions of this Chapter regarding wasting of water, flooding, or use of pressurized irrigation service on unauthorized property, and whose appeal either has been denied by the City Administrator or who has failed to make a timely appeal to the City Administrator, may appeal to the City Council by filing a written appeal in the office of the City Administrator within ten days of the effective date of the termination, or the date of denial of the appeal by the City administrator, whichever is later. Any appeal shall be solely for the purpose of reviewing the interpretation given the terms of this chapter by the City Administrator and not to vary the terms in any way. Such appeal shall be considered by the City Council within thirty days of receipt of notice.
The person filing the appeal shall be provided with not less than five calendar days prior notice of the date, time and location of the hearing before the City Council. Notice of the hearing shall be given by first-class mail or by delivery to the premises. Upon the filing of the appeal, the City Treasurer in the case of non payment, or the City Administrator in the case of all other violations of this Chapter, shall take no further action with regard to the termination until the City Council makes a final decision on the appeal. If the City Council affirms the decision of the City Administrator regarding the water of water, flooding, or use pressurized irrigation water service on unauthorized property, the pressurized irrigation water service shall remain shut off until the City Council deems that appropriate measures have been taken by the user to insure future compliance with the provisions of this Chapter and all applicable fees have been paid. (Ord. 97-2, amended, 1997; Ord. 1-92, adopted, 1992)

13.18.280 Termination Without Notice.
Notwithstanding any provision or agreement to the contrary, the City may terminate water, Sewer, and/or pressurized irrigation services without notice where, in the City’s judgment, a clear emergency or serious health or safety hazard exists, for so long as such conditions exist, or where there is unauthorized use of or connection to the City water, sewer, or pressurized irrigation system.

13.18.290 Application for Pressurized Irrigation System Connection and Service.
Any person who desires or is required to connect to the Pressurized Irrigation system shall transfer the required water shares to the City, pay the Required connection and other fees and file with the water department for each such connection a written and signed application as provided by the City.

13.18.300 Non owner Applicants–Agreement of Owner.
Applications for Pressurized Irrigation System service made by persons other than the owner of the property to which service is to be provided must in addition to the above requirements be guarantees by an agreement signed by the owner of the premises or his duly authorized agent in the form provided by the City.

13.18.310 Separate Connections.
It is unlawful for separately described parcels (pursuant to the records of the Utah County Recorder) to be supplied from the same city-maintained service valve unless special permission for such combination usage has been granted by the City Council and the premises served are all owned by the same owner.

13.18.320 Shut-off Valves.
Persons connecting to the Pressurized Irrigation System shall be required to provide and install a valve independent of the City’s shut-off valve with which they may control the Pressurized Irrigation service to their premises. At no time will a person be allowed to tamper with or operate the City’s shut-off valve unless acting under the directions of the Public Works Superintendent.

13.18.330 Water Meters.
Water meters shall not be installed at each Pressurized Irrigation water connection; provided, however, that the Council may determine that it is necessary to monitor water use through any Pressurized Irrigation water connection or combination of Pressurized Irrigation water connections.

13.18.340 Extension of Pressurized Irrigation Water Mains Within the City.
Any person or persons, including any subdivider who is required to have the Pressurized Irrigation water mains extended within the City, shall do so at their own expense in accordance with the Lindon City development standards. Any such extension shall be deemed the property of the City.

13.18.350 Schedule of Use.
The Public Works Superintendent may schedule the use of the Pressurized Irrigation water, in the event it is determined that the use needs to be scheduled in order to meet the demands of the system.

13.18.360 Unlawful to Use Water on Other Property.
It shall be unlawful for any person to use, apply, or allow to be used or applied any water from the Pressurized Irrigations System on any property for which (I) application has been made to the City for Pressurized Irrigation service, (ii) all related fees have been paid, and (iii) connection and service for the specific parcel and area of property have been authorized by the City. (Ord. 13-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 1-92, adopted, 1992)

13.18.370 Building Permit.
As to each property which is required to be connected to the Pressurized Irrigation System pursuant to Section 13.18.150 of this Chapter, no building permit shall be issued for construction on said property, unless and until the building permit applicant shall first connect the property to the Pressurized Irrigations System, and provide adequate assurances of connection, in a form acceptable to the City, including the payment of all applicable fees and costs.

13.18.380 Penalties.
1. Any firm, corporation, person or persons, or any action on behalf of any person, persons, firms or corporation, violating any of the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class B misdemeanor.
2. Each person, persons, firms or corporation found guilty of a violation of any provision of this Chapter shall be deemed guilty of a separate offense for every day during which any violation of any provision of this chapter is committed, continued, or permitted by such person, persons, firm or corporation, and shall be punishable as provided in this Chapter. (Ord. 1-92, adopted, 1992)

Chapter 13.19 CITY PRESSURIZED IRRIGATION SYSTEM

Sections:
13.19.010    Connection fee.
13.19.020    User fees.
13.19.030    Size of service line.
13.19.040    Relief provisions.

13.19.010 Connection fee.
The Connection Fee is satisfied by submitting and transferring ownership of the appropriate type and amount of ware shares to Lindon City, as listed in the Lindon City Fee Schedule. (Ord. 2007-8, amended, 2007; Ord. 6-94, amended, 1994; Ord. 10-93, adopted, 1993)

13.19.020 User fees.
The monthly user fee for the Lindon City Pressurized Irrigation System shall be established by the City Council and is found within the Lindon City Fee Schedule. (Ord. 2007-8, amended, 2007; Ord. 10-93, adopted, 1993)

13.19.030 Size of service line.
The maximum size of the service line for the Pressurized Irrigation System shall be determined by the City Public Works Director. (Ord. 2007-8, amended, 2007; Ord. 10-93, adopted, 1993)

13.19.040 Relief provisions.
1. Relief Petition. Any applicant for connection to the Lindon City Pressurized Irrigation System (the “applicant”), may file a Relief Petition with the City Recorder seeking relief from all or part of the City Pressurized Irrigation System connection requirements as contained in this ordinance on the basis that the requirements, as applied to the applicant or to the specific property for which the connection is requested is inequitable, or for any other reason should be modified.
2. Time for filing notice of petition and petition no later than ten (10) calendars days from final action by the City on any connection application, the applicant shall file a Notice of Petition in writing with the City Recorder. Within thirty (30) days of filing of a Notice of Petition, the applicant shall file a Relief Petition with the City Recorder.
3. Information to be submitted with relief petition.
    a. The Relief Petition must be submitted on a form acceptable to the City, shall be signed by the applicant and verified, and must be accompanied at a minimum by the following information:
        i. Name of the applicant;
        ii. Name and business address of the current owner of the property, form of ownership, whether sale proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, or other, and if owned by a corporation, partnership, joint venture, or limited liability company, the name and address of all principal shareholders, members, or partners.
        iii. Price paid and other terms of purchase of the property, the date of purchase, and the name of the party from whom purchased, including the relationship, if any, between the applicant and the party from whom the property was acquired;
        iv. Nature of the interest owned by the applicant in the subject property;
        v. A complete description of all water rights and water shares owned by the applicant;
        vi. A complete description of all water rights and water shares which have been utilized on the subject property during the ten (10) years prior to the date of the application;
        vii. A description of all water rights and water shares transferred to the City by the applicant, related to the subject property;
        viii. A description of all water rights and water shares transferred to the City by any prior owner of the property during the ten (10) years prior to the date of the application, related to the subject property;
        ix. A complete description of the disposition or sale of all water rights and water shares related to the subject property during the ten (10)
        year period prior to the date of the application;
        x. All studies and reports commissioned by the applicant, agents of the applicant, or prior owners of the subject property within the previous ten (10) years concerning water usage, and/or availability, related to the subject property;
        xi. Information from a title report showing all recorded liens, encumbrances, and ownership interests related to all water rights and water shares related to the subject property as of the date of the petition;
        xii. Copies of all documents evidencing the existence of decreed water rights and water shares related to the subject property;
        xiii. The complete detailed factual basis for the applicant's assertion that the connection requirements for the City Pressurized Irrigation System are inequitable or should be modified as to the applicant, related to the subject property for which connection is sought;
        xiv. A specific description of the modification from the connection requirements for the City Pressurized Irrigation System which the applicant asserts are necessary, to the minimum extent necessary to prevent the requirements from being inequitable, together with the factual basis for said assertion.
    b. The Planning Commission or the City Council may request additional information reasonably necessary, in their opinion, to arrive at a conclusion concerning the Relief Petition.
4. Failure to submit information. In the event that any of the information required to be submitted by the applicant is not reasonably available, the applicant shall file with the petition a statement of the information that cannot be obtained and shall describe the reasons why such in formation is unavailable.
5. Hearing by the Planning Commission. No later than (30) days after the filing of a complete Relief Petition, together with all required and requested supporting information and documentation required by the City Council or the Planning Commission, the Planning Commission shall schedule a hearing. The hearing shall be held no later than 30 days after the date of filing, unless a reasonable extension of time is agreed to by both the Planning Commission and the applicant. At the hearing, the applicant may testify, call and examine witnesses, and present facts and evidence. All witnesses shall be sworn and testify under oath.
6. Burden of proof. The applicant shall have the burden of proving that the strict application of the City Pressurized Irrigation Water System Connection requirements are inequitable or should be modified, in whole or in part, as applied to the specific applicant or property for which a connection is sought.
7. Findings of the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall, on the basis of the evidence and testimony presented, make specific findings as part of its report and recommendations to the City Council, which may include the following:
    a. Whether the applicant has complied with the requirements for presenting the information to be submitted with a Relief Petition;
    b. A determination as to all water rights and water shares which have been previously transferred to the City with regard to the subject property;
    c. Whether, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, the imposition of the connection requirements, are inequitable or should be modified, as applied to the applicant or to the subject property.
8. Report and recommendations of the Planning Commission.
    a. The Planning Commission, based upon the evidence and findings, shall make a report and recommendation to the City Council concerning the Relief Petition.
    b. If the Planning Commission recommends to the City Council approval of the Relief Petition, in whole or in part, then the report of the Planning Commission shall discuss the type and extent of modifications necessary, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, to prevent the water connection requirements from having an inequitable effect.
    c. The report and recommendation shall be submitted to the City Council and mailed to the applicant no later than 30 days after the hearing.
9. City Council review and consideration. 60 days after receipt of the Planning Commission's report, the City Council shall hold a hearing to review the report and recommendations of the Planning Commission. At the hearing, the applicant may testify, and examine witnesses, and present facts and evidence. All witnesses shall be sworn and testify under oath. At the hearing the City Council may limit the testimony and evidence to new testimony and evidence. The City Council shall approve, in whole or in part, or disapprove the Relief Petition. The City Council may modify or waive the Pressurized Irrigation System connection requirements to the extent reasonably necessary to prevent the Pressurized Irrigation System connection requirements from being inequitable as to the applicant or as to the subject property and may condition such modification or waiver upon approval of specific development plans. The City Council may take such action without the necessity of re-submission of the petition to the Planning Commission.
10. Findings of the City Council. The City Council shall, on the basis of the Report and Recommendation of the Planning Commission and the evidence and testimony presented, make specific findings as part of the its decision. The findings may adopt, change, or modify the findings of the Planning Commission.
11. Decision of the City Council. The decision of the City Council shall be mailed to the Applicant no later than 30 days after the hearing.
12. Decision final. The decision of the City Council shall be final. (Ord. 2002-1, amended, 2002; Ord. 10-93, adopted, 1993)

Chapter 13.20 WASTEWATER DISCHARGES

Sections:
13.20.010    Purpose.
13.20.020    Permit--Contents.
13.20.030    Permit--Nontransferable.
13.20.040    Permit--Limitations-Amendment.
13.20.050    Prohibited discharges--Storm water.
13.20.060    Prohibited discharges--Specific categories.
13.20.070    Commercial garbage grinders.
13.20.080    Federal categorical pretreatment standards--Supersession of chapter limitations.
13.20.090    Federal categorical pretreatment standards--modification.
13.20.100    Specific pollutant limitations.
13.20.110    Application of state requirements.
13.20.120    POTW right of revision.
13.20.130    Discharge dilution prohibited.
13.20.140    Permit--Authority to discharge.
13.20.150    Permit--Required.
13.20.160    Permit--Application.
13.20.170    Permit--Modification.
13.20.180    Permit--Conditions.
13.20.190    Permit--Duration.
13.20.200    Permit--Approval.
13.20.210    Compliance date report.
13.20.220    Periodic compliance reports.
13.20.230    Monitoring facilities.
13.20.240    Inspection--Access.
13.20.250    Inspection--Failure to permit.
13.20.260    Sampling.
13.20.270    Pretreatment.
13.20.280    Confidential.
13.20.290    Option to contract for administrative services.
13.20.300    Amendments to guidelines.

13.20.010 Purpose.
It is the explicit purpose of this chapter to achieve the following:
1. Protect the operation of the city sewer system and the Orem City Publicly Owned Treatment Works, POTW;
2. To prevent inadequately treated pollutants from passing through such works; and
3. To ensure the city of Orem’s compliance with its NPDES permit. (Ord. 121 §34(a), amended, 1985)

13.20.020 Permit--Contents.
The permit for industrial wastewater discharge may require pretreatment of industrial waste waters before discharge, restriction of peak flow discharges, discharge of certain waste waters only to specified sewers, relocation of points of discharge, prohibition of discharge of certain wastewater components, restriction of discharge to certain hours of the day, payment of additional charges to defray increased costs of the city created by the wastewater discharges and such other conditions as may be required to effectuate No person(s) shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as storm water, surface water, groundwater roof runoff, Subsurface drainage, or cooling water to any sanitary sewer, except storm water runoff from limited areas, which storm water may be polluted at times and may be discharged to the sanitary sewer by permission of the superintendent. Storm water other than that exempted above and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers or storm sewers or to natural outlets approved by the superintendent and other regulatory agencies. Unpolluted industrial cooling water or process waters may be discharged, on approval of the superintendent, to a storm sewer, combined sewer, or natural outlet. (Ord. 121 §26(a), amended, 1985)

13.20.030 Permit--Nontransferable.
No city permit for industrial wastewater discharge is transferable without the prior written consent of the superintendent. (Ord. 121 §34(b), amended, 1985)

13.20.040 Permit--Limitations-Amendment.
No person shall discharge industrial waste waters in excess of the quantity or quality limitations set by his permit for industrial wastewater discharge. Any person desiring to discharge waste waters or use facilities which are not in conformance with its industrial wastewater permit must apply to the superintendent for an amended permit. Such amended permit shall be granted, provided its terms shall comply with this chapter. (Ord. 121 §34(c), amended, 1985)

13.20.050 Prohibited discharges--Storm water.
It is the explicit purpose of this chapter to achieve the following:
1. Protect the operation the city sewer system and the Orem City Publicly Owned Treatment Works, POTW;
2. To prevent inadequately treated pollutants from passing through such works; and
3. To ensure the city of Orem’s compliance with its NPDES permit. (Ord. 121 §34(a), amended, 1985)

13.20.060 Prohibited discharges--Specific categories.
No user shall contribute or cause to be contributed directly or indirectly, any pollutant or wastewater which will interfere with the operation or performance of the Orem City Publicly Operated Treatment Works, herein referred to as POTW. These general prohibitions apply to all such users of a POTW, whether or not the user is subject to National Categorical Pretreatment Standards or requirements. A user may not contribute the following substances to the city sewer system:
1. Explosives. Any liquids, solids, or gases which by reason of their nature or quantity are, or may be, sufficient either alone or by interaction with other substances to cause fire or explosion or be injurious in any other way to the POTW or to the operation of the POTW. At no time shall two successive readings on any explosion hazard meter, at the point of discharge into the system (or at any point in the system) be more than five percent nor any single reading over ten percent (ten percent of the lower explosive limit (LULL)) of the meter.
2. Solids. Except as authorized in Schedule 1 of the Orem City Wastewater Control Ordinance Controlled Limited Pollutants, solid or viscous substances which may cause obstruction of the flow in a sewer or other interference with the operation of the wastewater treatment facilities such as, but not limited: grease, garbage with particles greater than one-quarter inch in any dimension, animal guts or tissues, paunch manure, bones, hair, hides, or flashings, entrails, whole blood, feathers, ashes, cinders, sand, spent lime, stone or marble dust, metal, glass, straw, shavings, grass clippings, rags, spent grains, spent hops, wastepaper, wood, plastics, gas, tar or asphalt residues, residues from refining or processing of fuel or lubricating oil, mud or glass grinding or polishing wastes.
3. Corrosives. Any wastewater having a PH less than 6.5 or more than 8.5, or wastewater having any other corrosive equipment, and/or personnel of the POTW.
4. Toxic. Any wastewater containing toxic pollutants, except as authorized in said Schedule 1, Controlled Limited Pollutants, which either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, cause injury or interference with any wastewater treatment process or constitutes a hazard to humans or animals, creates a toxic effect in the receiving waters of the POTW, contaminates the sludge of any POTW systems, or exceeds the limitation set forth in a Categorical Pretreatment Standard. A toxic pollutant shall include but not he limited to any pollutant identified pursuant to Section 307(1) of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251/ et seq., herein referred to as “the Act.”
5. Noxious. Any malodorous liquids, gases, or solids which either singly or cumulatively or by interaction with other wastes are sufficient to create a public nuisance or hazard to life or are sufficient to prevent entry into the sewers for their maintenance and repair.
6. Untreatable. Any substance which may cause the POTW’s effluent or any other Product of the POTW, such as residues, sludge, or scums, to be unsuitable for reclamation and reuse or to interfere with the reclamation process where the POTW is pursuing a reuse and reclamation program. In no case shall a substance discharge to the POTW cause the POTW to be in noncompliance with sludge use or disposal criteria, guidelines or regulations developed under Section 405 of the Act or any criteria, guidelines, or regulations affecting sludge use or disposal developed pursuant to the Solid Waste Disposal Act, the Clean Air Act, the Toxic Substances Control Act, or state criteria applicable to the sludge management method being used.
7. NPDES permit violation. Any substance which will cause the POTW to violate its NPDES and/or State Disposal System Permit or the receiving water quality standards.
8. Objectionable Color. Any wastewater with objectionable color not removed in the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions,
9. Temperature. Any wastewater having a temperature which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW treatment plant resulting in interference or cause the temperature at the headworks of the POTW treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees Fahrenheit.
10. Slug Loads. Any pollutants, including oxygen demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released at a flow and/or pollutant concentration which a user knows or has reason to know will cause interference to the POTW. In no case shall a slug load have a flow rate or contain concentrations or qualities of pollutants that exceed for any time period longer than fifteen minutes more than five times the average twenty-four hour concentration, quantities, or flow during normal operation
11. Radioactive. Any wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotope of such half-life or concentration as may exceed limits established by the POTW manager in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations.
12. Hazard. Any wastewater which causes a hazard to human life or creates a public nuisance. (Ord. 121 §26(b), amended, 1985)

13.20.070 Commercial garbage grinders.
Mechanically operated grinder or disposers for producing ground garbage are permitted in commercial establishments. Every such grinder or disposer shall be so designed and installed:
1. That it shall use a wet process pulping system, including a pulper and a de-watering press, or other devices, which discharge at least seventy-five percent of the volume of pulp or solid wastes run through it into a garbage can or other container for transport to a proper and lawful garbage or waste disposal site approved by the Utah State Department of Health;
2. That it shall utilize a closed loop or other design which provides for a minimum for eighty-five percent use of circulated water;
3. That the fluid discharged therefrom into the sewer shall flow readily through an approved trap or interceptor drain line or soil line in a manner which prevents clogging or stoppage of the drain line;
4. That the entire installation shall comply in all particulars with the applicable provisions of state and local plumbing and electrical codes;
5. That said grinders will be operated with only cold water flowing into the grinder while connected to the city sewer. The final decision regarding sufficiency of grinder installation for the foregoing requirements rest solely with the POTW manager. (Ord. 121 §26(c), amended, 1985)

13.20.080 Federal categorical pretreatment standards--Supersession of chapter limitations.
Upon the promulgation of the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standard for a particular industrial subcategory, developed pursuant to 400 CFR, Section 403.6, the federal standard, if more stringent than limitations imposed herein for sources in that subcategory, shall immediately supersede the limitations imposed herein. The POTW manager shall notify all affected users of the applicable reporting requirements under 40 CFR, Section 403.12. (Ord. 121 §27, amended, 1985)

13.20.090 Federal categorical pretreatment standards--modification.
Where the POTW's wastewater treatment system achieves consistent removal of pollutants limited by Federal Pretreatment Standards, the POTW may apply to the director in an NPBES state with an approved State Pretreatment Program, and the Administrator of the EPA in a non-NPUES state or NPOES state without an approved State Pretreatment Program, herein referred to as the “approval authority,” for modification of specific limits in the Federal Pretreatment Standards. “Consistent removal” means reduction in the amount of a pollutant or alteration of the nature of the pollutant by the wastewater treatment system to a less toxic or harmless state in the effluent which is achieved by the system in ninety-five percent of the samples taken when measured according to the procedures set forth in Section 403.7(c)(2) of Title 40 of the Code of Federal Regulations, Part 403 - “General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution” promulgated pursuant to the Act. The POTW may modify pollutant discharge limits in the Federal Pretreatment Standards if the requirements contained in 40 CFR, Part 403, Section 403.7, are fulfilled and prior approval from the approval authority is obtained. (Ord. 121 §28, amended, 1985)

13.20.100 Specific pollutant limitations.
No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the controlled discharge wastewater containing in excess of the Controlled Limited and Controlled Admissible Pollutants, as established by the POTW from time to time and as set forth in Schedules 1 and 2 of the Orem City Wastewater Control Ordinance. (Ord. 121 §29, amended, 1985)

13.20.110 Application of state requirements.
State requirements and limitations on discharges shall apply in any case where they are more stringent than federal requirements and limitations or those contained herein. (Ord. 121 §30, amended, 1985)

13.20.120 POTW right of revision.
The POTW shall have the right to establish more stringent limitations or requirements on discharges to the wastewater disposal system if deemed necessary to comply with the objectives presented in Section 27-69 of the Orem City Wastewater Control Ordinance. (Ord. 121 §31, amended, 1985)

13.20.130 Discharge dilution prohibited.
No user shall ever dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate pretreatment to achieve compliance with the limitations contained in the Federal Categorical Pretreatment Standards, or in any other pollutant-specific limitation developed by the POTW or state. (Ord. 121 §32, amended, 1985)

13.20.140 Permit--Authority to discharge.
No person shall discharge, or cause to be discharged, any industrial wastewaters directly or indirectly into sewage facilities owned by the city without first obtaining a permit for industrial wastewater discharge from the superintendent. (Ord. 121 §33, amended, 1985)

13.20.150 Permit--Required.
All industrial users now connected or proposing to connect to the city sewer system shall obtain a wastewater discharge permit before connecting to and/or discharging to the city sewer system (Ord. 121 §35, amended, 1985)

13.20.160 Permit--Application.
Users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall complete and file with the city an application in the form prescribed by the city and accompanied by a fee as set forth in the schedule of fees for the city sewer system. All existing industrial users shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit prior to December 31, 1985, and proposed new industrial users shall apply at least ninety days prior to connecting to or contributing to the city sewer system. In support of the application, the user shall submit, in units and terms appropriate for evaluation the following information:
1. Name, address, and location of discharge (if different from the address);
2. SEC number according to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual, Bureau of the Budget, 1972, as amended;
3. Wastewater quantity and quality. Quality characteristics include, but are not limited to, those mentioned in Sections 13.20.050 through 13.20.070 of this chapter as determined by a reliable analytical laboratory; sampling and analysis shall be performed in accordance with the procedures established by the EPA pursuant to Section 204(h) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 135, as amended;
4. Time(s) and duration of discharges;
5. Average daily and peak wastewater flow rates, including daily, monthly and seasonal variations, if any;
6. Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans and details to show all sewers, sewer connections, and appurtenances by size, location and elevation. If deemed necessary by the city, such plans shall provide for separate systems for handling sanitary and industrial wastewater;
7. Description of activities, facilities and plant processes on the premises, including all materials which are or could be discharged;
8. Where known, the quantity and specific nature of any pollutants in the discharge which are limited by the city, state or Federal Pretreatment Standards, and a statement regarding whether or not the pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, whether additional operations and maintenance and/or additional pretreatment is required for the user to meet applicable pretreatment standards;
9. If additional pretreatment and/or operations and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment requirements.
10. The following conditions shall apply to this schedule:
    a. The schedule shall contain increments of progress in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment requirements,
    b. No increment referred to in subdivision 1 of this subsection shall exceed nine months,
    c. Not later than fourteen days following each date in the schedule and the final date for compliance, the user shall submit a progress report to the city including, as a minimum, whether or not the user complied with the increment of progress to be met on such date and, if not, the date on which it expects to comply with this increment of progress, the reason for delay and the steps being taken by the user to return the construction to the schedule established;
    d. Any other information as required by the city to evaluate the permit application. After evaluation and acceptance of the date furnished, the city may issue a wastewater discharge permit. (Ord. 121 §36, amended, 1985)

13.20.170 Permit--Modification.
Upon enactment of a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard and within the time prescribed thereby, the wastewater discharge permit of users subject to such standards shall be revised to require compliance therewith. Where a user subject to a National Categorical Pretreatment Standard, has not previously submitted an application for a wastewater discharge permit, the user shall apply for a wastewater discharge permit within thirty days after notice of the enactment of the applicable National Categorical Pretreatment Standard. The user with an existing wastewater discharge permit shall submit to the city within thirty days after such notice, the information required by Subsections H and I of Section 13.20.160. In addition to the foregoing, the terms and conditions of the permit shall be subject to modification by the city during the term of the permit as limitations or requirements are modified or other just cause exists. Any changes or new conditions in the permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance, as determined by the city. (Ord. 121 §37, amended, 1985)

13.20.180 Permit--Conditions.
Wastewater discharge permits shall be expressly subject to all provisions hereof and all other applicable regulations, user charges and fees established by the city. Permits may contain, but are not limited to, the following information:
1. Payment of the then current unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the wastewater to be discharged to the city sewer;
2. Limits on the average and maximum wastewater constituents and characteristics;
3. Limits on average and maximum rate and time of discharge or requirements for flow regulations and equalization;
4. Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities;
5. Specifications for monitoring programs which may include sampling locations, frequency of sampling, number, types and standards for tests and reporting schedules;
6. Compliance schedules;
7. Requirements for submission of technical reports or discharge reports;
8. Requirements for maintaining and retaining records relating to wastewater discharge as specified by the city, and affording city access thereto;
9. Requirements for notification of the city of any new introduction of wastewater constituents or any substantial change in the volume or character of the wastewater constituents being introduced into the wastewater treatment system;
10. Requirements for notification of the city of slug discharges;
11. Requirements for separate systems to handle sanitary and industrial wastewater or such that in the event that the user's industrial wastewater is or could cause an interference or a potential interference with the city sewer system, that the industrial wastewater could be severed, preventing discharge into the city sewer system and still allow the user's sanitary wastewater to discharge into the city sewer system;
12. Requirements that each industrial user provide protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other substances regulated herein. Facilities to prevent accidental discharge of prohibited materials shall be provided and maintained at the industrial user's own cost and expense. Detailed plans showing facilities and operating procedures to provide this protection shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved by the city before construction of the facility. All existing industrial users shall complete such a plan by December 31, 1985. No industrial user who commences contribution to the city sewer system after the effective date hereof shall be permitted to introduce pollutants into the system until accidental discharge procedures have been approved by the city. Review and approval of such plans and operating procedures shall not relieve the industrial user from the responsibility to modify the industrial user's facility as necessary to meet the requirements hereof. In the case of an accidental discharge, it is the responsibility of the industrial user to immediately telephone and notify the city and the Orem City POTW of the incident. The notification shall include location of discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, and corrective actions:
    a. Written Notice. Within fifteen days following an accidental discharge, the industrial user shall submit to the city and the Orem City POTW manager a detailed written report describing the cause of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the industrial user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the industrial user of any expense, loss, damage or other liability which may be incurred by the city as a result of damage to the city sewer system, to the Orem City POTW, fish kills, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the industrial user of any fines, civil penalties, or other liability which may be imposed by this chapter or other applicable law.
    b. Notice to Employees. A notice shall be permanently posted on the industrial user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees who to call in the event of a dangerous discharge. Employers shall ensure that all employees who may cause or suffer such a dangerous discharge to occur are advised of the emergency notification procedure;
    c. Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the city. (Ord. 121 §38, amended, 1985)

13.20.190 Permit--Duration.
An industrial wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years. A permit may he issued for a period less than a year or may be stated to expire on a specified date. The user shall apply for permit re-issuance a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing permit. Any permit may be canceled or terminated for failure to comply with the requirements hereof. (Ord. 121 §39, amended, 1985)

13.20.200 Permit--Approval.
Upon receipt of all required information; the application shall be processed. When properly executed by the city, the application form shall constitute a valid permit for industrial wastewater discharge. The application shall be approved if the applicant has complied with all applicable requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 121 §40, amended, 1985)

13.20.210 Compliance date report.
Within ninety days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, follows commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the city sewer system any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city and to the Orem City POTW manager a report indicating the nature and concentration of all pollutants in the discharge from the regulated process which are limited by pretreatment standards and requirements and the average minimum, and maximum daily flow and times for these process units in the user facility which are limited by such pretreatment standards or requirements. The report shall state whether the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements are being met on a consistent basis and, if not, what additional operation and maintenance and/or pretreatment is necessary to bring the user into compliance with the applicable pretreatment standards or requirements. This statement shall be signed by an authorized representative of the industrial user and certified to by a qualified professional engineer. (Ord. 121 §41, amended, 1985)

13.20.220 Periodic compliance reports.
1. Any user subject to a pretreatment standard, after the compliance date of such pretreatment standard, or, in the case of a new source, after commencement of the discharge into the city sewer system, shall submit to the city and to the Orem City POTW manager during the months of April and October, for the respective preceding six-month period, unless required more frequently in the pretreatment standard or by the city, a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the effluent which are limited by such pretreatment standards. In addition, this report shall include a record of all daily flows during the reporting period. At the discretion of the city and in consideration of such factors as local high or low flow rates, holidays, budget cycles' etc., the city may alter the months during which the above reports are to be submitted.
2. The city may impose mass limitations on users which are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. In such cases, the report required by subsection 1 of this section shall indicate the mass of pollutants regulated by pretreatment standards in the effluent of the user. These reports shall contain the results of sampling and analysis of the discharge, including the flow and the nature and concentration, or production and mass where requested by the city of pollutants contained therein which are limited by the applicable pretreatment standards. The frequency of monitoring shall be prescribed in the applicable pretreatment standard. All analysis shall be performed in accordance with procedures established by the EPA Administrator pursuant to Section 304(h) of the Act and contained in 40 CFR, Part 136 and amendments thereto, or with any other test procedures approved by techniques approved by the EPA Administrator. (Ord. 121 §42, amended, 1985)

13.20.230 Monitoring facilities.
1. The user shall provide and operate, at its expense, monitoring equipment and facilities approved by the city, sufficient to allow inspection, sampling, and flow measurement of the building sewer systems. The monitoring equipment and facilities shall be situated on the user's premises or such other location as allowed by the city.
2. There shall be ample room in or near such monitoring manhole or facility to allow accurate sampling and preparation of samples for analysis. The facility, sampling, and measuring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition at the expense of the user.
3. Whether constructed on public or private property, the sampling and monitoring equipment and facilities shall be provided in accordance with the city's requirements and all applicable local construction standards and specifications. Construction shall be completed within ninety days following written notification to the user by the city. (Ord. 121 §43, amended, 1985)

13.20.240 Inspection--Access.
All users shall allow the city or its representatives ready access at all reasonable times to all parts of the premises for the purpose of inspection, sampling, records examination or in the performance of any of its duties. The city, approval authority, state and EPA shall have the right to set up on the user's property such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling inspection, compliance monitoring and/or metering operations. Where a user has security measures in force which would require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that upon presentation of suitable identification, personnel from the city will be permitted to enter, without unreasonable delay, for the purposes of performing their specific responsibilities. (Ord. 121 §44, amended, 1985)

13.20.250 Inspection--Failure to permit.
In the event a duly authorized officer or agent of the city is refused admission for any purpose, the city may cause sewer service to the premises in question to be discontinued until the city's agents have been afforded reasonable access to the premises and sewer system to accomplish the inspection and/or sampling. (Ord. 121 §45, amended, 1985)

13.20.260 Sampling.
All measurements, tests, and analyses of the characteristics of water and wastes to which reference is made herein shall be determined in accordance with standard methods. In the event that no special facility has been required, the point of inspection shall be considered to be the downstream manhole in the city sewer nearest to the point at which the building sewer is connected to the public sewer. (Ord. 121 §46, amended, 1985)

13.20.270 Pretreatment.
1. Users shall provide all necessary wastewater pretreatment as required to comply herewith. Any monitoring equipment and facilities required to pretreat wastewater to a level acceptable to the city shall be provided, operated/ and maintained at the user's expense. Such facilities required by the city may include the requirement for separate systems to handle sanitary and industrial wastewater so that both can be discharged into the city collection system independently of each other, detailed plans showing the pretreatment facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the city for review, and shall be approved in writing by the city before construction of the facility. The review of such plans and operating procedures will in no way relieve the user for the responsibility of modifying the facility as necessary to produce an effluent acceptable to the city under the provisions hereof. Any subsequent changes in the pretreatment facilities or method of operation shall be reported to and be acceptable to the city prior to the user's initiation of the changes.
2. The city shall annually publish in a newspaper of general circulation within the boundaries of the city, a list of the users which were not in compliance with any pretreatment requirements or standards at least once during the twelve previous months. The notification shall also summarize any enforcement actions taken against the user(s) during the same twelve months. All records relating to compliance with pretreatment standards shall be made available to officials of the EPA or Approval Authority upon request. (Ord. 121 §47, amended, 1985)

13.20.280 Confidential.
1. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits and monitoring programs and from inspections shall be available to the public or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city that the release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user.
2. When requested by the user furnishing a report, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public but shall be made available upon written request to governmental agencies for uses related thereto, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, and/or the pretreatment requirements; provided, however, that such portions of a report shall be available for use by the state or any state agency in judicial review or enforcement proceedings involving the user furnishing the report.
3. Information accepted by the city as confidential shall not be transmitted to any governmental agency by the city until and unless a ten-day written notification is given to the user by certified mail or personal service. (Ord. 121 §48, amended, 1985)

13.20.290 Option to contract for administrative services.
The city has the option to contract with any governmental or private entity to provide such administrative services as deemed necessary. Such governmental entity could provide the following services, but would not be limited to the following except by contract with each entity:
1. Permit processing;
2. Monitoring facilities;
3. Inspection and sampling;
4. Pretreatment processing;
5. Enforcement action;
6. Laboratory analysis. (Ord. 121 §49, amended, 1985)

13.20.300 Amendments to guidelines.
As EPA adds or amends specific pretreatment and effluent guidelines, or as the city deems necessary, the restrictions or conditions of a permit for industrial wastewater discharge may require amendment, as circumstances dictate. The city shall require an industrial discharger to establish an abatement time schedule to comply with any changes in the industrial wastewater permit. (Ord. 121 §50, amended, 1985)

Chapter 13.22 STORM WATER UTILITY

Sections:
13.22.010    Purpose.
13.22.020    Definitions.
13.22.030    Storm water utility.
13.22.040    Storm water utility fee.
13.22.050    Billing.

13.22.010 Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to protect the health, safety and welfare of the city and its inhabitants by improving the city's storm water system, managing and controlling storm water runoff, protecting property, preventing polluted waters from entering the city's water supply and other receiving waters, and establishing a viable and fair method of financing the construction, operation and maintenance of the storm water system. (Ord. 97-14, repealed and replaced, 1997; Ord. 11-95, adopted, 1995)

13.22.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall be defined as follows:
“Developed parcel” means any parcel that has been altered from its natural condition by grading, filling, compacting the soil, hardening the surface of the property, constructing improvements on the property, or installing any other impervious surfaces on the property.
“Equivalent Service unit (ESU)” means the average amount of impervious surface, expressed in square feet, on developed single family residential parcels in Lindon City.
“Impervious surface” means any hard surface, other than the natural condition of the surface of the soil that prevents or retards the absorption of water into the soil, or that causes water to run off the surface in greater quantities or at greater rates of flow than the natural condition of the surface of the soil otherwise would. (Ord. 97-14, adopted, 1997)

13.22.030 Storm water utility.
1. Creation. The city council hereby creates and establishes a storm water utility as part of the city's overall sewer system. The storm water utility shall plan, design, construct, maintain, administer and operate the city's storm water system.
2. Enterprise fund. The city council may establish a storm water utility enterprise fund. Once established, all fees collected shall be deposited in the fund and the fund shall only be used to pay expenses related to the construction, maintenance and operation of the storm water utility. After establishment, any storm water fees collected shall not be commingled with or transferred to other city funds. However, the storm water utility may pay other city funds for services and expenses directly attributable to the storm water utility. The enterprise fund shall be operated according to State law and city policy.
3. Facilities and assets. Once established as an enterprise fund, the storm water utility shall operate independently of city operations funded by the general fund. The storm water utility shall have the same relationship to the city as other city utilities, such as the water utility and the sanitary sewer (waste water) utility. Upon creation of the utility, all of the city's storm water facilities and assets shall be transferred to the storm water utility in consideration for the storm water utility's agreement to take primary responsibility for planning, designing, constructing, maintaining, administering and operating the city's storm water system.
4. Administration. The storm water utility shall be administered by the city's public works director. (Ord. 97-14, adopted, 1997)

13.22.040 Storm water utility fee.
1. Imposed. Each developed parcel of real property in the city shall be charged a storm water utility fee.
2. Equivalent service unit. The fee shall be based on the number of equivalent service units (ESUs) contained in the parcel. The city council finds that the ESU is the most accurate measurement for determining the amount that each parcel contributes to, benefits from, and otherwise uses the storm water utility. Based on engineering studies completed in the Utah County area, the city council finds and establishes that one ESU equals two thousand eight hundred twenty (2,820) square feet of impervious surface area.
3. Calculation. Based on engineering data, the city council finds that each single family residential unit contributes approximately the same amount of storm water runoff rate, one ESU. All multi-family residential parcels shall pay a multiple of this base rate, expressed in ESUs, according to the measured impervious area on the parcel. The city council may adopt separate rates for Performance Developments, condominiums and other uses that are not easily handled under the standard rate schedule.
4. Charge per ESU. The amount charged for each ESU shall be established from time to time by public hearing and by resolution of the city council.
5. Exemptions and credit. The city council may establish exemptions and credits to the storm water utility fee by resolution.
6. Policies. The public works director may adopt policies, consistent with this ordinance and any resolutions passed by the city council, to assist in the application, administration and interpretation of this ordinance and any resolutions related to the storm water utilities.
7. Appeals. Any person or entity that believes that this ordinance, or any storm water utility rate resolution, was interpreted or applied erroneously may appeal to the city administrator. The appeal shall be in writing, shall state any facts supporting the appeal, and shall be made within ten (10) days of the decision, action, or bill being appealed. The city administrator may elect to hold a hearing on the appeal. The city administrator shall respond to the appeal in writing within ten (10) days of when the appeal is filed. If the person or entity is not satisfied with the city administrator's decision, a further appeal may be made to the city council. The appeal to the city council shall follow the same procedures as the appeal to the city administrator. The city council's decision shall be final and binding on all parties.
8. Storm water utility fee waiver. Eligibility Requirements.
    a. Eligible persons. Any low income person who meets the income requirements is eligible to apply for a waiver of the municipal storm water utility fee on that person's owner occupied primary residence or on a residence where the person is a tenant.
    b. Application process. The fee waiver application must be filed at the time of initiation of service, or on or before the first day of the month preceding the effective date of the waiver with the city.
    c. Required information. The application must set forth adequate facts to support the Person's eligibility for waiver to include:
        i. A statement certifying that the applicant's household income does not exceed the maximum allowable yearly income as promulgated by the State of Utah to qualify for property and income tax abatements. Household income means all taxable or non-taxable income from all sources including, but not limited to, gross income, net rents, interest, alimony, support payments, disability payments, public assistance payments, retirement income, and social security benefits. Household income does not include relief in kind supplied by a public agency.
        ii. The city may require proof of residency for at least ten (10) months of the year;
        iii. Signatures of both husband and wife are required if the waiver they seek is on a residence owned in joint tenancy.
    d. Claim limits. A person may request a waiver on only one primary residence.
    e. Approval of application. The City Treasurer may approve the application if the appropriate documentation as set forth above is provided by the applicant or the applicant can provide adequate proof that they have qualified for and been granted an abatement or “circuit breaker” allowance from Utah County or the State of Utah on their property taxes or income taxes.
    f. Renewal. A citizen receiving this fee waiver must re-apply annually. (Ord. 98-5, amended, 2000; Ord. 97-14, adopted, 1997)

13.22.050 Billing.
The city council finds that the city's storm water system, sanitary sewer system, culinary water system, secondary water system, and solid waste collection system are interrelated services that are part of a unified city plan to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the city and its residents and the environment. The fees charged for each of the services listed above shall be contained in a unified billing statement and billed monthly by the city. If there is no regular utility bill for the property, the storm water utility fee shall be charged directly to the owner of the property. The fee shall be deemed a civil debt owed to the city by the person or entity contracting for the city utility services provided to the property, or if there is no such contracting person or entity, then it is a civil debt owed by the record property owner. All properties shall be charged the fee, regardless of whether or not the owner or occupant of the property requests the storm water utility service. Failure to pay any portion of the utility bill may result in the termination of any and all services provided by the city, including culinary or secondary water service. (Ord. 97-14, adopted, 1997)

Chapter 13.23 STORM DRAINAGE

Sections:
13.23.010    Findings.
13.23.020    Definitions.
13.23.030    Purpose.
13.23.040    Prohibited Obstructions, Exceptions.
13.23.050    Reduction of Storm Flow.
13.23.060    Prohibited Discharges.
13.23.070    Prohibited Storage and Littering.
13.23.080    Requirements for Sumps.
13.23.090    Storm Water Connections, Record Drawings.
13.23.100    Authority to Inspect.
13.23.110    Requirement to Monitor and Analyze.
13.23.120    Notice of Violation.
13.23.130    Damage to Storm Water System or Irrigation Lines.
13.23.140    Manhole Covers.
13.23.150    Drinking Water Protection.
13.23.160    Piping of Existing Drainage and Irrigation Facilities.
13.23.170    Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
13.23.180    Inspection and Entry.
13.23.190    Alleviation of Dangerous Conditions and Stop Work Order.
13.23.200    Long Term Storm Water Pollution Prevention and Maintenance Plan.
13.23.220    Requirements for Proposed Developments.
13.23.230    Requirements for Construction Activities (Excluding Construction of a Single Family Residence).
13.23.240    Requirements for Construction of One Single Family Residence.
13.23.250    Requirements for Existing Developments.
13.23.260    Violations and Enforcement.
13.23.270    Compliance with Federal and State Law.
13.23.280    Lindon Storm Water Management Program.

13.23.010 Findings.
The city council:
1. Has found it necessary and determined that the public interest, convenience, health, welfare and safety requires that all water generated from individual construction, commercial, industrial, and public use developments and subdivisions be confined and disposed of in a flood control storm drain system; and
2. Has adopted as part of the city's general plan a storm drainage master plan prepared by the city engineer relating to the disposition of surface waters in a storm drainage system; and
3. Has found that each area which is proposed to be subdivided, developed or built upon does in fact generate additional runoff water which needs to be disposed of in a safe manner, avoiding damage and hazards to the inhabitants of the city; and
4. Has found it is necessary that certain improvements be constructed upon or in close proximity to residential, commercial, industrial and public use developments in order to carry the surface runoff water to appropriate storage, disposition areas and other facilities identified in the storm drainage master plan; and
5. Has found that the costs of construction of the improvements must be borne by the developer or builder of the proposed project.

13.23.020 Definitions.
The following words and phrases shall be defined as follows for the purpose of this Chapter:
“Best Management Practices (BMPs)” means a wide range of management procedures, schedules or activities, prohibitions of practices, maintenance procedures, and other management practices which have been demonstrated to effectively control the quality and/or quantity of storm water runoff and which are compatible with the planned land use. BMPs also include treatment requirements, operating procedures, and practices to control site runoff, spillage or leaks, sludge or water disposal, or drainage from raw materials storage. A list of BMPs can be found in the Lindon Storm Water Management Program (LSWMP).
“Catch Basin” means a drain inlet designed to keep out large or obstructive matter.
“City Manager” means the Lindon City Manager, or designee.
“Debris” means any dirt, rock, sand, vegetation, rubbish or litter.
“Dechlorinated Water” means water with all traces of chlorine removed.
“Detention Basin” means a depression designed to detain storm water runoff so downstream storm water resources are not over-taxed. A detention basin contains an inlet and an outlet, allows, debris to settle out, and regulates water flow.
“Development” means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to site preparation, filling, grading, paving, excavation, and construction, alteration or remodeling of buildings or other structures, and any activities on a construction site, as determined by the Public Works Director, the Community Development Representative, or City Engineer, that create conditions that may generate erosion, sediments, hazardous materials, or pollutants that can impact or affect the storm drain system or the waters collected thereby.
“Director” means the Public Works Director of Lindon City or his duly appointed deputy, agent, or representative.
“Disturb” means to alter the physical condition, natural terrain or vegetation of land by clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, excavation, and construction of buildings or other structures.
“Drain Inlet” means a point of entry into a sump, detention basin, or storm drain system.
“Emergency Condition” means any condition in which time is of the essence in stopping, limiting, repairing, or alleviating any condition that poses at threat to public health, welfare or safety, creates a serious risk to person, property or environment, or which creates a substantial risk of damage to the City’s storm water system.
“Hazardous Material” means any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to a substantial presence or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. Hazardous material includes, but is not limited to any hazardous substance designated under 40 CFR part 116 pursuant to section 311 of the Clean Water Act.
“Illicit Connection” means illicit connection means either of the following;
    a. Any drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the storm drain system. Examples include, but are not limited to, any conveyances which allow non-storm water discharge such as sewage, process wastewater, or wash water to enter the storm drain system, and any connections to the storm drain system from indoor drains or sinks regardless of whether said drain or connection had been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by a government agency; or
    b. Any drain or conveyance connected to or discharging to the storm drain system, which has not been (1) documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records submitted to the City, and (2) approved in writing by the City.
“Illicit Discharge” means any non-storm water discharge to the storm water system. Illicit discharges include both direct connections (e.g. wastewater piping either mistakenly or deliberately connected to the storm water system) and indirect connections (e.g. infiltration into the storm water system or spills collected by drain inlets), except discharges allowed pursuant to a UPDES Permit (other than the UPDES Permit for discharges from the municipal separate storm sewer) and discharges resulting from fire fighting activities.
“Land Development” means any development of a parcel, lot, subdivision plat or site plan. If there is more than one lot in the subdivision plat or site plan, all lots in the subdivision plat or site plan shall jointly be considered to be part of the land development.
“Non-Storm Water Runoff” means any runoff other than storm water.
“NPDES” mean “National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. As authorized by the Clean Water Act, the National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit program controls water pollution by regulating point sources that discharge pollutants into waters of the United States.
“Person” means any individual, corporation, partnership, association, company or body politic, including any agency of the State of Utah and the United States government.
“Pollutant” means dredged soil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, industrial, municipal and agricultural waste, paints, varnishes, and solvents; oil and other automotive fluids; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects, articles, and accumulations, that may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; hazardous substances and wastes; sewage, sanitary sewer overflows, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure (including but not limited to sediments, slurries, and concrete resinates); and noxious or offensive matter of any kind.
“Pretreatment” means a structure or process that entirely or partially removes pollutants from storm water.
“Redevelopment” means alterations of a property that change the footprint of a site or building.
“Runoff” means that part of precipitation, snow melt, or irrigation water that runs off the land. It can carry pollutants from the air and land into the receiving waters.
“Storm Drain” means a closed conduit for conducting collected storm water.
“Storm Water System” means the system of conveyances (including sidewalks, roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, detention basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, man-made channels, sumps, storm drains, and ground water owned and operated by the City, which is designed and used for collecting or conveying storm water. The storm water system is also referred to as a “municipal separate storm sewer system” or “MS4.”
“Storm Water” means any flow that occurs during or following any form of natural precipitation. Storm water includes only the portion of such flow that is composed of precipitation.
“Sump” means a formalized underground structure, generally surrounded by drain rock, that releases water into the surrounding sub-soil.
“UPDES” means Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. A state permit program designed to regulate and control discharges into surface waters of the State. A UPDES permit is typically required prior to discharging any waste water to surface water, including storm drainage discharges, well drilling activities, industrial processing, etc. (Ord. 2006-9, amended, 2007; Ord. 97-14, adopted, 1997; Ord. 2011-10, amended, 2011)

13.23.030 Purpose.
The purposes of this Chapter are as follows:
1. To minimize the introduction of pollutants into the Storm Water System.
2. To comply with State and Federal laws and regulations.
3. To provide a means to monitor and control discharges into the Storm Water System.

13.23.040 Prohibited Obstructions, Exceptions.
1. Prohibited Obstructions. It is unlawful for any person to;
    a. Obstruct the flow of water in the storm water system.
    b. Contribute to the obstruction of the flow of water in the storm water system.
    c. Cover or obstruct any storm drain inlet.
2. Exception. The following obstructions are exempt from the prohibitions of this Section:
    a. Street or improvement projects authorized by the City.
    b. Flood control and prevention activities performed by the City.
    c. Obstructions approved by the City as part of a site’s construction or post construction storm water pollution prevention plan.
    d. Obstructions occurring during clean-up periods established by the City, provided that the materials are placed according to City directions and do not obstruct storm drain inlets.

13.23.050 Reduction of Storm Flow.
A developer must provide for a controlled rate of release of storm water exiting the project not to exceed 0.20 cubic feet of water per second per acre. The amount of storm water exiting the project cannot exceed the amount calculated above, but may be further restricted by the capacity of existing storm drains or drainage facilities as determined by the city engineer. Restrictions to the controlled the rate of release will require that detention storage be provided.

13.23.060 Prohibited Discharges.
1. Illicit Discharges. It is unlawful for any person to cause or allow an illicit discharge or to allow pollutants to enter the storm water system.
2. Exceptions. The following discharges to the storm water system shall not be considered to be illicit discharges and shall be exempt from the prohibitions of this Section:
    a. Discharges regulated under a valid National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) storm discharge permit, provided that the discharges comply with the terms of the permit.
    b. Discharges from water line flushing performed by the City.
    c. Discharges from sprinkled landscaped irrigation or sprinkled lawn watering.
    d. Discharges from non-commercial car washing.
    e. Discharges from natural riparian habitat or wetland flows.
    f. Discharges from natural groundwater flows directly to a piped storm water system.
    g. Discharges from air conditioning condensation.
    h. Discharges from fire fighting or emergency management activities.
    i. Discharges of de-chlorinated water from swimming pools.
    j. Discharges from foundation drains, footing drains, or crawl space or basement pumps if the discharges have been approved in writing by the City.
    k. Discharges resulting from actions by a public utility, the City, or any other governmental entity to remove or alleviate an emergency condition, including the restoration of utility service or the reopening of a public thoroughfare to traffic.
    l. Discharges resulting from actions by any other person when the City determines, and documents in writing, that the actions are necessary to remove or alleviate an emergency condition.
    m. Discharges from bona fide agricultural and farming operations, provided that the agricultural and farming operations constitute the principal use of the parcel, provided that such use of the parcel does not conflict with the City’s zoning ordinance, and that the discharges are deemed by the City to have a negligible or minimal impact on the Storm Water System as to both amount of discharge and level of pollutants in the discharges.

13.23.070 Prohibited Storage and Littering.
It is unlawful for any person to maintain, store, keep, deposit or leave any pollutant or hazardous material, or any item containing a pollutant or hazardous material, in a manner that, in the opinion of Lindon City, is likely to result in the discharge of the pollutant or hazardous material to the storm water system.

13.23.080 Requirements for Sumps.
It is unlawful for any person to construct a sump in the City unless (1) the sump has been approve by the City, (2) the sump is designed to separate sediments oils and grease and floatables from the storm water, and (3) the sump complies with applicable Lindon City Construction Standards and Specifications.

13.23.090 Storm Water Connections, Record Drawings.
Any person connecting to the storm water system shall provide the Lindon City Public Works Department with record drawings showing the details and the location of the connection. The plans shall be in a format that is acceptable to Lindon City. In addition, the City may request proof that an applicant has secured, or is in the process of securing, any discharge permits that the intended development or land use may be required to obtain from state, or federal entities. The City, in its discretion, may condition connection to the storm water system upon the issuance of such permits, or upon applicant meeting certain steps, which the City may identify in writing, in securing such a permit. Nothing herein shall be construed as authorizing the City to impose any conditions or requirements in addition to state or federal requirements for such a permit, nor shall anything herein be construed as requiring the City to monitor, implement, or assume responsibility for enforcement of any discharge permit issued by state or federal entities.

13.23.100 Authority to Inspect.
Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any provision of this Chapter, or whenever Lindon City has cause to believe that there exists, or potentially exists, a condition which constitutes a violation of this Chapter, the City may enter the premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same and to inspect and copy records related to storm water compliance. In the event the owner or occupant refuses entry after a request to enter and inspect has been made, the City is hereby empowered to seek assistance from any court of competent jurisdiction in obtaining such entry. The City shall not be required to seek assistance from any court to enter private property and inspect, if such actions are necessary to alleviate, abate, or resolve an emergency condition.

13.23.110 Requirement to Monitor and Analyze.
1. Inspection During Construction or Development Activities. If Lindon City testing or inspections indicate that a site is discharging storm water at a rate greater than the maximum allowed rate, is causing or contributing to storm water pollution, illegal discharges, or non-storm water discharges to the storm water system or waters of the United States, and if the violations continue after notice from the City, the City may require any person engaged in the illicit activity and/or the owner or operator of the site to provide, at his own expense, monitoring and analyses required by the City to determine compliance with this Chapter.
2. Post Construction Maintenance and Inspection. All development in which private storm water system improvements are made, except for the construction of a single family home with its associated on-site improvements, which disturbs less than one acre land and is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that disturbs one acre or more of land, must enter into a storm water maintenance plan as required by this Chapter, shall inspect the improvements at least once on an annual basis, and shall provide the City with a written report of the findings of such inspection, including any damages, defects, or deficiencies related to the improvement. In addition to the rights to inspect as provided in this Chapter, the City shall inspect the improvements at least once every five years, but may inspect the improvements more frequently as it determines in its sole discretion.

13.23.120 Notice of Violation.
Whenever the City finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to comply with a requirement of this Chapter, the City will order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation;
a. The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting;
b. The elimination of illicit connections or discharges;
c. The violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist.
d. The abatement or remediation of storm water pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property.
e. Payment to cover administrative, remediation, monitoring, analyses, and reporting costs; and
f. The implementation of detention, source control, or treatment BMPs.
2. The City is not required to provide the notice requirements set forth in this Section and immediately proceed with criminal and/or civil action against the violator if:
    a. the violator has committed the same violation in the past;
    b. the violation, in the opinion of the City, creates a serious risk to person, the environment or property; or
    c. the City deems the violation to constitute an emergency.

13.23.130 Damage to Storm Water System or Irrigation Lines.
Any person who damages any portion of the storm water system, a City-owned irrigation line, or a City-maintained irrigation line shall be responsible for repairing the damages. The damages shall be repaired by a licensed contractor bonded to do work in the City and shall be repaired in accordance with the City’s Construction Standards and Specifications. It is unlawful to remove or alter any portion of the storm water system without permission from the Director.

13.23.140 Manhole Covers.
It shall be unlawful to open any storm water manhole or other storm water fixture (such as grates, lids or inlets) without permission from the Director.

13.23.150 Drinking Water Protection.
All storm water and non-storm water discharges shall comply with the City’s drinking water source protection ordinance.

13.23.160 Piping of Existing Drainage and Irrigation Facilities.
Any open irrigation or drainage ditches which are located within or along the borders of any proposed development must be piped or otherwise covered, or remain open, as a condition of development approval, at the discretion of the Planning Commission. The developer shall be responsible for the design and construction of the required improvements. If the ditch has been identified in the storm drainage master plan as needing increased capacity, the City Council may elect to have the city participate in the costs of the increased capacity required when piping such a ditch.

13.23.170 Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.
A Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan as outlined in the Lindon Storm Water Management Program and which complies with all requirements contained therein, shall be submitted with all site plan or improvement plan applications.

13.23.180 Inspection and Entry.
The applicant for development, including any site plan or improvement plan shall allow any authorized employees and representatives of the City, representatives of the State of Utah Division of Water Quality, and representatives of the EPA, to enter the site at any time and to inspect the erosion and sediment control measures maintained by the applicant. The applicant shall also allow inspection of any records pertaining to the erosion and sediment control measures maintained by the applicant.

13.23.190 Alleviation of Dangerous Conditions and Stop Work Order.
The City, in its sole discretion, may take any steps the City deems necessary to alleviate any situations which involve a risk of injury to person, damage to storm drain facilities, damage to other property or the environment, or any other exceptional circumstances, and may bill the owner, developer, or contractor responsible for creating the circumstances for the cost of alleviating said circumstances. A stop work order may be issued upon discovery of work in violation of or not in compliance with the Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan.

13.23.200 Long Term Storm Water Pollution Prevention and Maintenance Plan.
1. A Long term Storm Water Pollution Prevention and Maintenance Plan as outlined in the Lindon Storm Water Management Program and which complies with all requirements contained therein and with the UPDES Storm Water General Permit for Construction activities, is to be submitted with the site plans or improvement plans.

13.23.220 Requirements for Proposed Developments.
All proposed development shall, in addition to the other requirements of this title, comply with the UPDES Storm Water General Permit for Construction Activities, which include, but are not limited to following:
1. All development that includes the construction of private storm water improvements, except for the construction of a single family home with its associated on-site improvements which disturbs less than one acre land and are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that disturbs one acre or more of land, must enter into a Storm Water Maintenance Agreement with Lindon City. The Storm Water Maintenance Agreement may be entered into on behalf of the City by the Public Works Director, but the agreement must be in a form that has been approved by the City Council. The agreement, among other requirements must include a provision requiring the property owner to perform inspections of the improvements and provide a written report to the City at least once annually, and that Lindon City shall inspect the improvements at least once every five years.
2. Each proposed development shall incorporate best management practices (BMPs) into development design to limit the flow rate of runoff and protect water quality, reduce discharge of pollutants, and control waste as such, but not limited to, discarded building materials, concrete truck washout, chemicals, litter, and sanitary waste, and other discharges prohibited by this chapter that may cause adverse impacts to water quality.
    a. Storm Water Best Management Practices (BMPs) must be considered throughout the development process. Lindon City requires some BMPs on all development and may generally encourage and recommend others on any particular development, as listed in Part 6 of the Lindon City Storm Water Management Plan.
    b. Upon the recommendation of the City Engineer, Lindon City may also require the use of BMPs other than those listed in Part 6 of the Lindon Storm Water Management Plan, which may be necessary for a particular development, based upon engineering judgment and the particular conditions of a given project.
3. A Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan, as required in this chapter, shall at a minimum meet the requirements for a Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan as set forth in the UPDES Storm Water General Permit for Construction actives, and shall be submitted with the development plans for approval. This requirement applies to all development, other than construction of single family homes and associated on-site improvements, which disturbs less than one acre of land, and which is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that disturbs one acre or more of land.
4. Financial guarantee of Site Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.
    a. Financial guarantees that improvements contained in the Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan will be installed and maintained must be posted with Lindon City prior to beginning construction. In the case of a subdivision of land, this will be included in the bond that is required for the cost of the subdivision improvements.
    b. The City, at its discretion, may elect to require non-monetary methods of enforcement already in place in Lindon City (business licenses, utility services, building and occupancy permits) rather than a financial guarantee to ensure compliance with the improvements contained in the approved Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan.
    c. At the time of development, the developer shall provide an estimate of the cost of the required improvements. The City will review the estimate and establish the dollar amount of the financial guarantee.
5. A Long-Term Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan, as required by this chapter, must be prepared and submitted with the development plans for approval, including a signed Storm Water Maintenance Agreement as required by this Chapter. This requirement applies to all development in which private improvements are constructed, except for the construction of a single family home with its associated on-site improvements which disturbs less than one acre land and is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that disturbs one acre or more of land.
6. Utah Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (UPDES).
    a. Development having a disturbed area of one acre or more, or which are part of a larger common plan of development or sale that disturbs one acre or more of land, require a UPDES Storm Water General Permit for construction activities from the Division of Water Quality of the Department of Environmental Quality of the State of Utah.
    b. Obtaining the permit requires preparation and submission Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan, and a Notice of Intent to the State. The developer must submit a copy of the Notice of Intent to the City before the site plan will be considered finalized.
    c. When an overall development of over one acre in size is phased, the permit is required for each phase, even if each phase is less than one acre in size. Development of fewer than one acre in size, and which is not part of a larger common plan of development or sale that disturbs one acre or more of land, are covered under Lindon City’s UPDES General Permit.
7. Land Disturbance Permit.
    a. Any person commencing or performing any land disturbance, grading, relocation of earth, or any other land disturbance activity in Lindon City shall be required to first obtain a land disturbance permit if the proposed activity disturbs land areas in the follows amounts:
        i. R1-12 zone: Less than one acre but more than 12, 000 square feet.
        ii. All zones other than R1-12: Less than one acre but more than 20,000 square feet.
        iii. All zones. Any land disturbance that is observed by Lindon City which creates significant potential storm water pollution.
            A. In the event a Land Disturbance Permit is required based solely on the observation of a potential storm water pollution, Lindon City shall provide written notice to the land owner and/or tenant of the need for the permit, and shall allow a reasonable time to secure such permit.
            B. The City shall be authorized to require the immediate cessation of any potential pollution activity during the pendency of the Land Disturbance Permit.
    b. An application for a Land Disturbance Permit shall be submitted in accordance with the Land Development Policies Standard Specifications and Drawings.
    c. A land disturbance permit shall not be issued if:
        i. The City determines that the work proposed by the applicant is hazardous, or is likely to endanger any private property, result in the deposit of debris on any public way, or interfere with any existing drainage course.
        ii. The proposed land disturbance activity would not comply with the requirements of an approved site plan, subdivision plat, or any provisions of law, including the provisions of the Chapter.
    d. In granting any land disturbance permit pursuant to the provisions of this Chapter, the City may attach such conditions as may be reasonably necessary to protect public health and safety and to mitigate potential harm to person, property or environment.
    e. Exemptions: The following activities do not require a Land Disturbance Permit. Although these activities do not require a land disturbance permit, they are still subject to, and shall be performed in accordance with the City Standards and Specifications and all other applicable ordinances, rules, regulations of the City, State and Federal governments.
        i. Any emergency activity that is immediately necessary for the protection of life, property, or natural resources.
        ii. Actions by any other person when the City determines, and documents in writing, that the actions are necessary to remove or alleviate an emergency condition.
        iii. Existing nursery and agricultural operations conducted as a permitted main or accessory use.
        iv. Bona fide agricultural and farming operations, provided that the agricultural and farming operations constitute the principal use of the parcel and provided that such use of the parcel does not conflict with the City’s zoning ordinance: and
        v. Mowing, brush clearing, tree cutting or similar activities which do not grade, dig, excavate or otherwise remove or kill the surface growth and root system of the ground cover.
        vi. Any development or use that has received an approved Storm Water Pollution Prevention Plan or a UPDES Permit (Ord. 2011-10, amended, 2011; Ord. 2007-5, amended, 2007)

13.23.230 Requirements for Construction Activities (Excluding Construction of a Single Family Residence).
a. Prior to beginning work, developers and contractors must provide appropriate instruction to on-site construction supervisors and operators, regarding the requirements of the Construction Site Storm Water Management Plan. A copy of the plan must be present at the construction site.
b. The improvements shown in the approved Construction Site Storm Water Management Plan must be construction as indicated in the plan. The appropriate activities outlined in the Construction Site Storm Water Management Plan must be constructed as Management Plan must be performed prior to any other construction activities on the site. Lindon City encourages modifications to the plan when needed to improve storm water management in light of site condition, but any variation from the approved plan that reduces or eliminates any element of the plan must first be approved by the Lindon City Public Works Representative or City Engineer.
c. After initial implementation of the improvements outlined in the approved Construction Site Storm Water Management Plan, precipitation activity will provide opportunity to observe the effectiveness of the storm water management improvements. Those responsible for construction activities must monitor the in-place storm water management improvements to assess their effectiveness; they must then make adjustments to the improvements as needed to accomplish effective storm water management. The City shall be entitled to monitor the effectiveness of the Construction Site Storm Water Management Plan and to require modifications to the plan as is necessary to achieve the purposes of this chapter.
d. Verification that improvements were constructed as approved.
1. Following implementation of the improvements contained in the Construction Site Storm Water Management Plan, the preparer of the plan shall provide Lindon City with a statement as to the condition of the improvement contained in the plan. The statement shall be made on a copy of the Construction Site Storm Water Management Plan document, and shall be signed.
2. If the improvements were constructed as approved, the statement shall include language verifying such. If the improvements were not constructed as approved, it shall state the differences, the reason for the differences, the reason for the differences, and provide an opinion as to the adequacy of the constructed improvements. This statement must be provided to Lindon City prior to final acceptance of improvements (in the case of public improvements) or issuance of an occupancy permit (in the case of private site improvements).

13.23.240 Requirements for Construction of One Single Family Residence.
All projects for the construction of one single family house shall, in addition to the other requirements of this title, comply with the following requirements:
a. A public Works Representative or City Engineer may waive the requirement that a Construction Site Storm Water Management Plan be submitted on individual residential lots.
b. The BMP fact sheet for Sediment Control on Small Construction Sites (SCSCS) is to be included as part of the building permit application. This BMP applies to construction and landscaping activities associated with individual residential structures, and shall be followed.
c. Owner and/or contractor shall make adjustments to their construction practices as needed to prevent storm water pollution.
    1. Where storm water pollution prevention measures are inadequate, or are not being properly followed, may be deemed a violation of this chapter. In addition to any other penalty for violating this chapter, the Public Works Representative, Community Development Representative, or City Engineer may refuse to perform inspections and/or shut down work on the project.
    2. Sediment that is left in the street or on adjacent lots shall be presumptive evidence of inadequate sediment control. It is the burden of the owner and/or contractor to rebut this presumption

13.23.250 Requirements for Existing Developments.
a. The owners of existing developments are responsible to maintain improvements and observe practices that were part of an approved Post Construction Storm Water Management Plan. Failure to adhere to the plan shall be considered a violation of this chapter. In addition to the penalties established in this chapter, the City may refuse to renew business licenses or other permits while such violations continue.
b. While Lindon City encourages adjustments to the approved post construction storm water management plan that enhance effective storm water management, any significant reduction of practices contained in the plan may only be made through formal modification of the plan, which requires re-submission of the Post Construction Storm Water Management Plan to the City’s Development Review Committee for approval.

13.23.260 Violations and Enforcement.
a. The violation of any of the provisions of this Chapter shall be a Class B misdemeanor. Each day that a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense.
b. Both the owners(s) of the property on which a violation occurs and the contractor(s) who’s work results in a violation of this chapter may be prosecuted separately and may individually face the additional penalties listed herein.
c. Violators of this Chapter are also subject to any penalties that may be imposed by the State of Utah, under the authority of the Utah Water Quality Act, Title 19, Chapter 5 of the Utah Code.
d. In addition to any criminal fines and/or penalties which may be assessed for a violation of this Chapter, the City shall have the right to issue a stop work order or to install and/or maintain appropriate erosion and sediment control measure on any site which is required to have such measures in the event that construction activity is commenced or continued without such measures having been installed as required by this Chapter. The City shall have the right to have such measures installed or maintained by City personnel or to hire a private contractor to perform such work and the contractor and/or the property shall be liable for any and all expenses related to performing such work plus a 25% penalty charge. The City at its discretion may assess said charges against any bond posted by the contractor and/or property owner and may place a lien upon the real estate for the charges.
e. Violators of this chapter may also be subject to prosecution, fines and penalties from the Sate of Utah and the United States EPA.

13.23.270 Compliance with Federal and State Law.
Nothing contained in this Chapter is intended to relieve any person or entity from any obligation to comply with applicable federal and state laws and regulations pertaining to clean water and/or storm water runoff.

13.23.280 Lindon Storm Water Management Program.
The Lindon Storm Water Management Program, as amended from time to time, is hereby incorporated by reference. (Ord. 2006-9, repealed and replaced, 2007)

Chapter 13.24 CONNECTIONS TO MOBILE HOMES OR TRAILERS

Sections:
13.24.010    Sewer system hookup mandatory.
13.24.020    Fee.
13.24.030    Application of other ordinances.

13.24.010 Sewer system hookup mandatory.
The owner or other person having charge or occupying any mobile home or trailer within the city shall cause the same to be connected to the city sewer system in compliance with applicable city ordinances, rules and regulations. (Ord. 42 §1, amended, 1978)

13.24.020 Fee.
The owner or other person having charge of or occupying any mobile home or trailer in the city shall pay a connection fee as follows:
1. The initial connection for the first unit in a mobile home park shall be five hundred dollars ($500);
2. There shall be a connection fee of one hundred dollars ($100) for each additional unit connected to the city sewer system. (Ord. 42 §2, amended, 1978)

13.24.030 Application of other ordinances.
The owner or other person having charge of or occupying any mobile home or trailer in the city shall be subject to all other city ordinances and regulations relating to the city sewer system. (Ord. 42 §3, amended, 1978)

Chapter 13.26 CITY CULINARY WATER SYSTEM, SEWER SYSTEM, AND PRESSURIZED IRRIGATION SYSTEM--USER FEES

Sections:
13.26.010    User Fees.

13.26.010 User Fees.
In determining the User Fee to be established by the City Code pursuant to Resolution, in accordance with Chapter 13.16, Chapter 13.19, and other provisions of the Lindon City Code, the City shall, in addition to other requirements, utilize the following procedure:
1. The City shall assess a surcharge for different classes of users of the City Culinary Water System, City Sewer System, and the City Pressurized Irrigation System.
2. The City Council shall establish the defining boundaries of each class of user.
3. The surcharge shall be established in an amount sufficient to cover the increased cost of providing culinary water service, sewer service, and/or pressurized irrigation service for each such user class, as determined by the City.
4. The City shall utilize the criteria determined to be appropriate by the City for the determination of each user class. A classification may be based upon geographical area, elevation of the property connected to the utility service, source of supply for culinary water service and/or pressurized irrigation water service, pumping costs for culinary water service, sewer service, and/or pressurized irrigation water service, or other factors as determined reasonable by the City Council.
5. The City shall review the surcharge rate not less often than every two (2) years and shall revise the surcharge rate as necessary to assure equity of the surcharge amount.
6. The City Council is designated a board of equalization of culinary water service, sewer service, and pressurized irrigation water service surcharge fees, to hear complaints and make corrections of any assessments deemed to be illegal, unequal, or unjust.
7. The surcharge shall distribute, to the extent determined by the City to be feasible and reasonable, the costs attributable to each user class in proportion to each user class's contribution to the special costs associated with providing City culinary water service City sewer service, and/or City pressurized irrigation service to each such user class. (Ord. 19-93, adopted, 1998)

Chapter 13.28 REQUIREMENTS FOR THE CONTROL OF BACK FLOW AND CROSS-CONNECTIONS

Sections:
13.28.010    Purpose of Chapter.
13.28.020    Responsibility.
13.28.030    Consumer's Responsibility.
13.28.040    Plumbing Official Authority.
13.28.050    Certified back flow assembly technicians, surveyors or repair person’s responsibilities.
13.28.060    Definitions.
13.28.070    Policy.
13.28.075    Cross Sections.
13.28.080    Termination--Notice.
13.28.090    Termination--Hearing and appeal.
13.28.100    Termination without notice.
13.28.110    Penalty for Violation.

13.28.010 Purpose of Chapter.
1. To protect the safe drinking water supply of Lindon city from the possibility of contamination or pollution; and,
2. To promote reasonable elimination or control of cross connections in the plumbing fixtures and industrial piping system(s) of the consumer, to assure water system safety; and,
3. To provide for the administration of a continuing program of back flow prevention which will systematically and effectively prevent the contamination or pollution of the water system.

13.28.020 Responsibility.
1. Drinking water system surveys/inspections of the consumer's water distribution system(s) may be conducted or caused to be conducted by individuals deemed qualified by and representing Lindon City, as determined to be necessary by Lindon City. All survey records will be maintained by Lindon City.
2. Lindon City may, at such time as determined by Lindon City, notify in writing all consumers of the need for the periodic water system survey/inspection to insure compliance with existing applicable minimum health and safety standards.
3. Selection of an approved back flow prevention assembly for containment control required at the service entrance shall be determined by Lindon City.

13.28.030 Consumer's Responsibility.
1. To comply with this Chapter as a term and condition of supply of water. Consumer’s acceptance of service is admittance of his/her water awareness and agreement to comply with the provisions of this Chapter.
2. It shall be the responsibility of the consumer to purchase, install, test and maintain any back flow prevention device/assembly required to comply with this Chapter.

13.28.040 Plumbing Official Authority.
1. The plumbing official’s authority to enforce the applicable sections of the Utah Plumbing Code begins at the point of service (downstream or consumer side of the meter) and continues throughout the developed length of the consumer's water system.
2. The plumbing official will review all plans to ensure that unprotected cross connections are not an integral part of the consumer's water system. If a cross connection cannot be eliminated, it must be protected by the installation of an air gap or an approved back flow prevention device/assembly, in accordance with the Utah Plumbing Code.
3. Water vacating the drinking water supply must do so via approved air gap or approved mechanical back flow prevention assembly, properly installed and in accordance with the Utah Plumbing Code.

13.28.050 Certified back flow assembly technicians, surveyors or repair person’s responsibilities.
1. Whether employed by the consumer or a utility to survey, test, repair, or maintain back flow prevention assemblies the Certified Back Flow Technicians, Surveyors or Repair Persons will have the following responsibilities:
    a. Insuring acceptable testing equipment and procedures are used for testing, repairing or overhauling back flow prevention assemblies.
    b. Making reports of such testing and/or repair to water purveyor and the Bureau of Drinking Water/Sanitation on forms approved for such use by the Bureau of Drinking Water/ Sanitation, and within the time frames prescribed by the Bureau of Drinking Water /Sanitation. The reports shall include the list of materials or replacement parts used.
    c. Insuring replacement parts are equal in quality to parts originally supplied by the manufacturer of the assembly being repaired.
    d. Not changing the design, material or operational characteristics of the assembly during testing, repair or maintenance.
    e. All testing of the mechanical devices/assemblies shall be performed by a Certified Technician, who shall be responsible for the competence and accuracy of all tests and reports.
    f. Insuring his/her license is current, the testing equipment being used is acceptable to the State of Utah, and is in proper operating condition.
    g. Be equipped with, and be competent to use, all necessary tools, gauges, and other equipment necessary to properly test, and maintain back flow prevention assemblies.
2. The Certified Technician conducting the test must tag each double check valve, pressure vacuum breaker, reduced pressure back flow assembly and high hazard air gap, showing the serial number, date tested and by whom. The technician's license number must also be on this tag.

13.28.060 Definitions.
“Water Purveyor” is the person designated to be in charge of the Water Department of Lindon City, which person is invested with the authority for enforcement of the provisions of this Chapter.
“Approved Back Flow Assembly” means a back flow assembly device accepted by the Utah Department of Health, Bureau of Drinking Water/ Sanitation, as meeting an applicable specification or as suitable for the proposed use.
“Auxiliary Water Supply” means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the purveyor's public water supply will be considered as an auxiliary water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural source(s) such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or “used waters” or “industrial fluids”. These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the water purveyor does not have authority for sanitary control.
“Back Flow” means the reversal of the normal flow of water caused by either back-pressure or back siphonage.
“Back-Pressure” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances under pressure into the feeding distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source(s) other than the intended source.
“Rack-Siphonage” means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances into the distribution pipes of a potable water supply system from any source(s) other than the intended source, caused by the reduction of pressure in the potable water supply system.
“Back Flow Prevention Assembly” means an assembly or means designated to prevent back flow. Specifications for back flow prevention assemblies are contained within the Utah Plumbing Code, Chapter 10, (Appendix J), and the Cross-Connection Control Program for Utah.
“Contamination” means a degradation of the quality of the potable water supply by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials.
“Cross-Connection” means any physical connection or arrangement of piping or fixtures which may allow non-potable water or industrial fluids or other material of questionable quality to come in contact with potable water inside a distribution system. This would include any temporary connections, such as swing connections, removable sections, four way plug valves, spools, dummy sections of pipe, swivel or change-over devices or sliding multi-part tubes or other plumbing arrangements.
“Cross-Connection Controlled” means a connection between a potable water system and a non-potable water system with an approved back-flow prevention assembly properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard.
“Cross-Connection - Containment” means the installation of an approved back flow assembly at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections within the consumer's water system; it shall mean the installation of an approved back flow prevention assembly on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross-connection (isolation).

13.28.070 Policy.
1. No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the Public Water Purveyor unless the water supply is protected as required by applicable State laws, regulations, codes, and this Chapter. Service of water to a consumer found to be in violation of this Chapter may be discontinued by the water purveyor as set forth herein. Service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected.
2. The customer's system(s) shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to authorized representatives of the water purveyor to determine whether cross connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of this Chapter, exist.
3. Whenever the public water purveyor deems a service connection's water usage contributes a sufficient hazard to the water supply, an approved back flow prevention assembly shall be installed on the service line of the identified consumer's water system, at or near the property line, or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line.
4. The type of protective assembly required shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists at the point of cross-connection (whether direct or indirect), applicable to local and state requirements or resulting from the survey.
5. All presently installed back flow prevention assemblies which do not meet the requirements of this section but which were approved assemblies for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under this Chapter, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the water purveyor is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the public water system. Whenever the existing assembly is moved from the present location or, requires a more than minimum maintenance or, when the water purveyor finds that the operation or maintenance of this assembly constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved back flow prevention assembly meeting the local and state requirements.
6. It shall be the responsibility of the consumer at any premises where back flow prevention assemblies are installed to have certified surveys/inspections, and operational tests made upon the request of the Public Water Purveyor, at the consumer's expense.
7. All back flow prevention assemblies shall be tested within ten (10) working days of initial installation.
8. No back flow prevention assembly shall be installed so as to create a safety hazard. Example: installed over an electrical panel, steam pipes, boilers, or pits.
9. If violations of this Chapter exist or if there has not been any corrective action taken by the consumer within 10 days of the written notification of deficiencies, or within such additional time as provided in the written notice, then the public water purveyor may deny or immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the condition(s) in conformance with the State and City requirements relating to plumbing, safe drinking water supplies and this Chapter.

13.28.075 Cross Sections.
The control or elimination of cross connections and the criteria for determining degree of hazard and prescribing appropriate levels of protections shall be in accordance with the UPC and the UPDWR. Water service to any premise shall be contingent upon the customer providing appropriate cross connection control if determined necessary. Determination and enforcement shall be responsibility of the Lindon City Public Works Department. Water service may be refused or terminated to any premises where an unprotected cross connection may allow contamination or pollutants to backflow into the public drinking water system.
Authorized employees of Lindon City with proper identification; shall have free access at reasonable hours of the day, to all areas of a premise or building to which drinking water is supplied for the purpose of conducting hazard assessment surveys. Water service may be refused or terminated, or maximum backflow protection may be required, to the premise where access to perform surveys is denied, where unprotected cross connections are located, or in the event that installed assemblies are not tested and maintained as required by State and local regulations.
Before any water service is terminated, a “due process” of notifying the customer and providing a reasonable time for compliance to be achieved will be observed according to the operating procedures of Lindon City. However, in the event of an actual backflow incident which endangers the public health, water service may be terminated immediately and not be restored until the cross connection is either eliminated or adequately protected. (Ord. 2011-4, adopted, 2011)

13.28.080 Termination--Notice.
Except as provided in Section 13.28.100, at least ten (10) calendar days prior to a proposed termination of water or sewer service, the city shall give written notice of proposed termination. The ten-day time period shall be computed from the date such notice is deposited in the mail. The notice shall be given by first-class mail or delivery to the premises and shall contain a summary of the following information:
1. The date of proposed termination;
2. The reason for the proposed termination;
3. A description of the consumer's hearing and appeal rights.

13.28.090 Termination--Hearing and appeal.
Any person whose water or sewer service is to be terminated, may appeal to the city council by filing a written appeal in the office of the city manager within ten days of the receipt of the notice of proposed termination. Any appeal shall be solely for the purpose of reviewing the interpretation given the terms of this chapter, and not to vary the terms in any way. Such appeal shall be considered by the city council, at a hearing where the consumer will be allowed to present evidence and testimony, within thirty days of receipt of notice. Except as provided in Section 13.28.100, upon filing of the appeal, the City shall take no further action with regard to the termination until the city council makes a final decision on the appeal. If the City council affirms the decision of termination, the water may be shut off immediately.

13.28.100 Termination without notice.
Notwithstanding any provision or agreement to the contrary, the city may terminate water and sewer service without notice where, in the city's judgment, a clear emergency or serious health or safety hazard exists for so long as such condition exists, or where there is unauthorized use of or connection to the city water or sewer service or tampering with pipes, meters, or other water or sewer equipment.

13.28.110 Penalty for Violation.
Any violation of the terms and provision of this Chapter shall constitute a Class “B” Misdemeanor. Each day's violation shall be considered a separate offense.

Chapter 13.30 DRINKING WATER SOURCE PROTECTION

Sections:
13.30.010    Short Title and Purpose.
13.30.020    Definitions.
13.30.030    Establishment of drinking water source protection zones.
13.30.040    Permitted uses.
13.30.050    Prohibited uses.
13.30.060    Administration.

13.30.010 Short Title and Purpose.
1. This ordinance shall be known as the “Drinking Water Source Protection Ordinance.”
2. The purpose of this ordinance is to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for Lindon City by the establishment of drinking water source protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells and the Spring Management Area for the springs and spring water collection facilities which are the supply sources for Lindon City’s water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and Conditions which may be maintained within such zones.

13.30.020 Definitions.
When used in this ordinance the following words and phrases shall have the meanings given in the section.
“Design Standard” means a control which is implemented by a potential contamination source to prevent discharges to the groundwater. Spill protection is an example of a design standard.
“Land management strategies” means zoning and non-zoning controls which include, but are not limited to, the following: zoning and subdivision ordinances, site plan reviews, design and operating standards, source prohibitions, purchase of property and development rights, public education programs, ground water monitoring, household hazardous waste collection programs, water conservation programs, memoranda of understanding, written contracts and agreements, and so forth.
“Pollution Source” means point source discharges of contaminants to ground water or potential discharges of the liquid forms of “extremely hazardous substances” which are stored in containers in excess of “applicable threshold planning quantities” as specified in SARA Title III. Examples of possible pollution sources include, but are not limited to, the following: storage facilities that store the liquid forms of extremely hazardous substances, septic tanks, drain fields, class V underground injection wells, landfills, open dumps, landfilling of sludge and septage, manure piles, salt piles, pit privies, and animal feeding operations with more than ten animal unites. The following shall help clarify the definition of pollution source:
    a. “Animal feeding operation” means a lot or facility where the following conditions are met: animals have been are will be stables or confined and fed or maintained for a total of 45 days or more in any 12 month period, and crops, vegetation forage growth, or post-harvest residues are not sustained in the normal growing season over any portion of the lot or facility. Two or more animal feeding operations under common ownership are considered to be a single feeding operation if they adjoin each other, if they use a common area, or if they use a common system for the disposal of wastes.
    b. “Animal Unit” means a unit of measurement for any animal feeding operation calculated by adding the following numbers: the numbers of slaughter and feeder cattle multiplied by 1.0, plus the number of mature dairy cattle multiplied by 1.4, plus the number of swine weighing over 55 pounds multiplied by 0.4, plus the number of sheep multiplied by 0.1, plus the number of horses multiplied by 2.0.
    c. “Extremely hazardous substances” means those substances which are identified in Sec. 302 (EHS) column of the “TITLE III LIST OF LISTS” Consolidated List of Chemicals Subject to Reporting Under SARA Title III,” (EPA 560/4-91-011).
“Potential Contamination Source” means any facility or site which employs an activity or procedure which may potentially contaminate ground water. A pollution source is also a potential contamination source.
“Regulatory agency” means any governmental agency with jurisdiction over hazardous waste as defined herein.
“Sanitary landfill” means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes, or hazardous wastes, are disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon.
“Septic tank/drain field systems” means systems which are comprises of a septic tank and a drain-field which accepts domestic wastewater from buildings or facilities for subsurface treatment and disposal. By their design, septic tank/drain-field system discharges cannot be controlled with design standards.
“Wellhead” means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments.
“Spring water collection facilities” means all collection lines and collection boxes associated with the Spring Management Area.

13.30.030 Establishment of drinking water source protection zones.
There is hereby established use districts to be known as zone one, two, three, and four of the drinking water source protection area, identified and described as follows:
1. Zone one is the area within a 100-foot radius from the wellhead or spring water collection facility.
2. Zone two is the area within a 250-day ground water time of travel to the wellhead or spring water collection facility, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplied water to the ground water source, or the ground water divide, whichever is closer.
3. Zone three (waiver criteria zone) is the area within a 3-year ground water time of travel to the wellhead or spring water collection facility or margin of the collection area, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the ground water source, or the ground water divide, whichever is closer.
4. Zone four is the area within a 15-year ground water time of travel to the wellhead or spring water collection facility, the boundary of the aquifer(s) which supplies water to the ground water source, or the ground water divide, whichever is closer.

13.30.040 Permitted uses.
The following uses shall be permitted within drinking water source protection zones:
1. Any use permitted within existing agricultural, single family residential, multi-family residential, and commercial districts so long as uses conform to the rules and regulations of the regulatory agencies.
2. Any other open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use.

13.30.050 Prohibited uses.
The following uses or conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within drinking water source protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under Section 13.30.040 of this ordinance.
1. Zone one - The location of any pollution source as defined herein.
2. Zone two - The location of a pollution source unless its contaminated discharges can be controlled with design standards.
3. Zone three and four - The location of a potential contamination source unless is can be controlled through land management strategies.

13.30.060 Administration.
The policies and procedures for administration of any source protection zone established under this ordinance, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exception, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for Lindon City, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. (Ord. 2002-4, adopted, 2002)

Chapter 13.32 WATER CONSERVATION PLAN ORDINANCE

Sections:
13.32.010    Short Title and Purpose.
13.32.020    Establishment of Conservation Measures and Goals.
13.32.030    Water Conservation Plan Adoption.

13.32.010 Short Title and Purpose.
1. This ordinance shall be known as the “Water Conservation Plan Ordinance.”
2. The purpose of this ordinance is to create a plan for water conservation in Lindon City by the establishment of water conservation measures and goals.

13.32.020 Establishment of Conservation Measures and Goals.
There is hereby established a set of conservation measures and goals for Lindon City as detailed in the Water Conservation Plan.

13.32.030 Water Conservation Plan Adoption.
The Water Conservation Plan is hereby adopted on January 4, 2005. The plan will be amended no less than every five years and will continue to play a vital role in the future development of Lindon City, Utah. (Ord. 2005-1, adopted, 2005)

Title 14 RESERVED

Title 15 BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION

Chapters:
15.04        Administration
15.08        Adoption of Uniform Codes

Chapter 15.04 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:
15.04.010    Building official--Duties.
15.04.020    Occupancy--Inspection and approval required.
15.04.030    Building Permit Fee Schedule.
15.04.040    Underground Power.
15.04.050    Violation–Penalty.
15.04.060    Severability.
15.04.070    Appeals.

15.04.010 Building official--Duties.
The building official shall, in addition to the duties imposed by the provisions of the international and national building, electrical and plumbing codes herein adopted, be charged with the inspection of all buildings, structures, for the purpose of assuring compliance with State and/or local building code and City Ordinance requirements. (Ord. 2002-25, amended, 2002; Prior code §3-4)

15.04.020 Occupancy--Inspection and approval required.
Buildings and structures requiring a building permit pursuant to the provisions of the ordinances and policies of the city shall not be occupied or put into use until the local building official has inspected such building or structure, finds compliance with the ordinances and policies of the city, including the building codes, and gives a written certificate of occupancy and use to the owner or his agent to occupy and/or use the building or structure in the manner approved by the issuance of a valid building permit.
Structures occupied without a Final Certificate of Occupancy and in violation of building code requirements and Lindon City Ordinance requirements shall forfeit all construction and performance bonds posted to Lindon City and shall have a Notice of Noncompliance recorded against the property at the Utah County Recorders Office. The Notice of Noncompliance shall verify that Lindon City cannot verify code compliance for the structure and that the structure has not received final approval of occupancy.
Before such time as a Notice of Noncompliance is recorded, adequate notice of the responsible person, and/or property owner detailing steps necessary to comply with building code requirements shall be mailed and adequate time to bring the property into compliance shall be provided to the property owner as outlined in the International Building Code. (Ord. 2002-25, amended, 2002; Ord. 65 §1, amended, 1979)

15.04.030 Building Permit Fee Schedule.
Fees charged by Lindon City for receiving a building permit shall be established in the Lindon City Fee Schedule and the 1997 U.B.C. Construction projects in the process or completed without a required building permit shall be required to pay a double fee. (Ord. 2002-25, amended, 2002)

15.04.040 Underground Power.
All new construction shall be required to locate electrical power utility connections underground. Where it is the opinion of the Chief Building Inspector, and the Public Works Director that an underground connection is impossible or impractical, an above ground connection may be approved. (Ord. 2002-25, amended, 2002)

15.04.050 Violation–Penalty.
1. Any person, firm, entity, or corporation, whether as principal, agent or employee, who violates or causes the violation of any of the provisions of this Title shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor. For purposes of enforcement under this Section, the provisions of this Title shall include the provisions, requirements and restrictions of all of the codes and regulations referenced and adopted in Title 15. Each day a violation of this Title continues shall constitute a separate offense.
2. In addition, Lindon City by action of the City Council, may institute an injunction, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or maintenance:
3. Notice. 
    a. Upon inspection and discovery that any provision of this Title is being violated, the Building Official, or his agent, shall provide a written notice of violation and order to the property owner and to any other party who may be responsible for the violation.
    b. Each written notice and order shall: (1) indicate the nature of the violation; (2) order the action necessary to correct the violation; (3) give information regarding the established warning period for the violation; and (4) state the action the Building Official intends to take if the violation is not corrected within the warning period.
    c. The written notice shall be delivered personally or mailed to the property owner, as shown on the records of the county recorder, and to any other person who may be responsible for the violation. Receipt of notice shall be deemed to occur upon the earlier of the date written notice is delivered or three days after the notice is mailed as provided herein.
    d. The written notice shall serve to start any warning periods provided in this Section commencing upon receipt of notice. If the violation remains uncured within five days after the expiration of the warning period, a second notice shall serve to start the civil penalties after the expiration of the warning period established in this Section.
4. Warning Period. There shall be a 28 day Warning period for all violations of this Title, except as provided in Subsection 3(e) of this Section.
5. Civil Penalties. Violations of the provisions of this Title shall result in the following civil penalties, after expiration of the warning period established herein:
    a. For violations in residential zones, or residential use, a civil penalty of $200 per day.
    b. For violations in all non-residential zones, or non-residential use, a civil penalty of $400 per day.
    c. Each day a violation is continued or maintained after receipt of notice shall give rise to a separate civil penalty for each day of violation.
6. Violation Appeal Procedures.
    a. An appeal of a violation determination and/or suggested action by the City shall follow the appeal procedures outlined in LCC 17.09, except that:
        i. The Appeal Authority for violation determinations shall be the City Council, and
        ii. the appeal period (time to appeal) shall be valid for no longer that 10 days after expiration of the Warning Period. No appeals will be accepted after expiration of the appeal period.
7. Collection of Civil Penalties. Collection of civil penalties imposed under this Section may be collected by Lindon City as provided for in Title 1, Chapter 18 of this Code. Forbearance by the Building Official to collect civil penalties shall not relieve the responsibility to pay any penalty, to cure the violation, nor shall it require the City to reissue any of the notices required by this Section.
8. Nonexclusive Remedies. Any one, all or any combination of the penalties and remedies set forth in this Section, or any other Sections of Title 15 or the code and regulations adopted thereby, may be used to enforce the provisions of this Title. (Ord. 2002-25, amended, 2002; Ord. 65 §3, amended, 1979)

15.04.060 Severability.
The provisions of Chapter 15 are severable. (Ord. 2002-25, amended, 2002)

15.04.070 Appeals.
The Utah State Board of Appeals shall act as the Board of Appeals as required by the International Building Code. (Ord. 2002-25, amended, 2002)

Chapter 15.08 ADOPTION OF UNIFORM CODES

Sections:
15.08.010    Adoption.
15.08.020    Automatic Adoption.

15.08.010 Adoption.
It shall be Lindon City Policy to adopt and implement the current editions of the various state, national, and international standards and codes applicable to buildings and construction. Specifically these are the 2006 Editions of the International Plumbing, Mechanical, and Residential Codes and the 2005 National Electrical Code. In addition such codes, in conjunction with the Lindon City Code and the Lindon City Fee Schedule, shall provide standards for the issuance of building permits and collection of fees; and provides for penalties for the violation thereof. The International Building Code Standards as approved and adopted by the State of Utah are approved and adopted as the building code standards and requirments for Lindon City, and they are by this reference made a part of this Chapter to the same extent and effect as though they were copied in full and in their entirety in this chapter. In addition Chapter 1 of the 2006 Edition of the International Building Code is specifically adopted as the section governing the administration of the building code in the City. A copy of the code shall be filed in the Community Development Department for use and examination by the public, specifically the 2006 International Plumbing Code, the 2006 International Mechanical Code, the 2006 International Residential Code and the 2005 National Building Code. (Ord. 2007-4, amended, 2007; Ord. 2002-25, amended, 2002)

15.08.020 Automatic Adoption.
New editions of building codes as specified in 15.08.010 or other such codes as adopted by the Lindon City and/or the State of Utah shall be automatically adopted unless otherwise specified or amended therein. (Ord. 2002-25, amended, 2002)

Title 16 RESERVED

Title 17 ZONING

Chapters:
17.02        Definitions
17.04        General and Supplemental Provisions
17.06        Restrictions on Inoperable Motor Vehicle and Vehicle Storage
17.08        Planning Commission
17.09        Land Use Authority and Appeal Authority
17.10        Board of Adjustment
17.12        Document Submission and Review
17.14        Noticing
17.16        Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
17.17        Site Plan Development
17.18        Off-Street Parking
17.20        Conditional Uses Generally
17.22        Performance Standards for Conditional Uses
17.24        General Standards for Conditional Use Developments
17.30        Landfills and Land Excavations
17.32        Subdivisions–Special Requirements
17.33        Amending a Recorded Plat
17.34        Parcel Boundary Adjustment
17.38        Bonds for Completion of Improvements to Real Property
17.40        Zoning District Establishment
17.41        Anderson Farms Planned Development Zone (PD Zone)
17.42        MU–Multiple Use District
17.43        RB–Residential/Business District Overlay Zone (RBO)
17.44        Single Family Residential
17.45        R-3 Overlay Zone
17.46        R2 Overlay Zone
17.47        Research and Business (R&B) Zone
17.48        Commercial Zones
17.49        Industrial Zones
17.50        Mixed Commercial
17.51        Commercial Farm Zone
17.52        T–Travel Influence District
17.54        Regional Commercial (RC) Zone
17.55        Utah Lake Shoreline Protection Overlay Zone
17.56        SA–Sensitive Area District
17.57        HP–Hillside Protection District
17.58        Dedications of Subdivisions
17.60        Neighborhood Redevelopment Agency
17.61        Sexually Oriented Businesses
17.62        Flood Damage Prevention
17.64        Recreational Vehicles
17.66        Delivery of Irrigation Water Stock
17.68        Reimbursement Fees
17.70        Residential Care Facilities
17.72        Care Facilities Overlay
17.73        Tree Care Ordinance
17.74        Wind Energy Conversion Systems (WECS)
17.75        Senior Housing Facility Overlay
17.76        Planned Residential Development Overlay (PRD Overlay) Zone
17.78        Recreational Vehicle Parks

Chapter 17.02 DEFINITIONS

Sections:
17.02.010    Definitions.

17.02.010 Definitions.
Unless the context requires otherwise, the following definitions shall be used in the interpretation and construction of this division. Words used in the present tense shall include the future; the singular number shall include the plural, and the plural the singular; the word “building” includes the word “structure”; the words “used” or “occupied” include arranged, designed, constructed, altered, converted, rented, leased, or intended to be used or occupied; the word “shall” is mandatory and not directory, and the word “may” is permissive; the word “person” includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company, or corporation, as well as an individual; the word “lot” includes the words plot or parcel. Words used in this division, but not defined herein, have the meaning as defined in any other ordinance adopted by the local jurisdiction.
“Agricultural industry (agricultural business)” means the processing of raw food products by packaging, treating, and/or intensive feeding. Agricultural industry includes, but is not limited to, animal feed yards, the raising of fur-bearing animals, food packaging and/or processing plants, commercial poultry or egg production, commercial greenhouses, and similar uses as determined by the planning commission.
“Agriculture” means the production of food through the tilling of the soil, the raising of crops, breeding and raising of domestic animals and fowl except household pets and not including any agricultural industry or business.
“Airport.” All airport definitions and regulations will be found in the airport ordinance adopted by the local jurisdiction except as airports are governed under the general use regulations of this division.
“Alley” means a public access way less than twenty-six (26) feet in width that is designed to give secondary access to lots or abutting properties. An alley shall not be considered a street for the purpose of this division.
“Alluvial soils” means areas subject to periodic flooding as defined in the soil survey prepared by the Soil Conservation Service that encompasses the local jurisdiction.
“Amusement park” means any place of organized amusement activity not conducted wholly within a completely enclosed building, whether a commercial or nonprofit enterprise, except temporary celebrations sanctioned by the local governing body by a special permit.
“Animal clinic (also animal hospital)” means any building or portion thereof designed or used for the care or treatment of animals or fowl, and/or in which veterinary service is provided or is available.
“Architectural projection” means any building or structural projection which is not intended for occupancy and which extends beyond the face of an exterior wall of a building or structure, but not including signs.
“Automotive body and fender shop” means a facility for major automobile, truck, mobile home, recreational coach or recreational vehicle repairs to body, frame, or fenders, and including rebuilding.
“Automatic carwash” means a facility for automatic self-service washing and cleaning of automobiles and small trucks not exceeding one and one-half (1 ½) tons’ capacity.
“Automobile truck wash” means a facility for automatic self-service washing or cleaning of trucks exceeding one and one-half (1 ½) tons’ capacity.
“Automobile paint shop” means a facility for painting of automobiles, trucks, trailers, boats, or other travel or recreational vehicles or units.
“Automobile sales area” means an open area used for display, sale, or rental of new or used motor vehicles, mobile homes, recreational coaches, or recreational vehicles in operable condition.
“Automobile salvage yard (wrecking or processing)” means a lot or portion thereof used for the storage, dismantling, demolition, or abandonment of automobiles, other vehicles, other machinery, or parts thereof.
“Automobile service station” means a place where gasoline or any other motor fuel or lubricating oil or grease for operating motor vehicles is offered for sale to the public and deliveries are made directly into motor vehicles and where services performed may include tube and tire repair, battery charging, storage of merchandise, and tune up of automobiles; but not including major auto repair.
“Average slope” means an expression of rise or fall in elevation along a line perpendicular to the contours of the land connecting the highest point of land to the lowest point of land within a lot or building area. A vertical rise of one hundred (100) feet apart measured on a horizontal plane is one hundred (100).
“Basement” means a floor level below the first story in a building which floor is more than twelve inches (12") below the average level of the final grade, but where no more than one-half (½) of its floor-to-ceiling height is below the average contact level of the final grade. A basement shall be counted as a story for purposes of height measurement and as a half-story for the purpose of side yard determination.
“Beginning of construction” means the excavation or re-contouring of the site.
“Block” means the land surrounded by streets or other rights-of-way, other than an alley, or land which is designated as a block on any recorded subdivision plat.
“Boarding house” means a dwelling where, for compensation, meals are provided for at least three (3) but not more than fifteen (15) persons.
“Bona fide division of agricultural land purposes” means the division of agricultural land into three (3) or more lots for which the planning commission makes the following written findings of fact upon petition for such findings by a land owner:
    a. No urban services will be required by said division of agricultural land.
    b. The purpose and use of each of the lots in the division shall be for agriculture purposes, not for investment, building development, recreational use, cabin or other housing use, livestock feed yard, or other agricultural industry or business.
    c. Each of the parcels created has access to an existing public street or to a private street approved by the planning commission and the governing body.
    d. Each of the lots created shall be found by the Planning Commission to be capable of producing an income from the sale of agricultural products sufficient to justify its existence as a separate agricultural lot entity now or in the future. Among the controlling factors used in making a decision as to whether a division of land is or is not a bona fide division or partition of agricultural purposes, the planning commission and the governing body shall make findings as to the availability of water for irrigation or stock watering purposes, the class of the soil and depth of the soil mantle, the slope of the land, past history of agricultural production, and the present state of agricultural technology.
“Bona fide division of commercial land purposes” means the division of commercial land into three (3) or more parcels for which the planning commission makes the following written findings of fact upon petition for such findings by a land owner:
    a. The purpose and use of each of the lots in the division shall be for commercial purposes and not for manufacturing, warehousing, construction, or assembly of goods, agricultural production, recreation or residential housing.
    b. Each of the lots created has access to a public street or highway or to a private street approved by the planning commission and the governing body.
“Bona fide division of industrial land purposes” means the division of industrial land into three (3) or more parcels for which the planning commission makes the following written findings of fact upon petition for such findings by a land owner:
    a. The purpose and use of each of the lots in the division shall be for industrial purposes and not for on-premises sales, display of goods, agricultural production, recreation, or residential housing that will be used on the site.
    b. Each of the lots created has access to a public street or highway or to a private street approved by the planning commission and the governing body.
“Buildable area” means the portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided, except that land with an average grade exceeding fifteen percent (15%) shall not be considered geo-technically buildable unless it is approved by conditional use permit.
“Building” means any structure used or intended to be used for the shelter or enclosure of persons, animals, or property.
“Building, height of” means the average vertical distance measured at the four (4) corners of the main building. The “average vertical distance” is computed by measuring from the finished grade of the structure at each of the four (4) corners to the highest elevation of the roof structure.
“Building official” means the person designated as the building official for the local jurisdiction by the governing body.
“Campground” means a public area designated by a public agency for camping or a private area licensed by the local governing body for camping.
“Camping” means a temporary establishment of living facilities such as tents or recreational coaches as regulated by this division.
“Carport” means a private garage not completely enclosed by walls or floors. For the purposes of this division, a carport shall be subject to all the regulations prescribed for a private garage.
“Cellar” means a room or rooms having more than fifty percent (50%) of the floor to ceiling height under the average level of the adjoining ground.
“Child nursery (day care center)” means an establishment for the care and/or the instruction of five (5) or more children for compensation other than for members of the family residing on the premises, but not including a public school.
“Church” means a building, together with its accessory buildings and uses, maintained and controlled by a duly recognized religious organization where persons regularly assemble for worship and religious instruction.
“Clinic, dental or medical” means a building in which a group of dentists, physicians, and/or allied professionals in the healing arts are associated for the conduct of their professions. The clinic may include a dental and/or medical laboratory and an apothecary, but it shall not include in-patient care or operating rooms for major surgery.
“Club, private ” means a social, recreational, or athletic club or similar association or corporation incorporated under the provisions of the Utah Non-Profit Corporation and Cooperation Act for the above-stated purposes, which maintains or intends to maintain premises upon which alcoholic beverages are or will be stored, consumed or sold, and which for that reason is required to be licensed by the state.
“Conditional use” means a use of land for which a conditional use permit is required, pursuant to this division.
“Condominium” means the ownership of a single unit in a multi-unit project, together with an undivided interest in common areas and facilities of the property as provided by state law. A condominium development is comparable to a subdivision in that each development is characterized by multiple individual ownerships in a single development; in a condominium development the multiple individual ownerships are in structures, whereas in subdivisions such ownerships are in land. For regulation purposes the development of a condominium project is treated by Utah state law and by this division as a subdivision, and condominium developments must comply with the subdivision regulations of this division.
“Corral” means a space, other than a building, less than one (1) acre in area or less than one hundred (100) feet in width, used for the confinement of animals or fowl.
“Coverage, building” means the percentage of the total site area covered by buildings.
“Crosswalk” or “roadway” means a right-of-way designed for use by pedestrians and not intended for use by motor vehicles of any kind; a crosswalk or walkway or pedestrian way may be located within or without a street right-of-way, at grade, or grade-separated from vehicular traffic.
“Cul-de-sac” means a street which is designed to remain permanently closed at one end, with the closed end terminated by a vehicular turnaround. For purposes of this division, the length of the cul-de-sac shall be measured from the centerline of the intersecting street along the centerline of the cul-de-sac, to a point to the center of the cul-de-sac.
“Culinary water facility” means water supply lines, pumps, springs, wells, and/or any other physical facilities necessary to provide a supply of culinary water to a use in sufficient quantity and of approved quality to meet the standards of this division.
“Dairy” means the production of milk on a farm for wholesale marketing off the premises shall classify the farm as a dairy.
“Density” is a measure of the number of dwelling units per acre of area. It shall be expressed dwelling units per acre (DU acre).
    a. “Density, Gross.” This is the maximum density that may be permitted in any zoning district.
    b. “Density, Net.” This is the maximum density permitted on the buildable portion of the site. All tracts of land within a district may be developed to the same net density. Net density is calculated by dividing the total number of dwelling units by the net buildable site area. This density controls actual site capacity.
“District (zone, zoning district)” means a portion of the territory of the local jurisdiction established as a zoning district by this division, within which certain uniform regulations and requirements or various combinations thereof apply under the provisions of this division.
“Driveway” means a private roadway, the use of which is limited to persons residing, employed, or otherwise using or visiting the parcel on which the driveway is located.
“Dwelling” means any building or portion thereof designed or used as the principal residence or sleeping place of one (1) or more persons or families, but not including a tent, a recreational coach, hotel, motel, hospital, or nursing home.
“Dwelling, single-family” means a building containing only one (1) dwelling unit.
“Dwelling, two-family (duplex)” means a building containing only two (2) dwelling units.
“Dwelling, three-family (triplex)” means a building containing only three (3) dwelling units.
“Dwelling, four-family (four-plex)” means a building containing only four (4) dwelling units.
“Dwelling, multiple-family” means a building containing more than one (1) dwelling unit.
“Dwelling unit” means one (1) or more rooms in a dwelling, apartment complex, hotel, or motel, designed for and/or occupied by one (1) family for living or sleeping purposes and having one (1) but not more than one (1) kitchen or set of fixed cooking facilities, other than hot plates or other portable cooking units.
“Easement” means that portion of a lot or lots reserved for present or future use by a person or agency other than the legal owner(s) of such property(ies). The easement may be for use on, under, or above such lot or lots.
“Effective date of this division” means the date on which this division becomes legally binding.
“Environmental impact assessment” means a report which describes, by means of written narrative as well as maps, a geographical area in terms of existing: (l) slope, (2) soils, (3) water courses, (4) water table, (5) flood hazard areas, (6) geologic hazards, (7) vegetative types, (8) wildlife, (9) wildlife habitat, and (10) essential urban services presently available.
    a. The report includes a tabulation of proposed population density and the numbers and types of proposed dwellings and other buildings and spaces to be occupied at full development.
    b. The report further describes by means of written narrative as well as maps the impact to the proposed development on the following specific subject areas once the anticipated population density is achieved within the area to be developed: (l) water courses and flood hazards, (2) natural vegetation, (3) wildlife, (4) erosion, (5) topsoil loss, (6) sedimentation of water courses and reservoirs, (7) slope stability, (8) dust, (9) fire potential, (10) accumulation of solid and liquid wastes, and (11) the need and desire for urban services.
    c. The report also evaluates the potential area-wide economic impact of the development on both private and public economic sectors and the potential impact on school, public utility, and transportation systems.
    d. Finally, the report recommends measures which, if undertaken, will mitigate or obviate the adverse impacts resulting from construction of the proposed development, and discusses the benefits to be gained from such development, and what adverse impacts cannot be avoided and the extent of their detrimental influence.
“Essential facility” means electrical and natural gas utilities, radio stations (transmitting only), sanitary and public safety facilities provided by a public utility or governmental agency for overhead, surface or underground services, excluding any building, electrical substation, or transmission line of fifty (50) kv or greater capacity.
“Excavation” means any disruption of the soil mantle and/or manmade surfacing of the same. Excavations may be either in the nature of a process or a use. Excavations undertaken for the purpose of preparing a site for an ultimate land use or for repairing or constructing urban service facilities are processes; whereas excavations such as gravel pits, quarries or mines are uses which require specific use authorization in the zoning district where located, in addition to a conditional permit if such is required.
“Family” means one (1) individual, or two (2) or more persons related by blood, marriage, or adoption, living together in a single dwelling unit and maintaining a common household. A family may also include (4) four, but not more than four (4), non-related persons in a single dwelling unit. The term “family” shall not be construed to mean a fraternity, club or institutional group.
“Family Food Production.” See current city ordinances.
“Feed yard” means an agricultural industry in which animals or fowl are kept and intensively fed in relatively restricted area, as contrasted with open pasturage.
“Final plat” means a plat map prepared in accordance with the provisions of this division, which is designed to be placed on record in the office of the county recorder.
“Final inspection” means the final inspection of a building or facility made when all provisions and/ or conditions of this division have been met which will allow occupancy or use of said building or facility.
“Fire fighting facility” means such water supply, water lines, fire hydrants and other protective devices as may be required in accordance with the provisions of this division.
“First story” means the ground floor level and lowest story, not including basement, in a building provided the floor level is not more than twelve inches (12") below final grade for more than fifty percent (50%) of the perimeter.
“Flood hazard” means a hazard to land or improvements due to inundation or overflow water having sufficient velocity to transport or deposit debris, scour the surface soil, dislodge or damage buildings, or erode the banks of water courses.
“Flood plains” mean areas adjoining any streams, ponds, or lakes which are subject to one-hundred-year (100-year) recurrence-interval floods on maps prepared by the United States Army Corps of Engineers, or a study conducted by anyone else expert and experienced in the preparation of hydrological studies and the determination of flood lines.
“Flood plain soils” means areas subject to periodic flooding and listed in the soil survey prepared by the Soil Conservation Service which encompasses the local jurisdiction as being “on the flood plain” or subject to “flooding.”
“Floor area” means the sum of the areas of the several floors of the building or structure, including areas used for human occupancy or required for the conduct of the business or use, and basements, attics and penthouses, as measured from the exterior faces of the walls. It does not include cellars, unenclosed porches, attics not used for human occupancy, nor any floor space in an accessory building or in the main building intended or designed for the parking of motor vehicles in order to meet the parking requirements of this division, or any such floor space intended and designed for accessory heating and ventilating equipment.
“Floor area ratio” means the ratio of the floor area to the lot area, as determined by dividing the floor area by the lot area.
“Forest” means areas, groves, or stands of mature or largely mature (i.e., greater than six inches (6") caliper) trees covering an area greater than one-quarter (1/4) acre; or groves of mature trees (greater than twelve inches (12") caliper) consisting of more than ten (10) individual trees.
“Forest industry” means an industry which uses forest products, such as sawmill, pulp or paper plant, wood products, plant, and similar uses.
“Frontage” means all property fronting on one (1) side of the street between intersecting or intercepting streets, or between a street and a right-of-way, waterway, end of dead-end street, or political subdivision boundary, measured along the street line. An intercepting street shall determine only the boundary of the frontage on the side of the street which it intercepts, or that common line between a lot and a public street. Street lines across which access is denied or cannot be had because of topography or for other reasons shall not constitute frontage for purposes of this division.
“Frontage, lot” means the lineal measurement of the front lot line.
“Garage, private” means an accessory building designed and/or used for the storage of motor vehicles owned and used by the occupants of the building to which it is accessory, provided that a garage shall be considered part of the dwelling if the garage and dwelling have a roof or wall in common.
“Garage, public” means a building or portion thereof, other than a private garage, designed or used for servicing, repairing, equipping, hiring, selling, leasing, renting or storing motor vehicles.
“Geological hazard” means a hazard inherent in the crust of the earth, or artificially created, which is dangerous or potentially dangerous to life, property, or improvements, due to the movement, failure, or shifting of the earth. Geologic hazards include but are not limited to: rock fills, slide areas, flood plains, fault lines, high water table, and groundwater problems, such as liquefaction, etc.
“Grade (lot grade, finished grade)” shall be as follows:
    a. For buildings adjoining one (1) street only, the elevation of the sidewalk at the center of the wall adjoining the street.
    b. For buildings adjoining more than one (1) street, the average of the elevations of the sidewalk at the centers of all walls adjoining the streets.
    c. For buildings having no wall adjoining the street, the average level of the finished surface of the ground adjacent to the centers of all exterior walls of the building.
    d. Any wall parallel or nearly parallel to and not more than five (5) feet from a street line is to be considered as adjoining the street.
“Governing body” means the elected legislative body of the local jurisdiction.
“Ground floor” means the first story of a building other than the basement.
“Home occupation” means an occupation of a person where such person resides or an accessory building thereto and which occupation is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes and does not change the character of the dwelling or of the neighborhood. The home occupation shall not involve the use of any accessory building, either attached or detached, which substantially changes the character of the dwelling or of the neighborhood. It shall also not involve the use of yard space or of any part of a dwelling for which, by reason of any state, federal, or local law or ordinance, special or extra entrances or exits, or special rooms are required as a condition precedent to the operation of such use.
“Hospital” means an institution providing health services, primarily for in-patients, and medical or surgical care of the sick or injured, including as an integral part of the institution such related facilities as laboratories, out-patient departments, training facilities, central service facilities, and staff offices.
“Hotel” means a building designed for or occupied as the more or less temporary abiding place of sixteen (16) or more individuals who are lodged for compensation, with or without meals.
“Household pets” mean animals or fowl ordinarily permitted in the house and kept for company or pleasure, such as dogs, cats, and canaries, but not normally dangerous animals, such as lions and tigers. This definition shall not include a sufficient number of dogs as to constitute a kennel as defined in this division.
“Impervious surfaces” are those that do not absorb rain. All buildings, parking areas, driveways, roads, sidewalks, and any areas in concrete and asphalt shall be considered impervious surfaces within this definition. In addition, other areas determined by the local engineer to be impervious within the meaning of this definition will also be classed as impervious surfaces.
“Impervious Surface Ratio.” The impervious surface ratio is a measure of the intensity of land use. It is determined by dividing the total area of all impervious surfaces within the site by the base site area.
“Improvement” means work, objects, devices, facilities, or utilities required to be constructed or installed in a land development. Such improvements may include, but are not limited to, street construction to required standards, water facilities, sewer facilities, sidewalks, curbs and gutters, ditches and canals, drainage facilities, street trees, street signs, street lights, traffic control or safety devices, fire hydrants, and such other facilities or construction required by this division, subdivision regulations, or by the planning commission and/or governing body for the necessary proper development of the proposed land development.
“Improvements agreement” means an agreement between the local jurisdiction and a developer, wherein the developer agrees to install improvements required by this division, subdivision regulations, or by the planning commission and/ or governing body for the necessary proper development of the proposed land development.
“Junk” means old or scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper trash, rubber debris, or other waste or salvage materials, dismantled, junked, or wrecked automobiles or parts thereof; dismantled, junked, or inoperable appliances; and old scrap ferrous or nonferrous metal materials.
“Junkyard” means the use of any lot, portion of a lot, or tract of land for the storage, keeping or abandonment of junk, including scrap metals or other scrap material, or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles, or machinery or parts thereof, provided that this definition shall be deemed not to include such uses which are clearly accessory and incidental to any agricultural use permitted in the district.
“Kennel” means any premises where three (3) or more dogs older than four (4) months are kept, except that more than three (3) of such dogs may be kept in the rural residential, agricultural, and multiple-use districts as accessory uses to a use allowed in the district.
“Land, agricultural” means land used for bona fide agricultural purposes, or which is projected for agricultural use by the master plan or the zoning ordinance adopted by the local jurisdiction, but not including legally existing nonconforming uses located in areas so projected.
“Land, commercial” means land used for bona fide commercial purposes, or which is projected for commercial use by the master plan or the zoning ordinance adopted by the local jurisdiction, except legally existing nonconforming uses in areas designated commercial in such ordinance.
“Land development standards” mean construction standards, including but not limited to: drawings, tables, charts and references which have been adopted by the governing body and which set standards for the construction of improvements to land and which regulate such construction of improvements to land.
“Land, industrial” means land used for bona fide industrial purposes or which is projected for industrial use by the master plan or the zoning ordinance adopted by the local jurisdiction, except legally existing nonconforming uses in areas designated industrial in such ordinance.
“Land use intensity” means the degree to which land is used by man ranging from no use to unremitting, continual and concentrated use of the land. Land use intensity is normally measured by:
    a. Type of use, i.e., agricultural, residential, commercial or industrial;
    b. Period of use in average hours per day;
    c. Numbers of humans, associated animals, and machines which occupy the land during the average hours of use; and
    d. The percent of the land covered by manmade structures.
“Local attorney” means the attorney employed by or officially representing the local jurisdiction.
“Local building official” means the building official employed by or officially representing the local jurisdiction.
“Local engineer” means the engineer employed by or officially representing the local jurisdiction.
“Local Governing Body” (See “governing body.”)
“Local health officer” means the health officer or department employed by or officially representing the local jurisdiction.
“Local jurisdiction” means the county, city or town adopting this division.
“Local planner” means the planner employed by or officially representing the local jurisdiction.
“Local surveyor” means the surveyor employed by or officially representing the local jurisdiction.
“Lodging house” means a dwelling with not more than ten (10) guest rooms where, for compensation, lodging is provided for at least three (3) but not more than fifteen (15) persons, but not including motels or hotels.
“Lot” means a parcel or unit of land abutting a public street or approved private street, described by metes and bounds and held or intended to be held in separate lease or ownership, or a parcel or unit of land shown as a lot or parcel on a subdivision map, or condominium plot map.
“Lot area” means the area contained within the property lines of the individual parcels of land shown on a subdivision plat or required by this division, excluding any area within an existing street right-of-way, or any area required as open space under this division, and including the area of any easements.
“Lot, corner” means a lot abutting upon two (2) or more streets at their intersection or upon two (2) parts of the same street, such streets or parts of the same street forming an interior angle of less than one hundred thirty-five (135) degrees.
“Lot depth” means the horizontal distance between the front and the rear lot lines measured in the main direction of the side lot lines.
“Lot frontage” means the length, in feet, of the front lot line which is coterminous with the front street line.
“Lot frontage, required” means the length, in feet, of the front lot line which is coterminous with the front street line.
“Lot held in separate ownership” means all contiguous land held in one (1) ownership at the time of the passage of the ordinance codified in this division or at any time hereafter, whether or not such land has been or is described separately, has separate chains of title, is described on one (1) or more than one (1) property tax notice, or is otherwise divided on paper.
“Lot interior” means a lot other than a corner lot.
“Lot lines” means the property lines bounding the lot.
“Lot line, front” means, for an interior lot, the lot line adjoining the street; for a corner lot or through lot, each lot line adjoining a street.
“Lot line, rear ” means, ordinarily, that line of a lot which is opposite and most distant from the front line of the lot. In the case of a triangular or gore-shaped lot, a line ten (10) feet in length within the parcel parallel to and at a maximum distance from the front lot line. In cases where this definition is ambiguous, the zoning administrator shall designate the rear lot line.
“Lot line, side” means any lot boundary line not a front or rear lot line. (This does not apply to any yard fronting on a street, which is by definition a front yard line.)
“Lot, restricted” means a lot having an average slope of twenty-five percent (25%) or more; a lot which does not contain at least seventy five (75) feet by one hundred (100) feet, with an average slope of less than fifteen percent (15%); and/or a lot which has vehicular ingress to the main building or structure which, upon completion of construction on the side, has a slope of fifteen percent (15%) or greater; or a lot subject to geologic hazards.
“Lot right-of-way” means a strip of land not less than sixteen (16) feet in width connecting a lot to a street for use as private access to that lot.
“Lot width” means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines, measured at the required front yard setback line or rear yard setback line, whichever is shorter.
“Lot, unrestricted” means a lot having an average slope of less than twenty-five percent (25%) and containing a buildable area of at least seventy-five (75) feet by one hundred (100) feet, with an average slope of less than fifteen percent (15%), which buildable area is designated as such on the subdivision plat in which the lot is located, if the average slope of the lot is greater than fifteen percent (15%).
“Master plan (comprehensive plan, general plan)” means a coordinated plan which has been prepared and adopted for the purpose of guiding development, housing, and public facilities and parks and which is adopted by the local jurisdiction in accordance with Utah state law.
“Major street plan” means a map of the local jurisdiction which shows existing public streets and which has been officially adopted by the planning commission of the local jurisdiction as the major street plan.
“Market analysis” means an economic analysis of the feasibility of a project.
“Mobile home” means a detached single-family dwelling of not less than thirty (30) feet in length, designed for long-term occupancy, and to be transported on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers or detachable wheels; and which has not been demonstrated to conform to the building division for other residences adopted by the local jurisdiction. In determining if such a dwelling is designed for long-term occupancy, the following criteria shall be used: such a dwelling contains a flush toilet, sleeping accommodations, a tub or shower bath, kitchen facilities, and plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to appropriate external systems, and ready for occupancy except for connections to utilities and other minor work.
“Mobile home work” means a parcel of land that has been planned and improved for the placement of mobile homes for non-transient use and consisting of two (2) or more mobile home spaces where the entire project is to be under single ownership or management and meets all of the requirements of this division for mobile home parks.
“Mobile home space” means a space within a mobile home park designed and to be used for the accommodation of one mobile home.
“Mobile home subdivision” means a subdivision designed and intended for residential use where the lots are to be individually owned or leased, and occupied by mobile homes.
“Modular home” means a permanent dwelling structure built in prefabricated units which are assembled and erected on the site or at another location and brought as a unit to the site; said modular home is classed as a mobile home until it is placed on a permanent foundation and complies with all governing building codes.
“Motel” means a building or group of buildings for the accommodation of transient guests, comprising individual sleeping or living units, and designed and located to serve the motoring public.
“Natural retention area” means an area of poorly drained soils which lies along stream channels or swales or is adjacent to flood plain soil which are subject to periodic flooding.
“Nonconforming building or structure” means a building or structure or portion thereof, lawfully existing at the time this division became effective, which does not conform to all the height, area, and yard regulations herein prescribed in the zone in which it is located.
“Nonconforming use” means a use which lawfully occupied a building or land at the time this division (August 31, 1978) became effective and which does not conform with the use regulations of the zone in which it is located.
“Official map (also public facilities map)” means a map which has been officially adopted by the governing body according to state law and which includes the major street plan. If the local jurisdiction is a county, the official maps may also include parks, parkways, sites for public buildings or works, and subsurface facilities in which the county has been or may be called upon to assist financially, or by other means.
“Off-street parking space” means the space required to park one (1) passenger vehicle, which space shall meet the requirements of this division.
“Off-site facilities” means improvements not on individual lots but generally within the boundaries of the development which they serve, and as further outlined in this division.
“On-site facilities” means construction or placement of the dwelling and its appurtenant improvements on a lot.
“Open space” means land used for recreation, agriculture, resource protection, amenity, or buffers; is freely accessible to all residents of the development, except in the case of agricultural lands where access may be restricted; and is protected by the provisions of this division to ensure that it remains in such uses. Open space does not include land occupied by non-recreational buildings, roads, or road rights-of-way; nor does it include the yards or lots of single-family or multiple-family dwelling units or parking areas as required by the provisions of this division. Open space should be left in a natural state, except in the case of recreation uses which may contain impervious surfaces. Such impervious surfaces shall be included in the calculation of the impervious surface ratio.
“Open space ratio” means a measure of the intensity of land use. It is arrived at by dividing total amount of open space within the site by the base site area.
“Usable open space” means any portion of a lot or building which meets all of the following conditions:
    a. The open space shall be open to the sky or shall be open to view on at least two (2) sides.
    b. The space shall be readily accessible by foot traffic from the dwelling unit to which it is accessory.
    c. If the space is provided on a balcony, roof, or other facility above grade, it shall have such protective devices as are deemed necessary by the zoning administrator to assure reasonably safe usage by children and adults.
    d. The space shall not be provided from any required front or side yard, parking area, or driveway space.
“Package agency (also liquor store)” means any outlet authorized by the Utah Liquor Control Commission to sell original packaged liquor or wine for consumption off the premises.
“Parking facility (parking lots, parking structures)” means a building or open area, other than a street, used for the parking or more than four (4) automobiles and available for public use, whether free, for compensation, or accommodation for clients or customers.
“Pedestrian-way (walkway or crosswalk)” means a right-of-way designed for use by pedestrians and not intended for use by motor vehicles of any kind; a pedestrian-way may be located within or without a street right-of-way, at grade, or grade-separated from vehicular traffic.
“Permanent monument” means any structure of concrete, masonry and/or metal permanently placed on or in the ground, including those expressly placed for surveying reference, which meets the requirements of the local jurisdiction for permanent monuments.
“Permitted use” means a use of land which is allowed within a particular district without the necessity of obtaining a conditional use permit.
“Planning commission” means the planning commission of the local jurisdiction.
“Planned district” means a zoning district, the boundaries of which are to be shown on the zoning map, but the regulations for which shall be determined by a general development plan to be adopted by the governing body as part of the zoning ordinance, after public hearing, as required for other zoning districts.
“Prime agricultural soils” means areas of soils most suited for agriculture, those in capability units I, II, or III, as indicated in the soil survey prepared by the Soil Conservation Service which encompasses the local jurisdiction.
“Principal building or structure” means a building or structure which houses a principal use.
“Principal use” means any use which is named and listed in the use regulations provisions of this division, except those uses specifically designated as accessory uses; any use which is or may be conducted on a lot independently or any other use on the lot and not incidental or accessory to any other use on the lot; any use which establishes the primary activity on a lot.
“Private nonprofit recreational grounds facilities” means nonprofit recreational grounds and facilities operated by a nonprofit corporation, association, or group.
“Professional team, qualified” means an individual or group of individuals qualified by virtue of training, experience, state licensing where appropriate and membership in professional associations which pass upon qualifications prior to admittance to membership. A determination of whether or not a team is qualified, in the sense explained above, shall be made solely by the planning commission.
“Protection strip” means a strip of land between the boundary of a land development and a street within the land development, for the purpose of controlling the access to the street by property owners abutting the land development.
“Recreation dwelling (cabin, recreation cabin)” means a dwelling designed for limited rather than primary occupancy and generally located adjacent to or with easy access to recreational areas. The primary purpose for the construction of such a dwelling is to provide shelter during those limited periods of time when recreation is sought in the adjacent areas.
“Recreation vehicle” means a vehicle, with or without motive power, designed and constructed to travel on public streets, and designed for use as a human habitation of a temporary and recreational nature.
“Recreational vehicle park (travel trailer park)” means any area or tract of land or a separately designated section within a mobile home park where lots are rented or held out for rent to one or more owners or users of recreational vehicles for a temporary time not to exceed thirty (30) consecutive days.
“Recreational vehicle space” means a plot of ground within a recreational vehicle park designated and intended for the accommodation of one recreational vehicle.
“Right-of-way” means that portion of land dedicated to public use for street and/or utility purposes or maintained in private use for similar purposes.
“Roadway width” means the width of the actual surface.
“School, private” means a school which is operated by a quasi-public or private group, individual, or organization, and which has a curriculum similar to that provided in any public school in the State of Utah. Private schools may be nonprofit, or profit making establishments.
“School, public” means a school operated by a school district or other public agency in the State of Utah.
“Sign ordinance” means the sign ordinance of the local jurisdiction.
“Site” means a parcel or parcels of land intended to have one (1) or more buildings or intended to be subdivided into one (1) or more lots.
“Site area” means all land area within the site as defined in the deed. Area shall be from an actual survey rather than from a deed description.
“Site plan (plot plan)” means a scaled drawing of and information pertaining to a proposed development site.
“Stable, private” means a detached accessory building for the keeping of livestock owned by the occupants of the premises and not kept for hire, remuneration, or sale.
“Stable, public” means a detached accessory building where horses are boarded and/or kept for hire.
“Steep slopes” means areas where the average slope exceeds eight percent (8%) which, because of this slope, are subject to high rates of storm water runoff and therefore, erosion.
“Story” means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above.
“Story, half ” means a partial story under a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, the wall plates of which are on at least two (2) opposite exterior walls, do not extend more than four (4) feet above the floor of such story, and the ceiling area of which does not exceed two-thirds (2/3) of the floor area of the same half-story.
“Streets (also roads and highways)” means an open way, route or thoroughfare designed and constructed for vehicular traffic. Streets may be public or private. Public streets are those streets which have been dedicated or abandoned to the public and then accepted by proper public authority. All other streets are private streets. Streets may also be classified as to their ability to channel traffic. A minor (or local) street is thus a street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended to serve the local needs of a neighborhood and is of limited continuity. A collector street is a street, existing or proposed, which is a primary means of access to major streets. A major street, on the other hand, is a street, existing or proposed, which serves or is intended to serve as a primary traffic artery. Streets are generally identified as to their traffic-carrying role by so designating each street on the major street plan of the local jurisdiction.
“Street frontage” means a minor street, which is parallel to and adjacent to a limited access major street and which provides access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic.
“Street, half” means a street parallel and contiguous to a property line and of lesser right-of-way width than will eventually be required; the additional needed right-of-way width to be obtained in the future from the abutting property owner prior to development as a frontage.
“Street, stub” means a street extending from within a subdivision boundary and temporarily terminating there with no permanent vehicular turnaround. Stub streets are provided to permit adjacent undeveloped parcels of land to be developed later by continuing the stub street to the extended connecting street system.
“Structure” means anything constructed, the use of which requires fixed location on the ground, or attachment to something having a fixed location upon the ground, and includes “building.”
“Subdivider” means any person, firm, corporation, partnership or association who causes land to be divided into a subdivision for himself or others.
“Subdivision” means the division, whether or not concurrent or sequential in time, of tract or lot or parcel of land, into three (3) or more lots, plots, sites or other division of land for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale or of building development; provided, that this definition shall not include a bona fide division or partition of agricultural land for agricultural purposes of land developed for bona fide commercial, manufacturing, or industrial purposes, all as defined herein. The word “subdivision” and any derivative thereof shall have reference to the term “subdivision” as herein defined. For the purpose of this division, a subdivision of land shall also specifically include:
    a. The dedication of a street through or adjacent to a tract of land, regardless of area, which may create a division of lots or parcels constituting “subdivision”;
    b. Re-subdivision of land heretofore divided or platted into lots, sites, or parcels; or
    c. Condominium projects.
“Temporary use” means any use of land which, in the determination of the planning commission, shall not extend beyond two (2) years from inception of such land use. A determination as to whether or not a land use is temporary shall be based solely upon facts submitted to the planning commission at the time of application for a conditional use permit for temporary use. Unless found to be temporary, any use of land shall be presumed to be permanent.
“Urban services” means those services normally associated with urban living, including but not limited to the following: electricity, natural gas, streets, schools, culinary water, sewage collection and treatment facilities, and police and fire protection.
“Vicinity map (location map)” means a map or drawing not necessarily to scale, showing where a subdivision, or proposed subdivision, is located.
“Vicinity plan” means a map or drawing, to scale, of any area proposed for development, showing existing and proposed streets, buildings, public facilities and utilities within the general influence area of the proposed subdivision such as one mile radius; boundaries of zoning districts, taxing districts, and other special districts on and in the immediate vicinity of the land proposed for subdivision; water courses, impoundments, streams, springs, wells and areas subject to continuous or occasional flooding on and in the immediate vicinity of the land proposed for subdivision and significant vegetative patterns on and in the immediate vicinity of the land proposed for subdivision.
“Wetlands” means areas known as marshes, swamps, or wetlands, including all areas greater than one-quarter (1/4) acre where standing water is retained for a portion of the year and unique vegetation has adapted to the area.
“Yard” means a required open space on a lot, other than a court, unoccupied and unobstructed from the ground upward, except as permitted elsewhere in this division.
“Yard, front” means a space on the same lot with a building, between the front line of the building and the front lot line, and extending across the full width of the lot. The “depth” of the front yard is the minimum distance between the front lot line and the front line of the building. (Note: On a corner lot there are two (2) front yards.)
“Yard, rear” means a space on the same lot with a building, between the rear line of the building and the rear lot line, and extending the full width of the lot. The “depth” of the rear yard is the minimum distance between the rear lot line and rear line of the building.
“Yard, side” means a space on the same lot with a building, between the side line of the building and the side lot line and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. The “width” of the side yard is the minimum distance between the side lot line and the side line of the building. (Note: Corner lots do not have two (2) side yards.)
“Zoning administrator” means the person designated by the local governing body to enforce the regulations of this division.
“Zoning ordinance” means the ordinance of the local jurisdiction which provides for the division of the local jurisdiction into districts, specifies the land uses which may be conducted in each district, and provides regulations for the uses of the land in each district.
“Vault Security – Mini-Storage” means a storage facility that is characterized by individual separate spaces which are accessible by customers for the storing and retrieval of personal effects, household goods, and business inventory. In no case shall storage spaces be used for manufacturing, retail or wholesale selling, office or other business services, or human habitation. (Ord. 2019-1 §1, amended, 2019; Ord. 111, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-43; Ord. 2010-3, amended, 2010; Ord. 2001-1, amended, 2001; Ord. 2000-11, amended, 2000; Ord. 99-23, amended, 2000; Ord. 2000-5, amended, 2000; Ord. 99-18, amended, 2000; Ord. 2014-1, amended, 2014; Ord. 2018-2 § 1, amended, 2018)

Chapter 17.04 GENERAL AND SUPPLEMENTAL PROVISIONS

Sections:
17.04.010    Short title.
17.04.020    Purpose.
17.04.030    Applicability.
17.04.040    Interpretation.
17.04.050    Conflicts.
17.04.060    Effect on previous ordinances and maps.
17.04.070    Licensing authority.
17.04.080    Zoning administrator– Authorities and duties.
17.04.090    Amendment Procedures.
17.04.100    Building permit – Site plan required.
17.04.110    Building, use and occupancy permits – Required.
17.04.120    Building, use and occupancy permits – Compliance required.
17.04.130    Curb and gutter installation may condition permit approval.
17.04.140    Occupancy–Inspection and approval required.
17.04.150    Restricted lots - - Conditional use permit required.
17.04.160    Existing substandard lots.
17.04.170    Nonconforming lots prohibited.
17.04.180    Lot standards and street frontage.
17.04.190    Separate lot for each dwelling – Exceptions.
17.04.200    Lots and dwellings fronting on private streets.
17.04.210    Yard space for one building only.
17.04.220    Yards to be unobstructed – Exceptions.
17.04.230    Height limitations – Exceptions.
17.04.240    Additional height – Allowed when.
17.04.250    Minimum height of dwellings.
17.04.260    Accessory buildings – Maximum height and floor area.
17.04.270    Accessory buildings – Maximum rear yard area coverage.
17.04.280    Water and sewerage requirements.
17.04.290    Clear view of intersecting streets required.
17.04.300    Fences–When required.
17.04.310    Fences, walls, hedges and other vegetation – Location and maximum height.
17.04.320    Sale or lease of required space.
17.04.330    Construction subject to unusual potential or actual geologic or flood hazards.
17.04.340    Gasoline pump location.
17.04.350    Property divided by zoning district.
17.04.360    Utility extensions.
17.04.370    Excavations – Utility responsibility.
17.04.380    Front yard – Effect of map.
17.04.390    Pre-qualification of contractors.
17.04.400    Home occupation requirements.
17.04.410    Violation—Notice—Penalties.

17.04.010 Short title.
This division shall be known as the “uniform land development code,” or Chapter 17 of the Lindon City Code, and may be so cited and pleaded. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-1)

17.04.020 Purpose.
1. This division is designed and enacted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity, and welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the Lindon City; providing for, among other things, less congestion in the streets, better building and development practices, adequate light and air, a logical classification of land uses and distribution of land development and utilization, protection of the tax base, economy in governmental expenditures, encouragement of agricultural and industrial pursuits in appropriate locations, and the protection of existing urban development.
2. This division accomplishes these purposes by zoning the area lying within Lindon City and by regulating the location, height, bulk and size of buildings and other structures; the percentage of lot which may be occupied, the size of yards, courts and open spaces; the uses of buildings and structures for trade, industry, residence, recreation, public activities or other purposes; and the uses of land for trade, industry, residence, recreation or other purposes; and regulates the subdivision of land within the City. (Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-2)

17.04.030 Applicability.
The regulations set forth in Chapter 17 qualify or supplement, as the case may be, the district regulations and all other regulations appearing elsewhere in this division. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-3)

17.04.040 Interpretation.
In interpreting and applying the provisions of this division, the requirements contained herein are declared to be the minimum requirements for the purposes set forth. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-4)

17.04.050 Conflicts.
This division shall not nullify the more restrictive provisions of agreements, or other ordinances or laws, but shall prevail notwithstanding such provisions which are less restrictive. (Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-5)

17.04.060 Effect on previous ordinances and maps.
The existing ordinances covering zoning, in their entirety, and including the maps heretofore adopted and made a part of such ordinances, are superseded and amended to read as set forth herein; provided, however, that this division, including the attached map or maps shall be deemed a continuation of previous codes and not a new enactment, insofar as the substance of revisions or previous codes is included in this division, whether in the same or in different language; and this division shall be so interpreted upon all questions of construction relating to tenure of officers and boards established by previous codes, to questions of conforming or nonconforming uses and buildings and structures, and to questions as to the dates upon which such uses, buildings, or structures became conforming or nonconforming. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-6)

17.04.070 Licensing authority.
All departments, officials and public employees of Lindon City which are vested with duty or authority to issue permits or licenses shall conform to the provisions of this division and shall issue no permit or license for uses, buildings, or purposes where the same would be in conflict with the provisions of this division and any such permit or license, if issued in conflict with the provisions of this division, shall be null and void. (Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-7)

17.04.080 Zoning administrator– Authorities and duties.
The zoning administrator is authorized to enforce this division and all provisions thereof and shall do so by any legal means available to him, including but not limited to the following:
1. Advise the building official on the issuance of building permits. (If the zoning administrator gives written notification to the building official that an intended use, building or structure would be in violation of this division, such written notification shall be a presumption of illegality and the building official shall not issue a building permit for such use, building, or structure. If the offices of building official and zoning administrator are held concurrently by one person, this person shall detail the violation in writing on the permit refusal notification);
2. Inspect the uses of buildings, structures or land to determine compliance with the division. Such inspections shall be made at reasonable times;
3. Issue notices of violation wherever buildings or land are being used contrary to the provisions of this division. (This shall be done by serving notice in writing on any person engaged in said use and posting such notice on the premises.);
4. Inform the City Council of all division violations and recommend specific courses of action with regard to each violation;
5. Maintain a file of division violations and action to be taken by the City Council on such violations. (Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-10)

17.04.090 Amendment Procedures.
The local City Council may amend this division, including the map, but only in accordance with the following procedures:
1. The Planning Commission may initiate division amendment recommendations to the City Council. Any other person seeking to amend this division or map shall make application for such amendment by filing the following materials with the Planning Commission:
    a. A written petition designating the change desired and the reasons therefor;
    b. A nonreturnable amendment review fee in an amount determined by resolution of the City Council.
2. Lindon City formally initiates proceedings to amend this division when it gives notice, according to Lindon City Code Section 17.14.040, of the first public hearing in which the proposed amendment will be considered.
3. The Planning Commission shall review the amendment application and certify its recommendations concerning the proposed amendment to the City Council within forty-five days from receipt of the amendment application in a regularly scheduled meeting. The Planning Commission shall recommend adoption of a proposed amendment only where the following findings are made:
    a. The proposed amendment is in accord with the general plan of Lindon City;
    b. Changed or changing conditions make the proposed amendment reasonably necessary to carry out the purposes of the division.
4. After receipt of the certified favorable recommendations of the Planning Commission, the City Council shall give notice of a public hearing to consider such amendment as provided by law for zoning amendments.
5. After the required public hearing on the proposed amendment, the City Council may adopt or reject such amendment.
6. Concurrence by the City Council with an unfavorable recommendation of the Planning Commission shall constitute a denial of the application, and no public hearing shall be held. However, if the City Council determines that the proposed amendment may be desirable despite the Planning Commission's recommendation, a public hearing shall be held, with notice as required by law, prior to formal action on the application by the City Council.
7. If the City Council proposes to make any substantive change in the amendment as submitted to it by the Planning Commission, or as advertised, it shall refer such change back to the Planning Commission for its recommendation before adoption of such amendment.
8. Notification of Pending Land Use Ordinances
    a. When the City Council determines the need to adopt, amend, revise, or change any land-use, the City Council shall pass a resolution notifying the public that the City is considering the adoption, amendment, revision, or change of the current land use ordinances pursuant to Section 17.04.090, and shall identify the specific ordinance(s) and/or zone(s) to be affected.
    b. Applications for building or use permits filed after the passage of a Resolution pursuant to this section will be subject to any conditions or requirements established or amended as adopted in the pending ordinance.
    c. Upon receipt of an application for any building or use permit in an area or zone subject to a pending ordinance, the building official receiving the application shall notify the applicant of the pending ordinance(s).
9. Where an application for zoning amendment has been denied, the planning commission and the City Council shall not review the same zoning amendment application within six months of such denial, but may consider the proposal thereafter, but only if there is a substantial change of conditions since the earlier application. A resubmitted application shall be processed in accordance with the procedure outlined above. (Ord. 2015-03, amended, 2015; Ord. 2005-17, amended, 2005; Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-11)

17.04.100 Building permit – Site plan required.
An application for a building or use permit shall be made to the local building official and shall include a site plan and such other information as may be required by ordinance in Lindon City. (Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-12)

17.04.110 Building, use and occupancy permits – Required.
No building or structure shall be constructed, reconstructed, altered, or moved and no land shall be used except after the issuance of a permit for the same by the building official of Lindon City. (Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-13)

17.04.120 Building, use and occupancy permits – Compliance required.
An occupancy permit shall not be issued until the zoning administrator and building official shall have filed on record a report finding that the structures and intended uses are in compliance with the provisions of this division and specifically as to location and completion of both off-site (curb, gutter, sidewalk, paving, utilities, fences, ditches, etc.) and on-site (buildings, etc.) improvements. (Permanent power may not be granted until after the final inspection.) (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-14)

17.04.130 Curb and gutter installation may condition permit approval.
The installation of curb, gutter, sidewalk, drainage culverts, and covered or fenced irrigation ditches of a type approved by the City Council may be required on any existing or proposed street adjoining a lot on which a building is to be constructed or remodeled, or on which a new use is to be established. Such curbs, gutters, sidewalks, drainage culverts, and safety features for irrigation ditches and canals may be required as a condition of building permit approval. (Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-14)

17.04.140 Occupancy–Inspection and approval required.
Buildings and structures requiring a building permit pursuant to the provisions of this division shall not be occupied or put into use until the local building official has inspected such building or structure, finds compliance with this division and the building code of Lindon City, and gives a written certificate of occupancy and use to the owner or his agent and/or use the building or structure in the manner approved by the issuance of a valid building permit. (Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12- 101-16)

17.04.150 Restricted lots - - Conditional use permit required.
No building permits shall be issued for construction of any building or structure to be located on a restricted lot unless a valid conditional use permit for the same has previously been issued pursuant to this division. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-17)

17.04.160 Existing substandard lots.
1. Any lot legally held in separate ownership at the time of adoption of the ordinance codified in this chapter (August 31, 1978) which lot is below the requirements for lot area or lot width for the district in which it is located and on which lot a dwelling would be permitted if the lot met the area requirements of this division, may be used for a single family dwelling if such a lot is located in an R1 or an RM district.
2. The width of each of the side yards for such a dwelling may be reduced to a width which is not less than the same percentage of the lot width as the required side yard would be of the required lot width, provided that in no case shall the smaller of the two yards be less than five feet, nor shall the total width of the two yards be less than thirteen feet. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-18)

17.04.170 Nonconforming lots prohibited.
After adoption of the ordinance codified in this division (August 31, 1978), no lot having less than the minimum width and area required in the district in which it is located may be created nor shall building permits be issued for construction on such nonconforming lots created subsequent to adoption of the ordinance codified in this division. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-19)

17.04.180 Lot standards and street frontage.
Except for condominiums and as otherwise provided in this division, every lot presently existing or hereafter created shall have such area, width, and depth as required by this division for the district in which such lot is located and shall have frontage upon a public street or upon a private street or right-of-way approved by the planning commission, before a building permit may be issued, provided that no lot containing five (5) acres or less shall be created which is more than three (3) times as long as it is wide. (Ord. 2000-11, amended, 2000; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-20)

17.04.190 Separate lot for each dwelling – Exceptions.
Every dwelling structure shall be located and maintained on a separate lot having no less than the minimum area, width, depth, and frontage required by this division for the district in which the dwelling structure is located, except that farm or ranch properties of ten (10) acres or more in size, upon approval from the Planning Commission, shall be allowed one residential accessory building for farm and/or ranch employee housing. Such outbuilding shall not be located within fifty (50) feet of adjoining property lines and shall be held and owned by the farm or ranch owner. Residents of such dwelling shall be employed by the owner of the farm and/or ranch and work on site. In addition, the farm and/or ranch property on which the dwelling unit is to be constructed shall be assessed and considered green belt by the Utah County Assessor’s Office. (Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-21)

17.04.200 Lots and dwellings fronting on private streets.
Lots with frontage only on private streets shall be allowed by conditional use permit procedure only, and shall be subject to all applicable requirements of this division. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-22)

17.04.210 Yard space for one building only.
No required yard or other open space around an existing building or which is hereafter provided around any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this division shall be considered as providing a yard or open space for any other building; nor shall any yard or other required open space on an adjoining lot be considered as providing a yard or open space on a lot whereon a building is to be erected or established. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-23)

17.04.220 Yards to be unobstructed – Exceptions.
Every part of a required yard shall be open to the sky, unobstructed except for permitted accessory buildings in a rear yard, the ordinary architectural projections of skylights, sills, belt courses, cornices, chimneys, flues, and other ornamental features which project into a yard not more than two and one-half feet, and open or lattice-enclosed fire escapes, fireproof outside stairways and balconies opening upon fire towers projecting into a yard not more than five feet. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-24)

17.04.230 Height limitations – Exceptions.
Penthouse or roof structures for the housing of elevators, stairways, tanks, ventilating fans or similar equipment required to operate and maintain the building, and attached structures such as fire or parapet walls, skylights, towers, steeples, chimneys, wireless or television masts, theater lofts, or similar structures may be erected 10 (10) feet above the zone height limits, but no space above the height limit shall be allowed for purposes of providing additional floor space, nor shall such increased height be in violation of any other ordinance or regulation of Lindon City. A church may have architectural features, similar to those listed above, erected up to 50% of the building height or 20' above the zone height limit, whichever is greater. (Ord. 2010-4, amended, 2010; Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-25)

17.04.240 Additional height – Allowed when.
Public buildings and utility buildings, when authorized in a district, may be erected to a height greater than the district height limit by conditional use permit. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-26)

17.04.250 Minimum height of dwellings.
No dwelling shall be erected to a height less than one story above grade. Energy efficient or berm homes are approved only by conditional use permit. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-27; Ord. 2000-11, amended, 2000)

17.04.260 Accessory buildings – Maximum height and floor area.
See chapter 17.44 Single Family Residential.
(Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-29; Ord. 2015-22, amended, 2015)

17.04.270 Accessory buildings – Maximum rear yard area coverage.
See chapter 17.44 Single Family Residential.
(Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-29; Ord. 2015-22, amended, 2015)

17.04.280 Water and sewerage requirements.
In all cases where a proposed building or proposed use will involve the use of sewerage facilities, and a connection to a public sewer system as defined by the Utah State Division of Health is not available; and in all cases where a connection to a public water system approved by the Utah State Division of Health is not available; the sewage disposal system and the domestic water supply shall comply with state and local board of health requirements, and the application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a certificate of feasibility from such board or division and evidence of the physical presence, legal right to and availability of culinary water acceptable to Lindon City and showing the actual physical presence, legal right and availability of culinary water for the sole use of the proposed building or use. (Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-30)

17.04.290 Clear view of intersecting streets required.
In all districts, no obstruction to view in excess of three feet in height shall be placed on any corner lot within a triangular area formed creating a starting point at the intersection of two streets, then moving out from the starting point 40 feet in both directions along the right-of-way lines, then connecting the end points to form the triangular clear vision area. See Figure 17.04.310. Exceptions can be made for a reasonable number of trees and/or other vegetation pruned so as to permit unobstructed vision to automobile drivers as determined by City code enforcement staff. (Ord. 2009-2, amended, 2009; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-31)

17.04.300 Fences–When required.
The Planning Commission may require the erection of fences as a prerequisite to approval of any project or to the granting of any building permit where, in the opinion of said commission, this is necessary to protect life and property. Such fences may be of a type and size necessary, in the opinion of the Planning Commission, to accomplish the above-stated purpose, including sight-obscuring and security-type fences. (Ord. 2009-2, amended, 2009; Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-32)

17.04.310 Fences, walls, hedges and other vegetation – Location and maximum height.
The maximum height and location of fences, walls and hedges shall be as follows:
1. Fences, walls and hedges may be erected to the permitted building height in the district when located within the buildable area as established by building setbacks for a primary building footprint.
2. Fences, walls, and hedges may not exceed eight (8) feet in height within any required rear yard or interior side yard.
3. No fence, wall or hedge exceeding three (3) feet in height shall be erected or allowed closer to any street right-of-way line than the required building set back line, provided however that on street side yards (as typically found on corner lots), no view-obscuring fence, wall or hedge exceeding three (3) feet in height shall be erected or allowed closer than twenty (20) feet from the street right-of-way line. See Figure 17.04.310.
4. Where a fence, wall, or hedge is located along a property line separating two lots and there is a difference in the grade of the properties on the two sides of the property line, the fence, wall, or hedge may be erected or allowed to the maximum height permitted on either side of the property line.
5. The Planning Director and City Engineer can approve the following types of modifications and exceptions to the standards listed above upon review of a Fence Permit Application;
    a. Exemptions:
        i. Height modifications of fences, walls, and hedges that exceed eight (8) feet;
        ii. Setbacks and heights on odd or irregular shaped parcels or parcels with unusual development requirements due to easements, topography, etc;
        iii. Fences that encroach into the street side yard setback on corner lots;
        iv. Fences exceeding 3' in height within front setback areas.
    b. Criteria for evaluating exemptions;
        i. The Planning Director and City engineer, when modifying height and/or setback requirements as provided herein, shall use the following review standards;
        ii. The proposed height and/or setback modification is necessary to provide privacy and protection of private property interests;
        iii. The appearance of fence, wall, or hedge will not detract or cause aesthetic damage to neighboring property owners;
        iv. The proposed height and/or setback modification will not cause a public safety hazard.
        All appeals of decisions of the Planning Director and City Engineer will be made to the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2009-2, amended, 2009; Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 97-3, amended, 1997; Ord. 177 §5, amended, 1990)

17.04.320 Sale or lease of required space.
No space needed to meet the width, yard, area, coverage, parking or other requirements of this division for lot or building may be sold or leased away from such lot or building. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-34)

17.04.330 Construction subject to unusual potential or actual geologic or flood hazards.
1. Whenever development or construction is or may be subject to geologic or flood hazards, the planning commission may require the applicant to submit a geologic and soils survey report prepared by a qualified professional team. When such report indicates a lot to be subject to unusual potential or actual geologic or flood hazards, the applicant shall meet the special conditions required by the planning commission to reduce or eliminate such hazard, or if such conditions cannot be met or will not be met, the application for a building permit shall be denied. (Note: Even if a building permit for building in a geologic or flood hazard area is granted, final responsibility rests solely with the property owner, and not with the city.)
2. It shall be the responsibility of the individual property owner to retain and be responsible for any runoff water generated on his property. It must not be allowed to run into a city street (where gutters are installed) or sidewalk, or to cause any damage to another's property or that belonging to the city. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-35)

17.04.340 Gasoline pump location.
Gasoline pumps shall be set back no less than eighteen (18) feet from any street line to which the pump island is vertical, and twelve (12) feet from any street line to which the pump island is parallel, and not less than ten (10) feet from any residential or agricultural district boundary line. If the pump island is set at an angle on the property, it shall be so located that the automobiles stopped for service will not extend over the property line. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-36)

17.04.350 Property divided by zoning district.
Where a zoning district boundary cuts through a lot existing at the time of adoption of this division, the use regulations governing the portion of the lot located within the more restrictive zone shall govern the use and development of the entire lot, except for legally existing non-conforming uses and buildings on the lot. (Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-37)

17.04.360 Utility extensions.
No sewer service line, no water service line, no electrical or gas utility line shall be installed by a public or private company to the building, structure, or use the served which would be in violation of this division. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-38)

17.04.370 Excavations – Utility responsibility.
It is the intent of this division to hold franchised utilities responsible for all excavations, backfilling and paving. To this end all such work, whether done by a private or public entity, shall be commenced only pursuant to the issuance of an excavation permit (Chapter 17.30 of this division). Curbs and fills shall be constructed according to standards established by Lindon City, and approval of the same shall be evidenced by a release of responsibility signed by the City Engineer after approval by the City Council. (Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-39)

17.04.380 Front yard – Effect of map.
Whenever a front yard is required for a lot facing on a street for which an official map has been recorded, the depth of such front yard shall be measured from the mapped street line provided by the official map. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-40)

17.04.390 Pre-qualification of contractors.
Contractors are required to complete and submit to the city a pre-qualification application and permit bond prior to the commencement of any work in the city by that individual or business under a State of Utah contractor's license. Approved forms of the pre-qualification application and permit bond are available from the building inspector. The city building inspector and zoning administrator are directed to require completion of such pre-qualification application prior to allowing any individual or business to perform work in the city requiring a contractor's license. In the event the city council determines from the information contained on the pre-qualification application, that such person is not qualified to perform work in the city, the building inspector is directed to take appropriate steps to ensure that such work is immediately terminated. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-42)

17.04.400 Home occupation requirements.
1. The purpose and intent of this section of the Lindon City Code is to allow gainful occupations, professions, activities, or uses that are clearly customary, incidental, and secondary to the residential use of the property and which do not alter the exterior of the property or affect the residential character of the neighborhood.
2. No home occupation shall be conducted without first obtaining a home occupation permit pursuant to this chapter and a business license pursuant to this chapter and the Lindon City Code chapter regulating businesses.
3. The Planning Director may grant a home occupation permit in the residential zones, provided the use applied for meets all of the standards set forth in this section.
4. A home occupation permit shall be obtained from the planning director before such home occupation is established. The permit shall have a fee as established per the Lindon City Fee Schedule.
5. As a matter of public policy, the city believes that commercial and industrial activities should be conducted in zones where such activities are specifically permitted. However, limited business activities may be conducted within residences located in any zone in the city if the business activity strictly complies with all of the following requirements:
    a. Be clearly incidental to and secondary to the residential use of the dwelling unit and not occupy more than five hundred (500) square feet or twenty-five percent (25%) of the total floor space of such dwelling unit, whichever is less. This requirement does not apply to accessory buildings approved as part of a home occupation.
    b. Be carried on entirely within the dwelling unit or accessory structure solely by one (1) or more of the residents of the immediate family who reside in the dwelling unit or employees as permitted in Subsection (5)(c) of this section. For the purposes of this section, a carport, patio, or breezeway is not considered to be part of the dwelling unit. (This provision shall not prohibit the Utah State requirement for outside use by licensed day care/preschool facilities.)
    c. Home occupations may have up to one (1) employee or part-time equivalent to one (1) employee who does not live in the dwelling unit work at the home. Only one (1) nonresident employee shall work from the home at any given time. Such employee working at the home or coming to the home and moving to another job site associated with the home occupation shall be provided an off-street parking stall on the home occupation owner’s property. This employee shall be provided and required to use such parking on the business owner’s property and off of a public street.
    d. Not have any external evidence of the home occupation (except as may be required by state law or city ordinance) nor any exterior displays, displays of goods, nor advertising signs (except as allowed by this section) visible from outside of the dwelling unit. It shall not be permitted to conduct any activity outside the dwelling unit or to store materials or products outside the dwelling unit unless it is within an accessory structure approved as part of the home occupation.
    e. For any home occupation that is not summer physical education lessons as described in Subsection (6) of this section no more than six (6) motorized nonfarm vehicles shall be parked at the residence at any time, provided all of the vehicles can be parked legally, either in normal parking places on the lot occupied by the residence without parking in front of any other property. The six (6) vehicles specified above shall include the vehicles owned or operated by the residents, visitors or any other person using or visiting the home. Exceptions to this requirement may be granted by the planning director provided the applicant can clearly demonstrate that additional vehicles can be parked legally, either in normal parking places on the lot occupied by the residence containing the home occupation or by the curb directly in front of the residence without parking in front of any other property. In addition to the foregoing, the home occupation must not generate more than five (5) vehicles of traffic to the residence during any hour. The home occupation shall not generate any traffic before 7:30 a.m. or after 6:00 p.m. nor shall any vehicle weighing in excess of twenty-four thousand (24,000) pounds, gross weight, travel to the residence for the purpose of servicing the home occupation.
    f. Not emit noise, odor, dust, fumes, vibration, smoke, electrical interference or other interference with the residential use of adjacent properties.
    g. Comply with all city building and fire codes.
    h. Obtain a home occupation permit and a business license from the city.
    i. Shall have no more than one (1) sign, not larger than two and one-half (2.5) square feet, attached to the main dwelling unit. The sign shall be aesthetically pleasing and made of similar materials and colors as the building to which it is attached. The sign shall not be directly lit.
    j. Home occupation owners shall be good neighbors and mindful of possible impacts their activities have on the residential character of the neighborhood. All home occupation permits are reviewable upon written complaint to the planning commission. The planning commission, in reviewing such complaints, shall have the authority to attach conditions to a home occupation to make it compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. If the planning commission makes a finding that the home occupation is not compatible with the surrounding neighborhood they shall have the authority to revoke such permit.
6. Summer Physical Education Lessons. 
    a. Shall only operate on a seasonal basis between June 1st and August 30th; and
    b. May have up to fourteen (14) individuals on site for a lesson inclusive of staff and students (e.g., one (1) employee and thirteen (13) students); and
    c. Shall only conduct one (1) lesson per hour; and
    d. Shall not begin before 7:30 a.m. nor terminate after 6:00 p.m.; and
    e. May generate up to thirteen (13) vehicles of traffic to the residence per lesson (a vehicle dropping off at the beginning of a lesson and picking up at the end of a lesson counts as one (1) vehicle); and
    f. May have up to fourteen (14) motorized nonfarm vehicles parked at the residence; provided, that additional vehicles can be parked legally, either in normal parking places on the lot occupied by the residence containing the home occupation or directly adjacent to the property without parking in front of any other property. Any parking plan, along with traffic flow, must be approved by city staff.
    g. If lessons are conducted outside the seasonal dates outlined in Subsection (6)(a) of this section, the business must comply with Subsection (5)(e) of this section with regards to parking and vehicles of traffic per hour. (Ord. 2017-12 §1, amended, 2017; Ord. 2002-23, amended, 2002; Ord. 99-23, adopted, 2000)

17.04.410 Violation—Notice—Penalties.
1. Any person, firm, entity, or corporation, whether as principal, agent or employee, who violates or causes the violation of any of the provisions of this Title shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided by law. Each day a violation of this Title continues shall constitute a separate offense.
2. In addition, the following may institute injunction, mandamus, abatement, or any other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, or maintenance or use:
    a. Lindon City by action of the City Council;
    b. Any owner of real estate within the zoning district in which an alleged violation of this division has occurred.
3. Notice. 
    a. Upon inspection and discovery that any provision of this Title is being violated, the Zoning Administrator, or his agent, shall provide a written notice of violation and order to the property owner and to any other party who may be responsible for the violation.
    b. Each written notice and order shall: (1) indicate the nature of the violation; (2) order the action necessary to correct the violation; (3) give information regarding the established warning period for the violation; and (4) state the action the Zoning Administrator intends to take if the violation is not corrected within the warning period.
    c. The written notice shall be delivered personally or mailed to the property owner, as shown on the records of the county recorder, and to any other person who may be responsible for the violation. Receipt of notice shall be deemed to occur upon the earlier of the date written notice is delivered or three days after the notice is mailed as provided herein.
    d. The written notice shall serve to start any warning periods provided in this Section commencing upon receipt of notice. If the violation remains uncured within five days after the expiration of the warning period, a second notice shall serve to start the civil penalties after the expiration of the warning period established in this Section.
    e. In cases where the Zoning Administrator determines that a delay of enforcement would pose a danger to the public health, safety or welfare, or would otherwise compromise the effective enforcement of this Title, the Zoning Administrator may seek immediate enforcement without prior written notice by instituting any of the remedies, other than civil penalties, authorized by this Section.
4. Warning Period. There shall be a 28 day warning period for all violations of this Title, except as provided in Subsection 3(e) of this Section.
5. Civil Penalties. Violations of the provisions of this Title shall result in the following civil penalties, after expiration of the warning period established herein:
    a. For violations in residential zones, or residential use, a civil penalty of $200 per day.
    b. For violations in all non-residential zones, or non-residential use, a civil penalty of $400 per day.
    c. Each day a violation is continued or maintained after receipt of notice shall give rise to a separate civil penalty for each day of violation.
6. Violation Appeal Procedures. 
    a. An appeal of a violation determination and/or suggested action by the City shall follow the appeal procedures outlined in LCC 17.09, except that:
        i. the Appeal Authority for violation determinations shall be the City Council, and
        ii. the appeal period (time to appeal) shall be valid for no longer that 10 days after expiration of the warning period. No appeals will be accepted after expiration of the appeal period.
7. Collection of Civil Penalties. Collection of civil penalties imposed under this Section may be collected by Lindon City as provided for in Title 1, Chapter 18 of this Code. Forbearance by the Zoning Administrator to collect civil penalties shall not relieve the responsibility to pay any penalty, to cure the violation, nor shall it require the City to reissue any of the notices required by this Section.
8. Nonexclusive Remedies. Any one, all or any combination of the penalties and remedies set forth in this Section, or any other Sections of Title 15 or the code and regulations adopted thereby, may be used to enforce the provisions of this Title. (Ord. 2003-3, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-8; Ord. 2010-4, amended, 2010)

Chapter 17.06 RESTRICTIONS ON INOPERABLE MOTOR VEHICLE AND VEHICLE STORAGE

Sections:
17.06.010    Definition of Vehicle.
17.06.020    Definition of Inoperable vehicle.
17.06.030    Storage of Inoperable vehicles - Residential.
17.06.040    Storage of Inoperable vehicles - Nonresidential Zones.
17.06.050    Recreational Vehicle Storage.
17.06.060    Each day a separate violation.
17.06.070    Violation–Penalty.

17.06.010 Definition of Vehicle.
“Vehicle” shall mean every device capable of being moved upon a roadway and in, upon, or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a roadway, excepting devices moved by human or animal power or used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. (Ord. 2002-19, amended, 2002)

17.06.020 Definition of Inoperable vehicle.
An “inoperable vehicle” is defined as a motor vehicle which does not bear valid registration plates and is not registered as required by Utah State Code or which by any reason of dismantling, disrepair, or other cause is incapable of being propelled under its own power, or which is unsafe for operation on the streets and highways of the State due to inability to comply with the Utah State Vehicle Code. (Ord. 2002-19, amended, 2002)

17.06.030 Storage of Inoperable vehicles - Residential.
Restrictions upon storage of inoperable motor vehicles in residential zones shall be as follows:
1. No vehicles which are being stored on any parcel of real property within the residential zoning district within the city which are abandoned, inoperable, dismantled, “junk vehicles,” shall be kept upon such parcel of property.
2. This chapter is not intended to prohibit the repair or restoration of a private vehicle which is in open view from a public street, providing the owner makes reasonable progress, and provided not more than one vehicle is involved. Reasonable progress shall be defined as a vehicle being repaired and made operable, including valid vehicle registration, within 90 days from the date of notification by the City that such vehicle must be made operable.
3. It shall be legal to store more than one inoperable motor vehicle on private property in a residential zone if the vehicle is not visible from the street or from other public or private property. (A covering such as a tarp does not constitute a visual barrier.) (Ord. 2002-19, amended, 2002; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-41(B))

17.06.040 Storage of Inoperable vehicles - Nonresidential Zones.
Restrictions upon storage of motor vehicles in non-residential zones shall be as follows:
1. No more than ten vehicles; which are abandoned, inoperable, dismantled, or “junk vehicles,” or being parked for repairs for longer than seventy two hours, shall be kept upon such parcel of property. (This excludes such vehicles which are stored within any building.)
2. Such vehicles shall be stored in an orderly and neat fashion behind a view-obscuring fence obscuring the place of storage from any adjacent public street.
3. This chapter is not intended to prohibit the repair or restoration of a private vehicle which is in open view from a public street, providing the owner makes reasonable progress, and provided not more than one vehicle is involved. Reasonable progress shall be defined as a vehicle being repaired and made operable, including valid vehicle registration, within 90 days from the date of notification by the City that such vehicle must be made operable.
4. The Planning Commission may approve specific conditions allowing vehicle storage, of operable or inoperable vehicles beyond ten vehicles and for longer than seventy two hours when approved as part of a Conditional Use Permit. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-41(A); Ord. 2002-19, amended, 2002)

17.06.050 Recreational Vehicle Storage.
It shall be legal to store recreational vehicles for non-commercial purposes in open view from a public street in all zones provided that such vehicle is not stored within the required front yard setback and that such vehicle has valid vehicle registration. Recreational vehicles which registration has been expired for more than 24 months shall be considered inoperable and subject to section 17.06.030 and/or 17.06.040. A recreational vehicle is a motor home, boat, travel trailer, camper shell, off highway vehicle, snowmobiles, personal water craft, combination of personal recreational vehicles on a trailer, and any other vehicle which sole purpose is for amusement and recreation. (Ord. 2002-19, amended, 2002)

17.06.060 Each day a separate violation.
Every day that this chapter shall be violated shall constitute a separate violation and the owner or user of any property violating this chapter shall be subject to all penalties herein for each day this chapter is violated. All violations of this ordinance shall be considered a Class C misdemeanor. (Ord. 2002-19, amended, 2002; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-41(C))

17.06.070 Violation–Penalty.
In the event that any property owner or user shall violate this chapter, the city shall be entitled to exercise all remedies at law or in equity or pursuant to the terms of the ordinances of the city, including issuance of an injunction enjoining any use in violation hereof; the city is also entitled to revoke the business license of any individual violating the terms of this chapter. In addition, the city may, at its option, serve written notice upon the individual violating the terms of this chapter requiring compliance within ten days. Upon the failure of such person so notified to comply with the terms of this chapter within the ten-day time period, the city, at its option, may remove the vehicles constituting a violation and bill the violator the reasonable cost of the removal or may, at its option, add the expenses to the city utility bill levied with respect to the property affected. Violation hereof shall also constitute a misdemeanor and be punishable as provided in the city ordinances. (Ord. 2002-19, amended, 2002; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-101-41(D))

Chapter 17.08 PLANNING COMMISSION

Sections:
17.08.005    Purpose.
17.08.010    Membership–Appointment.
17.08.020    Term of office.
17.08.030    Compensation.
17.08.040    Vacancies and Removal.
17.08.050    Policies and Procedures.
17.08.055    Electronic Meeting Policy of the Planning Commission.
17.08.060    Employment of Experts and Staff.
17.08.070    Adoption of Rules and Regulations.
17.08.080    Powers and Duties of Planning Commission.
17.08.090    City Council Review.

17.08.005 Purpose.
The Planning Commission is established as the land use authority for specifically identified items and shall also make land use and development recommendations to the Mayor and the City Council as set forth in this Code. This does not include policy making powers of the City that remain under the control of elected officials. The Planning Commission shall see that proposed developments conform to the codes and provision required within the City. The Lindon City Planning Commission is formed pursuant to the Utah State Code. (Ord. 2008-11, amended, 2008)

17.08.010 Membership–Appointment.
1. The planning commission shall consist of seven (7) members, each to be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council. Members of the Planning Commission shall be residents and owners of real property within the jurisdiction. No member of the City Council, Board of Adjustment, and no City employee shall be a member of the Planning Commission.
2. Appointment of an Alternate. When deemed necessary, the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, may appoint one alternate Planning Commission member to sit on the Planning Commission as a voting member. The Alternate Planning Commission member may participate in all regularly scheduled meetings and activities, however, may only participate as a voting member in the absence of one of the seven regularly appointed members. (Ord. 2008-11, amended, 2008; Ord. 2008-11, amended, 2008; Ord. 2002-24, adopted, 2002)

17.08.020 Term of office.
1. The terms of the appointed members of the planning commission shall be three (3) years, or until their respective successors shall have been appointed, except that the terms of appointment shall be such that the terms of two (2) or three (3) members shall expire each year. Planning Commission members may serve multiple terms as appointed by the Mayor and City Council. Any member or alternate member of the Planning Commission relocating their primary residence outside the limits of the City shall resign their appointment within 30 days prior to their relocation, if possible.
2. The planning commission existing at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall continue to serve, and the terms of its members shall be fixed by the governing body in such a manner as to comply with the above provisions for staggering terms of service. (Ord. 2008-11, amended, 2008; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-102-l(B); Ord. 2000-6, amended, 2000)

17.08.030 Compensation.
The members of the Planning Commission may receive a stipend as established by the Lindon City Council. In addition, the City Council shall provide for the reimbursement of the members of the Planning Commission for actual expenses incurred, upon presentation of proper receipts and vouchers. (Ord. 2008-11, amended, 2008; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-102-1(C); Ord. 2000-6, amended, 2000)

17.08.040 Vacancies and Removal.
Vacancies of appointed members occurring otherwise than through the expiration of terms shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term by appointment of the governing body. The governing body shall have the right to remove any member of the Planning Commission for misconduct and may remove any member for nonperformance of duty. Un-excused absences from two (2) consecutive regular meetings of the Planning Commission may be considered by the governing body as nonperformance of duty. Un-excused would consist of no prior notice to planning staff or other commissioner(s) of the absence. (Ord. 2008-11, amended, 2008; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-102-l(D); Ord. 2000-6, amended, 2000)

17.08.050 Policies and Procedures.
The Planning Commission shall adhere to the following policies and procedures in administration of the commission duties and governance of their meetings.
1. Organization. 
    a. Quorum – A quorum of at least four Planning Commission members must be present to hold a meeting and conduct business according to a legally prepared and posted agenda.
    b. Chairman and Vice Chairman – The annual election of the Chairman and Vice Chairman shall take place once each year. Nominations for each office shall be received from the voting Commission members. The Chairman and Vice Chairman shall serve for a term of one year. In the event of absence or disability of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman shall preside. In the absence of both, the members shall appoint a Chairman for the meeting. The Vice Chairman shall succeed the Chairman for the period of the unexpired term if he or she vacates office before the term is completed. A new Vice Chairman shall be elected at the next regular meeting.
2. Agenda Preparation. The Planning Director or appointed designee shall prepare the Planning Commission agenda and deliver the agenda and other reports, materials and communications pertaining to the agenda to all necessary parties prior to the meeting. The Planning Commission may not act on or make any final decision regarding an item that is not on the agenda. The Director or appointed designee shall also provide all required noticing and prepare all reports and gather such information as may be necessary for the Planning Commission to conduct its business.
3. Meetings. The Planning Commission shall give notice at least once each year of its meeting schedule for all regular meetings. Public notice of all meetings shall be provided in accordance with Utah Code and all applicable Lindon City codes.
    a. Meeting Procedures. All Planning Commission meetings shall be conducted in accordance with the required procedures contained in the Utah Code.
    b. Public Comment. There shall be on every agenda of the Planning Commission an item entitled “public comment”. The public comment portion of the meeting shall be limited to the public speaking to the commission on any item not on the agenda. Members of the public shall be free to express any idea, question, or view point without limitation except for time and the manner of the presentation
        i. Individual Members of the Public. Shall be limited to the time allowed by the Chairman. The Chairman shall ensure that the public comment is civil and orderly. The Chairman shall use his/her best efforts to allow the free expression of the public and keep the meeting in order. Planning Commissioners and staff should not interrupt, argue with, or otherwise interfere with any comment by a member of the public. The Planning Commissioners and staff may ask clarifying questions of the member of the public making a presentation, and other members of the public may comment at the discretion and recognition by the Chairman.
        ii. Public Participation in the Meeting. Other than at a required public hearing and the public comment portion of the meeting, members of the public shall not be allowed to participate in the meeting unless they are on the agenda or requested to present to the Planning Commission by the Chairman or a member of the commission. At the discretion of the Chairman, the public may participate when recognized by the Chairman.
        iii. Planning Commissioner Participation. At regular meetings of the Planning Commission, members shall speak in vigorous debate and discussion without interrupting others who are speaking. Any meeting designated as a work meeting shall be more informal and Planning Commissioners may freely participate as long as proper decorum is maintained. Planning Commissioners shall conduct themselves at all times with decorum and respect and shall refrain from making any disparaging remarks concerning any other member of the governing body or the public.
        iv. Chairing the Meeting. The Chairman shall preside over all meetings and hearings of the Commission and shall execute all official documents and letters on behalf of the Commission. The Chairman shall pace the meeting so that all items on the agenda can be addressed and either concluded or continued. The Chairman shall use his/her best efforts to preserve order and see that members of the commission and the public are treated at all times with respect.
        v. Meeting Adjournment. Meetings of the Planning Commission, as a goal, shall be scheduled to end at a reasonable hour and the Chairman and commissioners shall use their best efforts to conclude the meeting in a timely manner. The meetings of the Planning Commission shall not be adjourned until either all items listed on the agenda have been acted upon or a motion to adjourn is made and approved by a majority of the Planning Commission.
4. Voting and Conflicts of Interest. A quorum of Commission members must be present and vote in a public meeting for the Commission to make a decision. Any agenda item must receive four affirmative votes for approval or recommendation to the City Council for approval. Failure to vote by a member shall be counted as an abstention. All votes will be cast verbally. All official Commission members will vote except those who have abstained. A Commission member shall abstain only if he or she has possible conflict of interest. If the Commissioner(s) suspects that they may have a conflict of interest which would affect their employment or financial interests concerning any matter to be reviewed by the Planning Commission, they shall consult with the City Attorney prior to the scheduled review for advice regarding the appropriate action to be taken or shall declare the conflict on the record and should recuse themselves from the meeting and not participate in the discussion or voting on the matter. If the Commissioner(s) first suspects such a conflict of interest during the meeting in which the matter is being reviewed, they shall declare the conflict on the record and should recuse themselves from the meeting and not participate in the discussion or voting on the matter.

17.08.055 Electronic Meeting Policy of the Planning Commission.
1. The Lindon City Planning Commission may conduct electronic meetings where one or more of its members participates by means of a telephonic or telecommunications conference pursuant to Section 52-4-207 of the Utah Code Annotated as may be amended. The following procedures shall be followed for an electronic meeting of the Planning Commission:
    a. Members Considered Present. Planning Commission members participating electronically shall be considered present at the meeting for all purposes, shall be afforded every opportunity to participate in the discussion of the agenda items, and shall be allowed to cast their vote on issues coming to the Planning Commission for a vote.
    b. Anchor Location. The main anchor location as described in State Law is 100 North State Street, Lindon, Utah, 84042. Any additional anchor location (i) shall be identified by the Planning Commission by its proper address; or (ii) shall be the location of the Chairperson or Acting Chairperson of the Planning Commission with the proper declaration and shall be identified by its proper address or other identification as defined in the notification requirements of the State Law.
    c. Public Notice. Public notice of an electronic meeting of the Planning Commission shall be given pursuant to Section 52-4-202 of the Utah Code Annotated by:
        i. posting written notice at all anchor locations;
        ii. posting written notice on the Utah Public Notice Website created under Section 63F-1-701; and
        iii. providing written or electronic notice to (a) at least one newspaper of general circulation within the County, or (b) a local media correspondent.
    d. Notice to Planning Commission Members. City staff shall provide notice of an electronic Planning Commission meeting to all Commission members at least 24 hours before the meeting so that they may participate in the meeting and be counted as present for all purposes including the determination of whether a quorum is present. This notice shall include a statement that one or more members of the Planning Commission will be participating electronically, a description of how each member participating electronically will be connected to the meeting, and the regularly published agenda for that meeting.
    e. Chairperson Participation. Unless specified otherwise, no Planning Commission meeting may be held electronically unless the Chairperson or Acting Chairperson of the Planning Commission is present at an anchor location and conducts the meeting.
    f. Electronic Communications Line. Immediately prior to opening an electronic Planning Commission meeting, the Chairperson or Acting Chairperson of the Commission shall communicate with each Commission member who is participating electronically and ensure that he or she is prepared to move forward. From that time forward until the adjournment of the meeting, the electronic communications line shall be kept open unless a Commission member participating electronically wishes to withdraw from the meeting.
    g. Continuing the Meeting. If a Planning Commission member who participates electronically withdraws early from a meeting, any remaining meeting agenda items may be completed if (i) there is still a quorum of the Commission present at the main anchor location, or (ii) there are sufficient other members who are participating electronically to comprise a quorum with those at the main anchor location.
    h. Public Attendance and Participation. The public may attend the open portions of an electronic Planning Commission meeting at the main anchor location. The public may participate to the same extent as with a non-electronic Planning Commission meetings.
    i. Electronic Participation. Prior to taking a vote on any issue, the Chairperson or Acting Chairperson of the Planning Commission (i) shall inquire of each Commission member participating electronically if he or she has been able to adequately monitor the discussion, including comments from the public, and (ii) shall allow each Commission member the opportunity to make any comments that he or she desires.
    j. Electronic Meeting Minutes. The minutes of an electronic meeting of the Planning Commission shall include the name of each Commission member who participated electronically, the nature of the electronic communication, and the duration of the Council member’s participation. (Ord. 2014-5, amended, 2014)

17.08.060 Employment of Experts and Staff.
The Planning Director and/or staff are assigned to provide staff support to the Commission, the level of which shall be determined by the Director, in consultation with the Commission. The Planning Commission shall have power and authority to employ experts, and to pay such expenses as may be reasonable and necessary for carrying out the powers hereinafter set forth, but not in excess of such sum as may be appropriated by the governing body and/or which may be placed at the disposal of the Planning Commission by gift or otherwise. (Ord. 2008-11, amended, 2008; Ord. 2000-6, amended, 2000)

17.08.070 Adoption of Rules and Regulations.
Pursuant to the authority and requirements of state law, the Planning Commission shall adopt such rules and regulations governing its procedures as it may consider necessary or advisable, and shall keep a record of its proceedings, which record shall be open to inspection by the public at all reasonable times. (Ord. 2008-11, amended, 2008; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-102-1(G); Ord. 2000-6, amended, 2000)

17.08.080 Powers and Duties of Planning Commission.
1. Recommendations to the City Council. The Planning Commission shall prepare and make recommendations to the City Council for;
    a. A general plan and amendments to the general plan;
    b. Land use ordinances, zoning maps, official maps and amendments;
    c. Annexation and zoning of property into City;
    d. Other matters as established by the City Council and this code.
2. Review and Decision. 
    a. Unless an item is required to receive final review by the City Council (See 17.08.090), the Planning Commission shall review and decide land use applications and matters as established by this code or the City Council and shall act as the land use authority for items as listed in LCC 17.09, Table #1;
    b. The Planning Commission shall conduct meetings as outlined in LCC 17.08.050.
    c. When acting as a Land Use Authority, the effective date of a final decision of the Planning Commission is the date of the meeting in which a written decision is issued for the subject item. When acting as an Appeal Authority, the effective date of a final decision is the date when the decision is made (not when written decision is approved).
3. Entrance upon Land. The municipality (staff, administrative and legislative body, etc.) may enter upon any land at reasonable times to make examinations and surveys pertinent to the:
    a. preparation of its general plan; or
    b. preparation or enforcement of its land use ordinance; or
    c. preparation for a land use decision for which a land use application, business license, or other application has been received.
4. Other Powers. The Planning may exercise any other powers necessary to enable it to perform the functions delegated to it in this Code, or other matters as established by the City Council. (Ord. 2008-11, amended, 2008; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-102-1(H); Ord. 2000-6, amended, 2000)

17.08.090 City Council Review.
The Lindon City Council, in giving authority to the Planning Commission to review and approve all types of land use applications, reserves the right to review such application in a regularly scheduled City Council meeting when found to be in the public interest. The Council shall designate an item for Council review before a development application is advertised on an agenda for a Planning Commission meeting. At such time as the City Council names an item for review, the Planning Commission shall make a recommendation to approve or deny an application to the City Council. The City Council shall then become the final land use authority for the development application. (Ord. 2014-5, amended, 2014; Ord. 2009-7, amended, 2009; Ord. 2008-11, amended, 2008; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-102-1(I); Ord. 2000-6, amended, 2000)

Chapter 17.09 LAND USE AUTHORITY AND APPEAL AUTHORITY

Sections:
17.09.010    Definitions.
17.09.015    Land Use Authority.
17.09.020    Appeal Authority.
17.09.030    Appeals.
17.09.040    Time to Appeal.
17.09.050    Burden of Proof.
17.09.060    Review on Record.
17.09.070    De Novo Hearing.
17.09.080    Procedures.
17.09.090    Final Decision of Land Use Authority.
17.09.100    Final Decision of Appeal Authority.
            Table #1.

17.09.010 Definitions.
“Appeal Authority” means the person, board, commission, agency, or other body designated by ordinance to decide an appeal of a decision of a land use authority.
“De Novo” means anew; afresh; generally a new hearing or a hearing for a section time, contemplating a review in same manner in which matter was originally heard and a review of previous hearing.
“Land Use Application” means an application required by a municipality’s land use ordinance in order to reach a final land use action or land use decision.
“Land Use Authority” means a person, board, commission, agency, or other body designated by the local legislative body to act upon a land use application as the final decision maker.
“Land Use Code” means legislatively adopted land use ordinances, often referred to as the Development Code, City Code, or Code.
“Land Use Decision” means any final decision of the Planning Director or other official, board, commission, agency, or other body designated by the local legislative body who is responsible for the enforcement and/or approved of land use code regulation.

17.09.015 Land Use Authority.
Land use applications shall be reviewed and acted upon to reach a final decision by the appropriate land use authority as listed in LCC 17.09, Table # 1.

17.09.020 Appeal Authority.
Appeals regarding a decision made by a land use authority shall be acted upon to read a final decision by the appropriate appeal authority as listed in LCC 17.09, Table #1.
*See Table #1 at end of section

17.09.030 Appeals.
An applicant, a board or officer of Lindon City, or any person adversely affected by the land use authority’s decision administering or interpreting a land use ordinance may, within the time period provided by ordinance, appeal that decision to the appeal authority by alleging that there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the land use authority in the interpretation and/or application of the land use ordinance.

17.09.040 Time to Appeal.
1. Appeals shall only be taken within ten (10) days of the effective date of a final decision of a land use authority by submitting an Appeal Application to the City. IN the event that the final day for the filing of an appeal falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, the period for the filing of an appeal shall be extended through the next working day.
2. Such appeal application shall specify the grounds of appeal and circumstances related thereto. An appeal application shall specify the grounds of appeal and circumstances related thereto. An appeal shall be accompanied by a written statement of the grounds of appeal and any required filing fees. An application failing to specify grounds of appeal or meet requirements of this chapter may be summarily dismissed by the appeal authority.
3. The land use authority shall forthwith transmit to the appeal authority all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. An appeal hearing shall be held within forty-five (45) calendar days of the appeal application submittal.

17.09.050 Burden of Proof.
The applicant has the burden of proving that the land use authority erred.

17.09.060 Review on Record.
The appeal authority’s review of the decision of the land use authority shall be confined to the record of the proceeding, which shall include;
1. All materials, pleading, memoranda, stipulations, and motions submitted by any party to the proceeding and received or considered as evidence;
2. All materials submitted by the City or other agencies with respect to the application;
3. The minutes or recording of the hearing of the land use authority;
4. The findings and action of the land use authority; and
5. Argument confined to the record by the parties or their legal representatives at the time of the review before the land use authority.

17.09.070 De Novo Hearing.
1. The appeal authority may, at its opinion, by motion of the appeal authority, hold a de novo hearing or admit additional testimony and other evidence, if it is satisfied that the testimony or other evidence could not have been presented upon initial hearing and action. IN deciding this admission, the appeal authority shall consider;
    a. Prejudice to parties;
    b. Convenience of locating the evidence at the time initial hearing;
    c. Surprise to opposing parties;
    d. When notice was given to other parties as to the attempt to admit;
    e. The competency and relevancy of the proposed testimony and other evidence.
Upon a decision to admit additional testimony or evidence or to hear the entire matter de novo, the presentation of such testimony and evidence shall be processed in the same manner as a new application.

17.09.080 Procedures.
1. An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the land use authority certifies to the appeal authority, after the Appeal Application shall have been filed with the land use authority, that by reason of facts stated in the application, a stay would, in the land use authority’s opinion, cause imminent peril to life or property.
2. An appeal authority;
    a. Shall;
        i. Act in a quasi-judicial manner; and
        ii. Serve as the final arbiter of issues involving the interpretation or application of land use ordinances; and
    b. May not entertain an appeal of a matter in which the appeal authority, or any participating member, had first acted as the land use authority.
3. The appeal authority shall determine the correctness of a decision of the land use authority in its interpretation and application of a land use ordinance. IN exercising its powers, if the appeal authority finds that the land use authority erred in its interpretation and application of a land use ordinance, the appeal authority may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision of determination and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as acceptable to the appeal authority.
4. The concurring vote of the majority of the appeal authority shall be necessary to reverse any order, requirement, decision or determination of the land use authority, or to decide in favor of the appellant on any matter. Failure of an appeal authority to arrive at a majority vote on an appeal shall constitute a denial of the appeal application.

17.09.090 Final Decision of Land Use Authority.
The effective date of a decision of City staff is the date of a letter, permit, or other document notifying the applicant of the staff action. When acting as the Land Use Authority, the effective date of a decision of the Planning Commission, Board of Adjustment, City Council, or any other elected or appointed body is the date in which the written decision issued by the Land Use Authority is approved.

17.09.100 Final Decision of Appeal Authority.
The effective date of an Appeal Authority decision is the date the final decision is made (not when written decision is approved). (Ord. 2008-11, adopted, 2008)

Table #1.
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
|        Land Use Application         |     Land Use Authority      |    Appeal Authority    |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| General Plan Amendment              | City Council                | None                   |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| Zone Change and Zoning Ordinance    | City Council                | None                   |
| Amendments                          |                             |                        |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| Major Subdivisions                  | City Council                | Board of Adjustment    |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| Minor Subdivisions*                 | Planning Commission         | City Council           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| Plat Amendment*                     | Planning Commission         | City Council           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| Alteration of Nonconforming Use     | City Council                | Board of Adjustment    |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| Reimbursement Agreement             | City Council                | Board of Adjustment    |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| Property Line Adjustment*           | City Staff                  | Planning Commission    |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| Building Permit*                    | City Staff                  | Planning Commission    |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| Temporary Site Plan*                | City Staff                  | Planning Commission    |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| 1. Site Plan*                       | 1. Planning Commission      | 1. City Council        |
| 2. Site Plan in CF Zone             | 2. Planning Commission –    | 2. Board of Adjustment |
|                                     | Preliminary; City Council – |                        |
|                                     | Final                       |                        |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| 1. Conditional Use Permit*          | 1. Planning Commission      | 1. City Council        |
| 2. Conditional Use Permit in CF     | 2. Planning Commission –    | 2. Board of Adjustment |
| Zone                                | Preliminary; City Council – |                        |
|                                     | Final                       |                        |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| Temporary Conditional Use Permit*   | Planning Commission         | City Council           |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| Variances                           | Board of Adjustment         | None                   |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| Other Administrative Actions as     | City Staff, Planning        | Board of Adjustment    |
| Listed in Code or Performed through | Commission, City Council    |                        |
| Department Policy*                  |                             |                        |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
| Other Legislative Actions           | City Council                | None                   |
+-------------------------------------+-----------------------------+------------------------+
*In cases where the city council implements Section 17.08.090 and becomes the land use authority, the appeal authority becomes the board of adjustment.
(Ord. 2017-15 §1, amended, 2017; Ord. 2013-14, amended, 2013; Ord. 2008-11, amended, 2008)

Chapter 17.10 BOARD OF ADJUSTMENT

Sections:
17.10.010    Purpose.
17.10.020    Appointment–Membership.
17.10.030    Procedures.
17.10.040    Powers and Duties.
17.10.050    Variance.

17.10.010 Purpose.
In order to provide for fair treatment in the administration of local land use ordinances, hear specific appeals, evaluate variance requests, and to ensure that substantial justice is done, A Board of Adjustment has been created to exercise the powers and duties proved hereafter. (Ord. 2008-11, amended, 2008)

17.10.020 Appointment–Membership.
The board of adjustment shall consist of five(5) members, each to be appointed by the Mayor, with the advice and consent of the City Council, for a term of five (5) years. Members of the Board of Adjustment shall be residents and owners of real property within the jurisdiction. Board members may serve multiple terms as appointed by the Mayor and City Council. Any member may be removed for cause at any time by the Mayor and City Council. Vacancies shall be filled for the unexpired term of any member whose term becomes vacant. No member of the City Council, employees of the City, or Planning Commission shall be a member of the Board of Adjustment (Ord. 2008-11, amended, 2008; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-102-2(A))

17.10.030 Procedures.
The Board of Adjustment is authorized to:
1. Organize and elect a chairman and vice chairman;
2. Adopt rules that comply with all applicable State statutes and City ordinances;
3. Meet at the call of the chair and at any other times that the Board of Adjustment determines;
4. Conduct its meetings in compliance with requirements of State Statutes and City ordinances concerning the keeping of minutes, and recording of votes and absences;
5. Make decision on scheduled agenda items;
    a. Three members constitute a quorum of the Board of Adjustment and a concurring vote of at least three members is necessary to grant a variance or to overturn a decision on an appeal.
    b. When acting as a Land Use Authority, the effective date of a final decision of the Board of Adjustment is the date of the meeting in which a written decision is issued for the subject item. When acting as an Appeal Authority, the effective date of a final decision is the date when the decision is made (not when written decision approved.) (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Ord. 2008-11 §1, amended, 2008; Prior code §12-102-2(C))

17.10.040 Powers and Duties.
1. The Board of Adjustment shall hear and decide;
    a. requests for any variance from the terms of the land use ordinance;
    b. appeals for those items in which the Board acts as the appeal authority as listed LCC 17.09, Table #1;
    c. other matters as established by the City Council. (Ord. 2008-11, amended, 2008; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-102-2(D))

17.10.050 Variance.
1. Any person or entity desiring a waiver or modification of the requirements of the land use ordinance as applied to a parcel of property that he owns, leases, or in which he holds some other beneficial interest may apply to the applicable appeal authority for a variance from the terms of the land use ordinance.
2. 
    (a). The Board of Adjustment may grant a variance only if:
        i. Literal enforcement of the land use ordinance would cause an unreasonable hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general purpose of the land use ordinances;
        ii. There are special circumstances attached to the property that do not generally apply to other properties in the same zone;
        iii. Granting the variance is essential to the enjoyment of a substantial property right possessed by other property in the same zone;
        iv. The variance will not substantially affect the General Plan and will not be contrary to the public interest, and;
        v. The spirit of the land use ordinance is observed and substantial justice done.
    b. 
        i. In determining whether or not enforcement of the land use ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship under Section (2)(a), the Board of Adjustment may not find an unreasonable hardship unless the alleged hardship:
            A. Is located on or associated with the property for which the variance is sought, and;
            B. Comes from circumstances peculiar to the property, not from conditions that are general to the neighborhood.
        ii. In determining whether or not enforcement of land use ordinance would cause unreasonable hardship under Subsection (2)(a), the Board of Adjustment may not find an unreasonable hardship if the hardship is self-imposed or economic.
    c. In determining whether or not there are special circumstances attached to the property under Subsection (2)(a), the Board of Adjustment may find that special circumstances exist only if the special circumstances;
        i. Relate to hardship complained of, and;
        ii. Deprive the property of privileges granted to other properties in the same district.
3. The applicant shall bear the burden of proving that all of the conditions justifying a variance have been met.
4. Variances run with the land.
5. The Board of Adjustment and any other body may not grant use variances.
6. In granting a variance, the Board of Adjustment may impose additional requirements on the applicant that will:
    a. mitigate any harmful affects of the variance, or;
    b. serve the purpose of the standard or requirement that is waived or modified. (Ord. 2008-11, amended, 2008; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-102-2(E))

Chapter 17.12 DOCUMENT SUBMISSION AND REVIEW

Sections:
17.12.010    Application Submittal and Schedule for Review.
17.12.020    Time periods for planning commission and city council action.
17.12.030    Fees.
17.12.050    Approval, denial, continuing.
17.12.070    Formal action.
17.12.080    Public hearing.
17.12.110    Plan retention.
17.12.115    Land Use Application Submittal Requirements.
17.12.190    Review – Preliminary and Final approval.
17.12.210    Land Use Approval Expiration.

17.12.010 Application Submittal and Schedule for Review.
Any Applications or submittal required by this chapter and title shall be submitted to the Planning Department for a review of completeness of the submittal requirements. Once the application or submitted material is determined to be complete, the Planning Director or appointed designee will schedule the item for review by the appropriate Land Use Authority. (Ord. 2010-1, amended, 2010; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-103-1(A); Ord. 98-3, amended, 2000)

17.12.020 Time periods for planning commission and city council action.
Time periods for planning commission and city council action shall not begin to run until after complete applications are officially received by the Planning Department. (Ord. 2010-1, amended, 2010; Ord. 111 §, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-103-l(B); Ord. 98-3, amended, 2000)

17.12.030 Fees.
Fees may be charged to applicants for any services and/or applications that are required by this division to be performed by public officers or agencies. At the time of application submittal, the Planning Department shall charge and collect development fees at rates adopted in the Lindon City Fee Schedule. (Ord. 2010-1, amended, 2010; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-103-1(D); Ord. 98-3, amended, 2000)

17.12.050 Approval, denial, continuing.
At each step of the review procedure, the Land Use Authority shall approve, continue, or deny the materials submitted to it, and where applicable shall approve, continue, or deny the entire application or any portion thereof. Any approval or disapproval made by the Land Use Authority shall be in the form of findings of fact and conclusions (or minutes of the proceedings), which findings and conclusions shall be made available to the public by the planning commission within forty-five (45) calendar days of the meeting at which the application was reviewed. (Ord. 2010-1, amended, 2010; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-103-1(F); Ord. 98-3, amended, 2000)

17.12.070 Formal action.
Formal action on any application, i.e., action approving or denying an application, shall be taken only at regularly scheduled or officially called meetings of the Land Use Authority. (Ord. 2010-1, amended, 2010; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-103-1(H); Ord. 98-3, amended, 2000)

17.12.080 Public hearing.
Unless specifically required by this division, or other applicable law, no public hearing need be held unless the Planning Director or Planning Commission deems such a hearing to be necessary due to the application having more than routine significance and for which the surrounding property owners should be notified in order to protect the public interest. (Ord. 2008-1, amended, 2008; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-103-1(I; Ord. 98-3, amended, 2000)

17.12.110 Plan retention.
Plans, specifications and reports for all applications submitted to the local jurisdiction shall become the property of the public and shall be retained by the local jurisdiction for a minimum period of two (2) years. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-103-1(L); Ord. 98-3, amended, 2000)

17.12.115 Land Use Application Submittal Requirements.
Land use application submittal requirements shall be followed as listed in the Land development Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings manual (Development Manual). (Ord. 2010-1, amended, 2010)

17.12.190 Review – Preliminary and Final approval.
For subdivision plats, and plat amendments, the Land Use Authority’s “Land Use Decision” constitutes the ‘preliminary plan.’ The Development Review Committee or their appointed designee shall be the final authority to assure full compliance, completion and finalization of all site plans, improvement plans, subdivision plats, property line adjustments, and plat amendments. This final approval does not constitute a “Land Use Decision” as defined and referenced in LCC 17.09. (Ord. 2010-1, amended, 2010; Ord. 98-3, amended, 2000)

17.12.210 Land Use Approval Expiration.
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
|           Land Use Approval           |    Expiration / time period approval is    |
|                                       |                   valid                    |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| • Subdivision (See 17.32 for phased development exceptions).                       |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| • Preliminary Plan                    | 18 months                                  |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| (Timeline begins day of Land Use Authority’s approval)                             |
| *Milestone for completion: Engineered improvement plans approved by City.          |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| • Final Plat and Plans                | 12 months                                  |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| (Timeline begins day the City Engineer stamps plat/mylar)                          |
| *Milestone: City approved plat is recorded at the County Recorder’s Office.        |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| • Plat Amendment (Preliminary and Final - same as subdivision expirations and      |
| milestones above)                                                                  |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| • Conditional Use Permit              | Once conditions of approval are completed, |
|                                       | valid for life of the property. CUP        |
|                                       | reviewable upon complaint with revocation  |
|                                       | possible for failure to comply with        |
|                                       | CUP conditions.                            |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Milestone: Conditions of approval completed within 12 months.                     |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| • Site Plan (See 17.17.125 for phased development exceptions).                     |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| Land Use Authority Approval           | 12 months                                  |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| (Timeline begins day of Land Use Authority’s approval)                             |
| *Milestone: Engineered improvement plans / site plan approved by City.             |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| • Site Plan Approval                  | 24 months                                  |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| (Timeline begins day the City Engineer stamps finalized plans)                     |
| *Milestone: Building permit is issued for construction.                            |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| • Alteration of Non Conforming Use - (same as Site Plan expirations and milestones |
| above)                                                                             |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| • Property Line Adjustment            | Once approved and recorded, valid for      |
|                                       | life of the property.                      |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Milestone: City approved documents and/or surveys recorded at County Recorder’s   |
| Office within 12 months                                                            |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| • Variance                            | No expiration. Valid for life of the       |
|                                       | property.                                  |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| • Temporary Site Plan                 | See LCC 17.17.140 for expiration and       |
|                                       | extension limits.                          |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
| *Unless otherwise stated within Lindon City Code, any required milestones shall    |
| be completed within these time limits. After expiration of these time periods,     |
| such approvals shall expire unless an extension of approval is granted by the      |
| Land Use Authority.                                                                |
+---------------------------------------+--------------------------------------------+
An application for an extension must be received no later than 30 days after the expiration. In no event shall the combined total of all preliminary, final, or combination of approvals be extended for a total period greater than 12 months (i.e., An applicant may request a 6 month extension for a preliminary approval and then a 6 month extension on a final approval – as long as the combination of the extensions does not exceed 12 months). If no extension is granted, and a land use approval has expired, the application becomes null and void. A new application will then be required which must meet all current ordinances and procedures established by code. (Ord. 2010-1, amended, 2010; Ord. 98-3, amended, 2000)

Chapter 17.14 NOTICING

Sections:
17.14.010    Notice of public meeting.
17.14.015    Applicant notice – Waiver of requirements.
17.14.020    Notice of intent to prepare a general plan or comprehensive plan amendment.
17.14.030    Notice of public hearing and public meetings to consider general plan or modifications.
17.14.040    Notice of public hearing and public meetings on adoption or modification of land use ordinance.
17.14.050    Third party notice.
17.14.060    Notice for an amendment to a subdivision.
17.14.070    Hearing and notice for proposal to vacate a public street, right-of-way, or easement.
17.14.080    Notice challenge.
17.14.090    Special notice requirements.

17.14.010 Notice of public meeting.
1. Notice of meetings for a public body shall be in conformance with the “Open and Public Meetings Act” as found in Utah Code 52-4. For use in this chapter of the Lindon City Code, definitions as found in Utah Code 10-9-103 and 52-4-103 are adopted by reference.
2. Unless otherwise specified in this chapter, for all meetings of a public body, an agenda of the meeting shall be posted not less than twenty-four (24) hours before the meeting.
3. The agenda shall be posted at the Lindon City Center and, beginning April 1, 2008, shall be posted on the Utah Public Notice Website. Said notice shall also be provided to at least one (1) newspaper of general circulation within Lindon City.
4. The city may establish additional means of informing the public about city activities and events through citizen enrolled electronic communication or other methods of information distribution. (Ord. 2018-3 § 1, amended, 2018)

17.14.015 Applicant notice – Waiver of requirements.
1. For each land use application, Lindon City shall:
    a. Notify the applicant of the date, time, and place of each public hearing and public meeting to consider an application;
    b. Provide to each applicant a copy of each staff report regarding the applicant or the pending application at least three (3) business days before the public hearing or public meeting; and
    c. Notify the applicant of any final action on a pending application.
2. If Lindon City fails to comply with the requirements of subsection (1)(a) or (1)(b) of this section or both, an applicant can waive the failure so that the application may stay on the public hearing or public meeting agenda and be considered as if the requirements had been met. (Ord. 2018-3 § 1, amended, 2018)

17.14.020 Notice of intent to prepare a general plan or comprehensive plan amendment.
1. Before preparing a proposed general plan or comprehensive general plan amendment, the city shall provide ten (10) calendar days’ notice of its intent to prepare a proposed general plan or a comprehensive general plan amendment to: each affected entity within the city, Mountainland Association of Governments, the Utah State Automated Geographic Reference Center, and the State Planning Coordinator.
2. Each notice shall:
    a. Indicate that the city intends to prepare a general plan or a comprehensive plan amendment, as the case may be;
    b. Describe or provide a map of the geographic area that will be affected by the general plan or amendment;
    c. Be sent by mail or e-mail;
    d. Invite the affected entities to provide information for the municipality to consider in the process of preparing, adopting, and implementing a general plan or amendment concerning:
        i. Impacts that the use of land proposed in the proposed general plan or amendment may have; and
        ii. Uses of the land within the city that the affected entity is considering that may conflict with the proposed general plan or amendment; and
    e. Include the city website address and a name and telephone number of a person where more information can be obtained concerning the city’s proposed general plan or amendment. (Ord. 2018-3 § 1, amended, 2018)

17.14.030 Notice of public hearing and public meetings to consider general plan or modifications.
1. The city shall provide:
    a. Notice of the date, time, and place of the first public hearing to consider the original adoption or any modification of all or any portion of general plan; and
    b. Notice of each public meeting on the subject.
2. Each notice of public hearing under subsection (1)(a) of this section shall be at least ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing and shall be:
    a. Published in a newspaper of general circulation within Lindon City;
    b. Mailed to each affected entity;
    c. Posted in at least three (3) public locations with the city or on the city website.
3. Each notice of a public meeting under subsection (1)(b) of this section shall be at least twenty-four (24) hours before the meeting and shall be:
    a. Posted in at least three (3) public locations within the city or on the city website; and
    b. Submitted to a newspaper of general circulation within Lindon City. (Ord. 2018-3 § 1, amended, 2018)

17.14.040 Notice of public hearing and public meetings on adoption or modification of land use ordinance.
1. The city shall give:
    a. Notice of the date, time, and place of the first public hearing to consider the adoption or any modification of a land use ordinance; and
    b. Notice of each public meeting on the subject.
2. Each notice of a public hearing under subsection (1)(a) of this section shall be:
    a. Mailed to each affected entity at least ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing;
    b. Posted in at least three (3) public locations within the city or on the city website;
    c. Published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city at least ten (10) calendar days before the public hearing; or
        i. Mailed at least three (3) calendar days before the public hearing to:
            A. Each property owner whose land is directly affected by the land use ordinance change; and
            B. Each adjacent property owner within five hundred feet (500') if the impacted property is residential and eight hundred feet (800') if the impacted property is nonresidential.
3. Each notice of public meeting under subsection (1)(b) of this section shall be at least twenty-four (24) hours before the meeting and shall be posted in at least three (3) public locations within the city.
4. Courtesy notices for proposed zoning map enactments or amendments shall be sent to each owner of private real property whose property is located entirely or partially within said proposal at least ten (10) days before the scheduled day of the public hearing.
The notice shall:
    a. Identify with specificity each owner of record of real property that will be affected by the proposed zoning map or map amendments;
    b. State the current zone in which the real property is located;
    c. State the proposed new zone for the real property;
    d. Provide information regarding or a reference to the proposed regulations, prohibitions, and permitted uses that the property will be subject to if the zoning map or map amendment is adopted;
    e. State that the owner of real property may no later than ten (10) days after the day of the first public hearing file a written objection to the inclusion of the owner’s property in the proposed zoning map or map amendment;
    f. State the address where the property owner should file the protest;
    g. Notify the property owner that each written objection filed with the municipality will be provided to the municipal legislative body; and
    h. State the location, date, and time of the public hearing. (Ord. 2018-3 § 1, amended, 2018)

17.14.050 Third party notice.
1. Third party notice shall be required by the city for all new site plan, conditional uses, subdivisions, variances, alteration of nonconforming uses, zone map and general plan map changes, appeals heard by the board of adjustments, and for other land use applications that the planning director determines to have more than routine significance and for which the surrounding property owners should be notified in order to protect the public interest.
2. Not less than ten (10) calendar days before the first public meeting or public hearing required for land use applications listed in subsection (1) of this section, each notice shall:
    a. Be mailed and addressed to the record owner of each parcel within five hundred feet (500') of the subject property if said property is residential or eight hundred feet (800') if said property is nonresidential; or
    b. Be posted on the subject property with a sign of sufficient size, durability, print quality, and location that it is reasonably calculated to give notice to passers-by.
3. If the city mails notice to third party property owners within subsection (2)(a) of this section, it shall mail equivalent notice to property owners within an adjacent jurisdiction. (Ord. 2018-3 § 1, amended, 2018; Ord. 2009-8, amended, 2009)

17.14.060 Notice for an amendment to a subdivision.
1. For an amendment to a subdivision, the city shall provide notice of the date, time, and place of at least one (1) public meeting that is:
    a. Mailed not less than ten (10) calendar days before the public meeting and addressed to the record owner of each parcel within five hundred feet (500') of that property if said property is residential or eight hundred feet (800') if said property is nonresidential; or
    b. Posted not less than ten (10) calendar days before the public meeting on the property proposed for subdivision, in a visible location, with a sign of sufficient size, durability, and print quality that it is reasonably calculated to give notice to passers-by.
2. The city shall provide notice as required by Section 17.14.070 for a subdivision that involves a vacation of a street, right-of-way or easement. (Ord. 2018-3 § 1, amended, 2018; Ord. 2009-8, amended, 2009)

17.14.070 Hearing and notice for proposal to vacate a public street, right-of-way, or easement.
For any proposal to vacate, alter, or amend a public street, right-of-way or easement, the city council shall hold a public hearing and shall give at least ten (10) days’ notice of the date, place, and time of the hearing by:
1. Mailing notice to the record owner of each parcel that is accessed by the public street, right-of-way or easement;
2. Mailing notice to each affected entity;
3. Publishing notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the City; and
4. Posting notice on or near the street, right-of-way or easement in a manner that is calculated to alert the public. (Ord. 2018-3 § 1, amended, 2018; Ord. 2009-8, amended, 2009)

17.14.080 Notice challenge.
If notice given under authority of this chapter is not challenged under Utah Code 10-9a-801 within thirty (30) days after the meeting or action for which notice is given, the notice is considered adequate and proper. (Ord. 2018-3 § 1, amended, 2018)

17.14.090 Special notice requirements.
Group homes and care facilities have special notice requirements found in Chapters 17.70 and 17.72. Reimbursement agreements have special notice requirements found in Sections 17.68.050 and 17.68.070. (Ord. 2018-3 § 1, amended, 2018; Ord. 2008-1, amended, 2008)

Chapter 17.16 NONCONFORMING BUILDINGS AND USES

Sections:
17.16.010    Purpose and Intent.
17.16.020    Definitions.
17.16.030    Amendments, additions, enlargements and moving of nonconforming parcels or uses.
17.16.040    Alteration where parking is insufficient.
17.16.050    Restoration of damaged buildings.
17.16.060    Loss of Legal.
17.16.070    Determination of Nonconforming Status.
17.16.080    Listed Historic Structures.
17.16.090    Provisions not Applicable to Public Nuisances.
17.16.110    Alterations to comply with code.
17.16.120    School District Property.
17.16.130    Amortization.

17.16.010 Purpose and Intent.
In the zones established by this title or amendments that may later be adopted, there exist lots, buildings and structures, and uses of lots, buildings and structures, which were lawful before this title was passed or amended but which would be prohibited, regulated or restricted under the terms of this title or future amendment. The City Council declares that nonconforming buildings, structures and uses are generally incompatible with permitted uses, conditional uses and conforming buildings and structures in the zones involved. Being such, nonconforming buildings, structures and uses shall not be enlarged, modified, moved or otherwise changed, except as provided herein. (Ord. 2005-5, amended, 2005; Ord. 2004-3, amended, 2004; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-105-1)

17.16.020 Definitions.
In addition to the definitions set forth in chapter 17.02 of this title, the following definitions shall apply for purposes of this chapter:
“Change of Use” means a change from one land use to another land use on a different line in the land use charts or as per the comparability standard as found in Appendix A of the Standard Land Use Table of the Lindon City Code. “Nonconforming building or structure” means a building or structure which does not comply with height, setback, coverage or other requirements established by Lindon City Code, but which complied with the requirements and/or regulations in existence at the time of the construction of the building or structure.
“Nonconforming lot” means a lot which does not comply with lot area, lot dimension, lot coverage, lot improvement and maintenance requirements for parking, storage and display areas, and other requirements established by the zoning ordinance or any amendments thereto, but which complied with the requirements and/or regulations in existence at the time of the creation of the lot. “Nonconforming use” means any use, whether of a building, structure, lot, or tract of land, which does not conform to the land use regulations of this title and Lindon City Code for the zone in which such use is located, but which complied with the requirements and/or regulations in existence at the time the use was created. (Ord. 2005-5, amended, 2005; Ord. 2004-3, amended, 2004; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-105-2)

17.16.030 Amendments, additions, enlargements and moving of nonconforming parcels or uses.
1. All nonconforming parcels, lots, buildings, structures, or uses shall not be added to, enlarged in any manner, moved to another location on the lot, or have parcel lines moved, changed, or adjusted, except as provided by subsection 2 of this section.
2. The Planning Commission may authorize the expansion, alteration, or enlargement of a nonconforming use, structure, building, parcel, or lot, or movement of parcel lines, only after holding a public hearing and finding that:
    a. the expansion, alteration or enlargement of the nonconforming building. structure, parcel, lot, or use will to reasonable extent bring the property, building, structure, parcel, lot or use as close as reasonably possible to conformance with requirements and regulations of the zone in which the nonconformity is located; and
    b. the proposed change does not impose any unreasonable burden upon the lands located in the vicinity of the nonconforming use or structure or violate the development policies adopted in the Lindon City Master Plan; and
    c. the use, building, or structure, existing or proposed, will be brought into compliance, where possible, with design and architectural standards of the zone where proposed.
3. Additions, enlargements, alterations, or expansions of nonconforming uses, upon compliance with 17.16.030, shall be permitted on neighboring properties of the existing nonconforming use. Such parcels or lots shall be adjoining and share a common parcel boundary line and shall not be divided by a city street. (Ord. 2005-5, amended, 2005; Ord. 2004-3, amended, 2004; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-105-3)

17.16.040 Alteration where parking is insufficient.
A use, building or structure lacking sufficient automobile parking space in connection therewith as required by this title may be altered or enlarged, provided additional automobile parking space is supplied to meet the requirements of this title for such alteration or enlargement. (Ord. 2005-5, amended, 2005; Ord. 2004-3, amended, 2004; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-105-4)

17.16.050 Restoration of damaged buildings.
A nonconforming building or structure occupied by a nonconforming use which is damaged or is destroyed by casualty, act of God, or vandalism, may be restored pursuant to this section. The occupancy or use of such building, structure, or part thereof, which existed at the time of such damage or destruction may be continued or resumed; provided, that such restoration is started within a period of one year from the damage or destruction and is diligently prosecuted to completion withing two years of the damage or destruction. Any reconstruction or restoration must comply with Lindon City Code to the maximum extent possible. (Ord. 2005-5, amended, 2005; Ord. 2004-3, amended, 2004; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-105-5)

17.16.060 Loss of Legal.
Nonconforming Status. If a nonconforming uses ceases for any reason for a period of more than one hundred eighty (180) days, or for a period of six (6) months from the expiration of a Lindon City business license, the use shall be considered abandoned. Once abandoned, the legal nonconforming status shall be lost, and re-establishment of the use shall be prohibited. Any subsequent use of the property shall comply with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. This provision ( 17.16.060) shall not apply to established residential land uses in zones where housing construction is not permitted. (Ord. 2004-3, amended, 2004; Ord. 2005-5, amended, 2005; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-105-6)

17.16.070 Determination of Nonconforming Status.
The burden of establishing that any nonconformity is a legal nonconformity shall, in all cases, be solely upon the owner of such nonconformity. (Ord. 2004-3, amended, 2004; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-105-7)

17.16.080 Listed Historic Structures.
1. The Planning Commission shall be authorized to approve an addition, enlargement, and relocation of a nonconforming listed historic structure that does not comply with all the non-use regulations of the zone in which is it locate; and to authorize the use of a listed historic structure for a nonconforming use. Authorization requires the Planning Commission make the following findings:
    a. The proposed building, structure or use provides a demonstrable benefit toward the preservation of the listed historic structure; and
    b. The public benefits of the preservation of the listed historic structure as derived from the proposed nonconforming building, structure, or use will outweigh the public benefits that would result from the action(s) that would be required for the building, structure, or use to be brought into, or remain in, conformance. (Ord. 2005-5, amended, 2005; Ord. 2004-3, amended, 2004; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-105-8)

17.16.090 Provisions not Applicable to Public Nuisances.
Nonconforming status shall not be granted to public nuisances as enumerated in the Lindon City Code. Parcels, lots, or structures not in compliance with the Lindon City Code either presently or in the past shall not be granted nonconforming status. (Ord. 2005-5, amended, 2005; Ord. 2004-3, amended, 2004; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-105-9)

17.16.110 Alterations to comply with code.
A nonconforming use or structure may be altered or modified for the purpose of coming into compliance with any state or local law. (Ord. 2004-3, amended, 2004; Ord. 2005-5, amended, 2005; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-105-11)

17.16.120 School District Property.
Lindon City may terminate the nonconforming status of school district property when the property ceases to be used for school district purposes. (Ord. 2005-5, amended, 2005)

17.16.130 Amortization.
The Lindon City Council may provide for the termination of all nonconforming uses, except billboards, by providing a formula establishing a reasonable time period during which the owner can recover or amortize the amount of his investment in the nonconforming use, if any. (Ord. 2005-5, amended, 2005)

Chapter 17.17 SITE PLAN DEVELOPMENT

Sections:
17.17.100    Purpose.
17.17.110    Site Plan when required.
17.17.115    Land Use Application Submittal Requirements.
17.17.118    Site Plan – Approval Criteria.
17.17.120    Completion and Maintenance of a Site.
17.17.125    Site Plan-Phased development.
17.17.130    Amended site plans.
17.17.140    Temporary site plans.

17.17.100 Purpose.
The purpose of the Site Plan Development section is to:
1. Provide proper administrative review procedures to ensure that site development is accomplished through adherence to the Lindon City Land Development Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings manual (Development Manual) and the Lindon City Code.
2. Ensure that site plan developments are compatible with the surrounding land uses and zoning, and have been reviewed to address the adequacy of the site in regards to transportation and circulation, utility services, storm water drainage, environmental concerns, landscaping, and safety considerations.
3. Ensure compliance of architectural building design and site development standards as found in the Lindon City Commercial Design Guidelines.

17.17.110 Site Plan when required.
1. A site plan shall be submitted to the Planning Department for staff and engineering review and approval by the appropriate Land Use Authority for any of the following:
    a. Any development within a non-residential zone;
    b. Non-residential development within a residential zone (i.e., churches, bed and breakfast inns, schools, etc.);
    c. Conditional Uses in which new building construction and/or development is proposed as outlined in section a. and b. above;
    d. Multiple unit developments (residential or commercial) - excepting R2-Overlay projects that do not require parking lots, on-site storm water detention, or lacking other site plan items typically reviewed by the City Engineer.
    e. Other uses, construction, and/or development which the Planning Director determines would require a site plan in order to review storm drainage, vehicular circulation and parking, landscaping, site design, adequacy of providing utility services; or other issues found prudent to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the area;
    f. Any development required to submit a site plan as listed in other sections of Lindon City Code.
2. Exceptions. As determined by the Planning Director, in non-residential zones, single-family residential structures, residential accessory structures, non-commercial agricultural buildings, residential additions and remodels, or similar structures do not require site plan application and review as listed in this chapter.

17.17.115 Land Use Application Submittal Requirements.
Land use application submittal requirements shall be followed as listed in the Land Development Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings Manual (Development Manual). In addition, site plan submittals must be supplemented with color renderings of the proposed exterior of the building or any new additions. A materials board or color photos of building materials is encouraged for review by the Land Use Authority.

17.17.118 Site Plan – Approval Criteria.
1. A site plan shall be reviewed by the Land Use Authority as listed in LCC 17.09, Table #1. The Land Use Authority shall ensure that the site plan meets all specific zoning requirements as found in Lindon City Code, the Lindon City Commercial Design Guidelines, the Lindon City General Plan, and other applicable codes, plans, policies and manuals as may be currently adopted and applicable.
2. The Land Use Authority has the authority to approve, continue, or deny a site plan application. A denial is justified if the site plan does not meet the codes, ordinances, or requirements of the City. The Land Use Authority may also approve with conditions if the imposed conditions are necessary to meet the intent of a City code or ordinance and said conditions are necessary to further the protection of the public’s health, safety, and welfare.

17.17.120 Completion and Maintenance of a Site.
1. Except for circumstances listed in number 2 below, every site shall conform to the approved site plan or amended site plan. No structures or improvements may be added to a site that is not included on the approved site plan.
2. The City understands that in the field, during construction, minor alterations and deviations from the approved site plan may become necessary. Such minor alterations to the approved plan may be authorized by the Planning Director and the Public Works inspector without requiring a formal amendment to the approved plan. In no case shall such amendments be in violation of Lindon City Codes and/or ordinances. Significant deviations to the approved plan shall require a formal re-submittal of site plans for official engineering review and approval prior to continued construction. The Planning Director has discretion to determine if the significant deviation warrants an additional review by the Land Use Authority to ensure compliance with City Code.
3. All improvements shown on the approved site plan or amended site plan shall be inspected and finaled by appropriate public works, zoning, fire, and building officials prior to issuance of a final certificate of occupancy.
4. Each site shall be maintained in a clean, safe, and orderly manner. Required landscaping shall be regularly maintained and kept in a living state.
5. Failure to complete or maintain a site in accordance with this Chapter and with the approved site plan shall be a violation of the terms of Lindon City Code. The City may initiate criminal and/or civil legal proceedings against any person, firm or corporation, whether acting as principal, agent, property owner, lessee, employee or otherwise, for failure to complete or maintain a site in accordance with this City Code and with the approved site plan.

17.17.125 Site Plan-Phased development.
The City understands that due to financial constraints, some developments will be required to be constructed in multiple phases. As such, Lindon City is willing to make some accommodations to allow phased developments for site plans. Phased development must be clearly distinguished during application submittal and approved by the Land Use Authority. Application approval will be subject to the site plan expiration timeline as indicated in LCC 17.12. Each successive phase must be completed within 24 months of the previous phase with all phases of the site plan being completed within six years. Applications for new approvals shall be submitted for any phased development that exceeds six years.

17.17.130 Amended site plans.
1. Amended site plans shall be submitted when changes to the site and/or building are proposed. Changes that require amended site plans to be approved by the Land Use Authority and brought into substantial compliance with current city codes are triggered by the following:
    a. A change in intensity of land use of the property, defined as a change between agricultural, residential, commercial/ industrial, or public assembly uses (i.e., school or church changes to a retail business);
    b. New buildings or structures are being added to the property with the following exceptions:
        i. At the discretion of the Planning Director, accessory buildings on thousand (1,000) square feet or less may be administratively approved without requiring Land Use Authority review when, upon the Planning Director’s findings, the amended site plan meets the standards listed in paragraph 4 of this section; or
    c. Exterior changes are proposed to the dimensions of any existing building or structure as follows:
        i. 0 – 9% increase in building square footage. The new addition shall meet current architectural design standards for the zone, but except for parking standards necessary to accommodate the increased square footage, no additional site or building improvements are required. At the discretion of the Planning Director this level of change may be approved by Staff without requiring Land Use Authority review – when the alteration meets the standards listed in Section 17.17.130(4).
        ii. 10 – 19% increase in building square footage. The new addition, including the entire existing building being added to shall meet current architectural design standards for the zone in which it is located. The Land Use Authority may work with the applicant to prioritize architectural features that are determined to have the greatest impact on appearance of the structure in meeting zone standards. Parking standards shall also be complied with.
        iii. 20 – 30% increase in building square footage. The new addition and existing building shall meet current architectural and parking standards, as referenced in 17.17.130(c)(ii). In addition, any landscaping requirements shall be met.
        iv. Over 30% increase in building square footage. The site shall be brought into substantial compliance with all current city codes and ordinances – specifically as listed in Section 17.17.130(3).
        v. Any action which, when combined with one or more previous expansions that have occurred over a period of time, causes the aggregate area of expansion to fall within one of the percentage categories listed above.
    d. Cosmetic changes to the exterior of a building or structure (paint, windows, roof covering, etc.) are permitted without any approvals from the Land Use Authority. Any cosmetic changes shall meet current codes and/or shall bring the facilities closer to conformance with current codes and ordinances, including the Lindon City Commercial Design Guidelines.
2. Approval. The procedure for approval of an amended site plan shall be the same as the procedure of approval of an original site plan unless a waiver is granted according to 17.17.130(4).
3. Required Improvements. When a site plan is required to be brought into substantial compliance with all current city codes and ordinances the following issues shall receive specific review.
    a. Landscaping;
    b. Storage and exterior displays;
    c. Off-Street parking;
    d. Vehicular access and circulation;
    e. Off-street loading and unloading;
    f. On-site surface water drainage. (Other methods of surface water drainage may be approved for amended site plans if approved by the City Engineer);
    g. Off-site curb, gutter and sidewalk;
    h. Piping of irrigation ditches;
    i. Solid waste containers (trash enclosures);
    j. Street lights;
    k. Fencing and/or screening;
    l. Architectural standards applicable to the zone in which the site is located; and
    m. Any other areas required under the submittal requirements as referenced in 17.17.115.
4. Waiver. The Planning Director shall have the authority to waive the requirements of Section 17-17-130(1)(c)(i), and shall have the authority to approve amended site plans, new accessory buildings one thousand (1,000) square feet or less, and/or building permits without further review by the Land Use Authority if he or she makes the following findings:
    a. The proposed amended site plan complies with all current City ordinances; and
    b. The original site plan has not been materially altered, and has not changed in a way that detracts from the overall safety or aesthetics of the site; and
    c. The proposed amendments to the site plan will not have a material detrimental effect on other properties in the area.
5. Application fees for Staff approved amended site plans shall follow the Lindon City Fee Schedule established at the time of the application. Any decision of the Planning Director to waive the requirements of Section 17.17.130(2) will require notice of intent to approve the proposal to all surrounding property owners within three hundred feet (300') of the subject property. The decision may be appealed to the Appeal Authority within ten (10) days of the date of the mailed notice. If no appeal is received within the 10 day appeal period, the application and/or permit may be approved.
6. Modification of Requirements on amended site plans. The Land Use Authority may modify or adjust the requirements of subsection 17.17.130 if any of the following conditions are met:
    a. Strict compliance with the requirements of subsection 17.17.130 would cause an unusual and unnecessary hardship to the applicant and/or would create detrimental impacts upon the property (i.e., requiring landscaping would eliminate parking).
    b. The amended site plan provides for additions, deletions or improvements to the subject property that are beneficial to the public, that improve the appearance of the site, bring the site closer to conformance with City code, or that increase the safety or convenience of the site to the public.
    c. The maximum allowable modification or adjustment shall be the exception rather than the rule, and shall include all other variances previously granted on the site.
7. Additional Standards. In granting any of the changes set forth in subsection 17.17.130(5), the Land Use Authority may impose additional standards or requirements that will substantially serve the objectives of the standards or requirements that are waived, adjusted or modified. Any authorized changes or additional requirements shall be entered in the minutes of the Land Use Authority with the circumstances justifying the changes or requirements. (Ord. 2014-2, amended, 2014; Ord. 98-3, amended, 2000)

17.17.140 Temporary site plans.
1. Purpose. This section is enacted to accommodate certain uses which are temporary or seasonal in nature and in which typical permanent infrastructure and site plan improvements required by the Code would not be considered reasonable for the limited duration of the temporary use. No person shall construct or use a temporary site or building without first obtaining approval as set forth in this section.
2. All temporary sites shall be restricted to the non-residential zones, excluding seasonal agricultural or horticultural sales, which are permitted in all zones.
3. All submittal requirements for temporary site plans shall be followed as listed in the Land Development Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings manual (Development Manual).
4. The applicant shall pay a fee as established in the Lindon City Fee Schedule.
5. An application for a temporary site plan may be made by any property owner, lessee, contract purchaser, official, department, board or bureau of any government. If the property owner has not signed the application, a contract purchaser or lessee must file, with the application, a copy of the contract or some form of written statement which indicates the endorsement of the application by the property owner.
6. The Development Review Committee (DRC), or their appointed designee, shall be the land use authority for all proposed temporary site plans. The DRC shall have authority to approve, conditionally approve or deny any temporary site plan application accessible for the public enter therein.
    a. The DRC shall evaluate the impact of each temporary site and will assure that the site plan is compatible with the zone in which it is to be located.
    b. Any temporary site plan permitted by the DRC which complies with the specific requirements of this Chapter and any conditions and restrictions which may be imposed by the DRC shall be deemed to be a permitted temporary site on the lot on which it is thus permitted. Once a temporary site plan is permitted, however, the use shall not be enlarged, extended, changed, increased in intensity, or relocated unless an application is made for a new or revised temporary site plan.
    c. Non-permitted or unlisted uses deemed beneficial to or furthering the public interest may be considered for temporary site plan approval. Such uses may consist of public works projects, public utility construction activities, or other governmental activities.
7. All temporary site plans shall satisfy the following general standards:
    a. The proposed temporary use will be located, operated and maintained in a manner generally consistent with the policies of the General Plan and the provisions of the Code.
    b. Adequate parking to accommodate vehicular traffic to be generated by such use will be available on-site and/or meet parking regulations in LCC Chapter 17.18.
    c. The proposed use shall be such that pedestrian and vehicular traffic generated will not be hazardous or conflict with the existing and anticipated traffic in the neighborhood.
    d. No motor vehicle, mobile home, shipping container, or trailer from which sales are transacted or product is displayed shall be accessible for the public enter therein.
    e. The location, size and height of buildings, structures, walls and fences, and the nature and extent of screening, buffering and landscaping shall be such that the use will not hinder or discourage the appropriate development and use of adjacent or nearby land and/or buildings or adversely impair the value thereof.
    f. Signs shall be regulated by the provisions of the Sign Ordinance found in LCC Chapter18.
    g. The temporary use regulation of this Section does not exempt the applicant or operator from any other required permits, such as business licenses or health department permits.
8. The applicant shall comply with any condition imposed by the DRC. Conditions may include additional off-street parking, on-site landscaping, or any other physical improvements. In determining whether such improvements should be required, and in determining whether the temporary site plan shall be approved, denied or approved with conditions, the DRC shall consider the following:
    a. Harmony of the request with the general objectives of the General Plan, City ordinances, and the particular zone in which the request is located.
    b. Harmony of the request with existing uses in the neighborhood.
    c. Development or lack of development adjacent to the site.
    d. Whether or not the request may be injurious to potential development in the vicinity.
    e. Present and future requirements for transportation, traffic, water, sewer, and other utilities.
    f. Suitability of the specific property for the proposed use.
    g. Economic impact of the proposed use on the neighborhood.
    h. Aesthetic impact of the proposed use on the neighborhood.
    i. Attempts by the applicant to minimize other adverse effects on people and property in the area.
    j. Impact of the proposed use on health, safety and welfare of the City and persons owning property in the area.
    k. The anticipated parking needs for the site.
9. Regulations for Specific Uses. 
    a. Christmas tree sales lots: Allowed in all commercial and industrial zones. Display of Christmas trees need not comply with setback requirements of the zone, however, no display shall be located in any clear vision area. The temporary use permit shall be valid for a maximum 45-day consecutive time period.
    b. Firework sales: Allowed in any commercial or industrial zone from temporary stands. In addition, applicants must acquire all required permits and licensing prior to approval. Firework sales are also subject to the requirements of LCC Chapter 8.28.
    c. Fast food huts for the retail sale of food items such as shaved ice, snow cones, hot dogs, tacos, soft drinks. Allowed in any zone food eating establishments are permitted. Such uses may last up to a maximum one hundred twenty (120) consecutive days.
    d. Outdoor sales/traveling retail sales or services (such as sales of tools, housewares, rugs, toys, or other manufactured goods), or service businesses (such as windshield repair): May be allowed in all commercial and industrial zones. Such events may last up to a maximum of (30) thirty consecutive days.
    e. Seasonal agricultural or horticultural produce sales: Allowed in all zones. The temporary use permit for such uses shall be valid from May 1st through November 30th.
10. Except for uses listed in 9(e) of this section, the applicant shall remove within fourteen (14) days of the expiration of the approval, any structure or materials used for the temporary site such as tents, poles, display bins, etc. The applicant shall restore the site to the approved original site plan. If no original site plan exists, the applicant shall restore the site to its original condition. If deemed appropriate by the DRC, a bond in the amount determined by the DRC shall be posted with the City to guarantee the removal of temporary structures and/or restoration of the original site conditions.
11. After expiration of the time limit on a temporary site plan approval, the use must cease and shall not be relocated on the same parcel for 180 consecutive days. The only exceptions to this requirement are listed in paragraphs 9(e), 12 and 13 of this section.
12. The Development Review Committee may grant approval of a temporary site for up to one (1) year if any of the following conditions are met:
    a. The applicant has received site plan approval to build on a new site or expand a current site within the City.
    b. The applicant has begun construction and shall be making progress toward completion of the new or expanded site.
    c. The temporary site will be used to house the business moving into the new or expanded site.
13. The Development Review Committee may, if the applicant shows good cause, grant up to one (1) six (6) month extension for temporary site plans approved pursuant to paragraph 12. (Ord. 2010-1, amended, 2010; Ord. 98-3, amended, 2000)

Chapter 17.18 OFF-STREET PARKING

Sections:
17.18.005    Purpose.
17.18.010    Parking Required–Generally.
17.18.020    Size of parking spaces and aisles.
17.18.040    Mixed occupancies.
17.18.060    Access to individual space.
17.18.070    Minimum number required.
17.18.075    Uses not specified / reasonable parking.
17.18.077    Alternatives to reduce required parking.
17.18.078    Maximum parking spaces.
17.18.080    Parking lot maintenance and design.
17.18.085    Interior Landscaping Required.
17.18.090    Location.
17.18.100    Parking on sidewalks prohibited.
17.18.110    Driveway access requirements.
17.18.120    Bicycle parking.

17.18.005 Purpose.
The purpose of the Off-Street Parking ordinance is to:
1. Ensure that enough on-site vehicular parking spaces are available to accommodate the majority of traffic generated by the range of uses which might locate at a site over time;
2. Ensure that off-street parking, loading, and access demands associated with new development, or changes in use or capacity, will not adversely affect other nearby land uses and surrounding neighborhoods;
3. Maintain and enhance a safe and efficient transportation system within the community, including the maneuverability of emergency vehicles within a parking area, adequate ingress and egress, etc.;
4. Provide consideration to reducing environmental impacts caused by hard surface parking areas and minimize the visual impacts of traditional parking lots through landscaping, screening, and implementation of parking lot designs that break up the visual impact of large expanses of asphalt;
5. Promote a variety of transportation choices and incentives to reduce parking spaces through allowance of shared parking arraignments, transit-supportive developments, bicycle parking, and pedestrian accesses that connect to City trails or pedestrian routes.

17.18.010 Parking Required–Generally.
At the time any building or structure is erected or enlarged or increased in capacity or any change in use is applied for, off-street parking spaces for automobiles and bicycles shall be provided in accordance with the requirements set out in this chapter, or as otherwise required by conditional use permit. Lindon City shall have the ability to require additional parking for uses that have regularly over-flowed their minimum required parking spaces and such over-flow has created a nuisance or safety hazard within the community. Such over-flow parking issues shall be considered a nuisance by the City, and if left uncorrected, may result in the revocation of an active business license. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-106-1; Ord. 98-12, repealed and replaced, 2000)

17.18.020 Size of parking spaces and aisles.
1. The dimensions of each off-street parking space, exclusive of access drives or aisles, shall be at least nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet, measured from corner nearest curb face for diagonal spaces, nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet from curb face for ninety (90) degree spaces; and nine (9) feet by twenty-four feet (24'), from curb face, for parallel spaces. Where appropriate, wider stalls may be used when approved by the City Engineer. All stalls shall be striped (painted) on the parking surface.
2. Parking stalls shall be designed so that vehicles do not have potential to bump into any building, fence, or other structure. Installation of wider sidewalks adjacent to buildings, or parking bumpers, may be required to preserve at least 4' of clear width where vehicles may overhang sidewalks or walkways.
3. Two-way traffic parking aisles shall be at least 22' wide for angled parking and at least 24' wide for perpendicular parking. Narrower parking aisles with one-way traffic only may be approved by the City Engineer. (Ord. 98-12, repealed and replaced, 2000)

17.18.040 Mixed occupancies.
In the case of mixed uses in a building or on the lot, the total requirements for off-street parking facilities shall be the sum of the requirements for the various uses computed separately. (Ord. 98-12, repealed and replaced, 2000)

17.18.060 Access to individual space.
Except for single-family and two-family dwellings or on-street parking permitted under this chapter, direct access to each parking space shall be from a private driveway and not from a public street. All parking spaces shall have independent access not blocked by another parking space or other obstacle. (Ord. 98-12, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-106-3)

17.18.070 Minimum number required.
1. The following table lists anticipated minimum needs of parking spaces for specific uses. Where square footage ratios are listed, parking shall be based on the gross usable square footage for the intended uses – and therefore parking does not need to be calculated for mechanical rooms, restrooms, shower and changing rooms, elevators, stairwells, and other building areas deemed similar in nature by the City Engineer.
2. Section 17.18.075 and 17.18.077 provides that exceptions to the standards within the table may be granted by the Planning Director and City Engineer.
3. ADA parking spaces shall be provided according to the ‘ADA Parking and Passenger Loading Zone’ diagram found in the Lindon City development manual titled ‘Land Development Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings’.
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
|     SLUC      |               CATEGORY                |              REQUIRED               |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 1000          | Single-family residential dwelling    | Two (2) parking spaces per          |
|               |                                       | dwelling                            |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 1005          | Accessory Apartments to Single-family | Two (2) parking spaces              |
|               | dwellings                             |                                     |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 1111 and 1120 | Condominiums, town homes, and         | Two (2) parking spaces per          |
|               | Apartments                            | dwelling unit                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 1200          | Group Quarters                        | One (1) per sleeping room plus      |
|               |                                       | parking for accessory use           |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 1233          | Student Housing                       | One (1) stall per two (2) beds      |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 1241          | Retirement Homes/ Centers             | One (1) per two (2) beds            |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 1300          | Residential Hotels                    | One (1) per sleeping room,          |
|               |                                       | plus parking for accessory          |
|               |                                       | use and employee parking            |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 1400          | Mobile Home Park                      | Two (2) per dwelling unit           |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 1500          | Lodging                               | One (1) per bedroom, plus parking   |
|               |                                       | for accessory use                   |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 2000-3000     | Manufacturing                         | One (1) per 750 square feet         |
|               |                                       | of floor area                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 4000          | Transportation, Communication         | One (1) per 200 square feet         |
|               | and Utilities                         | of floor area in commercial         |
|               |                                       | zone, or one (1) per 750 square     |
|               |                                       | feet floor area in an industrial    |
|               |                                       | zone                                |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 5100          | Wholesale Trades, Warehousing,        | One (1) per 500 square feet         |
|               | misc. storage                         | of floor area in a commercial       |
|               |                                       | zone, or one (1) per 1000           |
|               |                                       | square feet of floor area           |
|               |                                       | in an industrial zone               |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 5200          | Building Materials, Hardware          | One (1) per 200 square feet         |
|               | and Farm Equipment                    | in commercial zone, or three        |
|               |                                       | (3) per 1000 square feet of         |
|               |                                       | floor area in an industrial         |
|               |                                       | zone                                |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 5300          | General Merchandise                   | One (1) per 200 square feet         |
|               |                                       | of floor area                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 5400          | Retail Food                           | One (1) per 350 square feet         |
|               |                                       | of floor area                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 5500          | Automotive, Marine craft, aircraft    | One (1) per 250 square footage      |
|               | - retail                              | of showroom and office space        |
|               |                                       | plus one (1) per employee           |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 5600          | Apparel and Accessories               | One (1) per 200 square feet         |
|               |                                       | of floor area                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 5700          | Furniture, Home Furnishings           | One (1) per 1000 square feet        |
|               | and Equipment                         | of floor area                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 5800          | Eating and Drinking Establishments    | One (1) per two (2) seats or        |
|               |                                       | one (1) per 100 square feet         |
|               |                                       | of floor area, whichever is         |
|               |                                       | greater.                            |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 5900          | Other Retail                          | One (1) per 350 square feet         |
|               |                                       | of floor area                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6100          | Finance, Insurance, and Real          | One (1) per 275 square feet         |
|               | Estate                                | of floor area                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6200          | Personal Services                     | One (1) per 200 square feet         |
|               |                                       | of floor area                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
|               | Reception Centers or similar          | One (1) per three and one-half      |
|               | assembly uses                         | (3 ½) person capacity in the        |
|               |                                       | building or facility, based         |
|               |                                       | on maximum use of all facilities    |
|               |                                       | at the same time.                   |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6300          | Business Services                     | One (1) per 200 square feet         |
|               |                                       | of floor area                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6400          | Repair Services                       | One (1) per 350 square feet         |
|               |                                       | of floor area                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6411 and 6414 | Auto Repair                           | One (1) per 300 square feet         |
|               |                                       | of floor area excluding bay         |
|               |                                       | areas, plus five (5) per single     |
|               |                                       | vehicle bay/shop                    |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6500          | Professional / Typical office         | One (1) per 350 square feet         |
|               | space                                 | of floor area                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6505          | Call Centers, Computer programming,   | One (1) per 250 square feet         |
|               | Technology Centers, or similar        | of floor area                       |
|               | high-density office uses.             |                                     |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6513          | Hospital Services                     | One (1) per 450 square feet         |
|               |                                       | of floor area                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6516          | Sanitariums, Convalescent and         | One (1) per three (3) beds,         |
|               | Rest Homes                            | or one (1) per 1500 square          |
|               |                                       | feet of floor area, whichever       |
|               |                                       | is greater                          |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6600          | Contract Construction                 | One (1) per 200 square feet         |
|               |                                       | of floor area in a commercial       |
|               |                                       | zone, or one (1) per 500 square     |
|               |                                       | feet of floor area in an industrial |
|               |                                       | zone                                |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6700          | Government Services                   | One (1) per 250 square feet         |
|               |                                       | of floor area                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6800          | Education, Nursery and Day            | One (1) per employee plus one       |
|               | Care                                  | per ten (10) children at maximum    |
|               |                                       | capacity                            |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
|               | Grades K-8                            | Two (2) per employee                |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
|               | Grades 9-12                           | Ten (10) per teaching station       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
|               | Colleges and Trade Schools            | Fifteen (15) per teaching station   |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
|               | Dancing and Other Special Training    | One (1) per 200 square feet         |
|               | Schools                               | of floor area                       |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 6911          | Churches, Temples, and Synagogues     | One (1) per four (4) seats          |
|               |                                       | or four (4) person seating          |
|               |                                       | capacity, based on fixed seating    |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
| 7100 to 7900  | Cultural, Amusement and Recreation    | One (1) per three and one-half      |
|               |                                       | (3 ½) person capacity in the        |
|               |                                       | building or facility, based         |
|               |                                       | on maximum use of all facilities    |
|               |                                       | at the same time.                   |
+---------------+---------------------------------------+-------------------------------------+
(Ord. 98-12, repealed and replaced, 2000)

17.18.075 Uses not specified / reasonable parking.
The number of parking spaces for uses not specified herein shall be determined by the Planning Director and the City Engineer, being guided where appropriate by the regulations set forth herein for uses of buildings or existing structures which are similar to the use, structure, or building under consideration. The Planning Director and City Engineer may also modify the required parking spaces when appropriate to avoid unreasonably excessive parking, or conversely to require additional parking for high demand uses. Broad flexibility is given to the Planning Director and City Engineer in determining the appropriate number of spaces.

17.18.077 Alternatives to reduce required parking.
Exceptions to the minimum parking standards may be granted in order to reward users of mass transit and to allow applicants options to reduce parking spaces in order to save construction costs and reduce land area needed for parking. The following exceptions to the minimum parking standards may be granted upon approval by the Planning Director and City Engineer:
1. Shared parking agreements. Joint use of required parking spaces may occur where two or more uses on the same or separate sites are able to share the same parking spaces because their parking demands occur at different times. The Planning Director and City Engineer may approve joint use of required nonresidential parking spaces between two lots and/or uses upon a determination that no substantial conflict in the periods of peak demand would occur from the shared parking allowance. The total number of spaces provided between the uses shall be at least equal to the sum of the minimum number of spaces required for each use. Applicants requesting the use of shared parking shall submit the following documentation as part of a building permit, business license, or land use application:
    a. The names and addresses of the uses and of the owners and tenants that are sharing the parking;
    b. A detailed site plan showing the location and number of parking spaces that are being shared. The shared spaces shall be no more than 350' away from the buildings or uses being served and shall have a safe and convenient pedestrian connection provided between the shared parking and the building or use. The shared parking allowance and/or pedestrian connection shall be signed and identified at both the use being served and the shared parking location;
    c. An analysis showing that the peak parking times of the uses occur at different times and that the parking area will be large enough for the anticipated demands of both uses; and
    d. A legal instrument written to the satisfaction of Lindon City that may include easements or deed restrictions that guarantee access to the parking for both uses in perpetuity. The document(s) must state that new uses that require more parking spaces, or have similar peak parking times, will not be permitted by Lindon City unless the minimum required parking is constructed to accommodate both the new use and the existing uses which have claim on the shared parking agreement. Said instrument(s) shall be signed by all property owners involved, and shall be recorded against each property at the County Recorder’s Office.
2. Sites well served by transit. 
    a. Sites with required parking that exceeds 25 spaces are eligible to receive a 5% reduction of the minimum parking requirements if the site is located within 500 feet of a transit stop with at least hourly service (bus, commuter rail, etc.). Applicants requesting this exception must provide a map identifying the site and provide UTA schedules (service must be verified by UTA to be active prior to occupancy of the facility) for all transit stops within 500 feet of the site.
    b. A 10% parking reduction will be granted for sites with required parking that exceeds 25 spaces if the development is adjacent to a street for which transit has current or proposed routes (service must be verified by UTA to be active prior to occupancy of the facility) and for which the development constructs a UTA approved, transit-supportive plaza adjacent to and visible from the transit street. Existing parking areas may be converted to take advantage of these provisions. The transit facility shall include all of the following elements:
        i. The plaza must be at least 300 square feet in area and shaped so that a 10'x10' square will fit entirely within the plaza;
        ii. At least 10%, but not more than 25%, of the transit-supportive plaza must be landscaped with living materials, including at least two shade trees;
        iii. A bench or sitting area with at least 5 liner feet of seating;
        iv. A shelter or other weather protection. The shelter must cover at least 20 square feet. If the plaza is adjacent to the bus stop, UTA must also approve the shelter;
        v. An easement or dedication that allows perpetual public access to the plaza;
        vi. The transit plaza shall be maintained by the owner of the property.
    c. A 5% reduction in parking spaces may be granted for uses with more than 25 spaces which provide documentation of employee and/or company participation in UTA sponsored vanpool, ride-share or other similar transit programs.
3. Motorcycle parking.
Motorcycle parking may substitute for up to 5 spaces or 5 percent of required automobile parking, whichever is less. For every 3 motorcycle parking spaces provided, the automobile parking requirement is reduced by one space. Each motorcycle space must be at least 4 feet wide and 8 feet deep. Existing parking may be converted to take advantage of this provision.
4. Comparative use reductions.
A comparable reduction in the amount of required parking may be considered if the City receives credible documentation of existing similar uses that have fewer parking spaces which reasonably accommodates the similar use. However, in order to accommodate the range of uses that may occur over time on the property, any site which is given a reduction in the number of parking spaces required under the table found in Section 17.18.070, which reduction was allowed due to comparisons of other existing similar uses, shall provide on the same or adjacent property (or through a shared parking agreement) the area needed to accommodate the total amount of required parking spaces according to the table found in Section 17.18.070. This “parking land-bank” shall be landscaped in a manner that can reasonably be transitioned into future parking spaces without disruption to the uses or circulation of traffic on the property. If the ‘land-bank’ area is landscaped, said landscaping shall not count towards other required perimeter or interior landscaping requirements. Storm drainage and other engineering considerations on the site shall be designed to accommodate the full number of stalls required in the table found in Section 17.18.070.
5. Bicycle parking.
A 5% reduction in the minimum amount of vehicular parking may be permitted by providing bicycle parking that is additional to the minimum bicycle parking standards found within Section 17.18.120. This parking reduction may only be given if the additional bicycle parking is in conjunction with an employee accessible showering and changing facility located on the site for which the vehicular parking would have been required. This shall be permitted at a one-to-one ratio of parking spaces to bicycle spaces. Existing parking may be converted to take advantage of this provision.

17.18.078 Maximum parking spaces.
Parking lots exceeding 25 spaces shall not have more than 130% of the minimum required spaces for all combined uses as required in this chapter unless otherwise approved for compelling reasons by the Planning Director and City Engineer in order to prevent adverse impacts of overflow parking onto adjacent streets and properties.

17.18.080 Parking lot maintenance and design.
Every parcel of land used as a public or private parking lot shall be developed and maintained in accordance with the following requirements:
1. Surfacing. Each off-street parking lot shall be surfaced with asphalt, concrete or other binder pavement, including structurally engineered organic materials or pavers, and permanently maintained so as to provide a dustless surface and ease of snow removal. The parking area shall be so graded as to dispose of all surface water. If such water is to be carried to adjacent streets, it shall be piped under sidewalks.
2. Screening. The sides and rear of any off-street parking lot adjacent to a residential use or residential zone shall be screened from such area by a solid masonry wall or other sight obscuring fencing or landscaping materials as approved by the Planning Commission, not less than six (6) feet in height.
3. Lighting. Lighting used to illuminate any parking lot shall be arranged to reflect the light away from adjoining residential premises and from street traffic.
4. Where a parking area on a site is more than 120,000 square feet, the parking area must contain the following elements (Parking areas in structures are not included):
    a. Internal access ways shall divide the parking area into smaller areas that are no greater than 60,000 square feet;
    b. These access ways are intended to direct business traffic to and from the adjacent street or between individual sections of the parking lot and provide safe pedestrian routes from parking areas to the building or use; and
    c. Each internal access way shall have at least one auto travel lane, curbs, landscaping, and unobstructed sidewalks on both sides that provide pedestrian access to the building on the site, and shall be designed in the following method:
        i. The sidewalks must be at least 6 feet wide. There must be a planting strip at least 4 feet wide adjacent to the access way. The planting strip must be between the curb and the sidewalk, and be landscaped and irrigated with grass or other living vegetation with 2" caliper trees at least 6' tall planted every 20' and centered within the planting strip.
    d. The internal access ways and associated landscaping are excluded from the portion of the parking and loading area used to calculate required interior landscaping.
5. In order to prevent vehicles from having to re-enter a public roadway to access neighboring businesses or parcels, cross-access easements between multiple parcels may be required where deemed appropriate by the City Engineer. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-106-6; Ord. 98-12, repealed and replaced, 2000)

17.18.085 Interior Landscaping Required.
1. Any off-street parking lot adjacent to a residential use or residential zone shall provide a minimum 10' landscaped buffer from the parking lot to the adjacent residential use or zone. Trees shall be planted at least every 10' along the landscaped strip adjacent to the residential use or residential zone. Trees must be a minimum of 2" caliper measured one foot off the ground and at least 6' tall when planted. In addition to any required fencing, trees shall be of a variety that will mature to a height of at least 20' tall in order to provide a visual barrier between the non-residential use and the residential use. The Planning Commission has flexibility to grant exceptions to this landscape screening standard if existing vegetation or other existing screening is found to meet the intent of the screening requirements found in this section.
2. For all required parking lots in any zone, interior parking lot landscaping is required as follows:
    a. Any parking lot that has at 10 or greater required parking spaces shall provide at least 40 square feet of interior landscaped area for each parking space;
    b. The landscape materials shall consist of at least 75% living vegetation including ground cover, trees, and shrubbery. The remaining 25% may consist of xeriscape (desert landscaping) materials;
    c. Trees that are 2" caliper measured one foot off the ground and at least 6' tall when planted shall be installed within the interior parking lot landscaping areas at a ratio of one tree for every 10 required parking spaces. The applicant may determine the location of the trees within the interior landscaping areas as defined by this ordinance.
    d. The landscaping must be dispersed throughout the parking area and shall be separated from the parking lot by 6" high concrete curbing;
    e. Perimeter landscaping required along public street frontages or required adjacent to residential zones or uses may not substitute or count towards square foot requirements for interior landscaping. However, interior landscaping may join perimeter landscaping as long as it extends at least four feet into the parking area from the perimeter landscape line.
    f. Layout of interior landscaped areas. The layout of the interior landscaped areas must meet either one or a combination of the standards of this subparagraph:
        i. Option 1: Landscape strips. 
            •Interior landscaping must be arranged in landscape strips at least four feet wide between rows of parking stalls, as shown in Figure 1 and 2.
            •Where the front portions of parking stalls are landscaped as allowed above, an additional 2' landscaped strip must be adjacent to the four-foot landscape strip to accommodate the over-hanging of vehicles, as shown in Figure 2.
        ii. Option 2: Other landscape patterns. 
            •Interior landscaping must be arranged in areas at the ends of rows of parking or between parking spaces within rows of parking. See Figure 3.
            •Interior landscaping may join perimeter landscaping as long as the interior landscape area extends at least 4 feet into the parking area from the perimeter landscape line. See Figure 3.
            •Landscaping that abuts, but does not extend into, the parking area may be included as interior landscaping if all of the following are met:
                - The abutting landscaped area must be in addition to required perimeter landscaping;
                - Only the first ten (10) feet of the abutting landscaped area, measured from the edge of the parking area, may be included as interior landscaping. See Figure 3; and
                - The landscaped area is not abutting and parallel to required perimeter landscaping unless 4 feet wider than the required perimeter landscaping. See Figure 3.
    g. Individual tree-planting spaces. Where an individual tree is planted in a space surrounded by pavement, the planting area must have a minimum interior dimension of five feet. See Figure 4.
    h. Exception for existing parking lots. Where compliance with the interior landscaping requirements listed above would result in the loss of existing required parking spaces, the amount of parking spaces required shall be reduced by up to a 20% in order to accommodate the interior landscaping required.

17.18.090 Location.
1. Off-street parking shall not be allowed in required front yard or street-side setbacks as measured from the property line. In commercial zones, the Land Use Authority may modify this requirement if it is deemed that sufficient landscaping and buffering exists between the parking area and the street or for reasons of topography or unique lot configuration. Unless otherwise permitted under this section, required parking spaces shall be located on the same lot which they are required to serve.
2. On-street parking for uniquely designed road cross sections that vary from the currently adopted road cross section standards may be considered by the Planning Commission for approval on local and private streets where, a recommendation is received from the City Engineer verifying that street widths, traffic patterns, and speed limits allow for the on-street parking to function in a safe and efficient manner and said parking will benefit the character and functionality of the project area. Permitted on-street parking will count towards the total number of required off-street parking spaces only for uses immediately adjacent to the on-street spaces. (Ord. 2015-28, amended, 2015; Ord. 2011-5, amended, 2011; Ord. 2008-6, amended, 2008; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-106-7; Ord. 98-12, repealed and replaced, 2000)

17.18.100 Parking on sidewalks prohibited.
It is unlawful for any establishment or individual to allow motor vehicles to park in such a position as to block a city sidewalk at any time. Violators will be cited and vehicles towed away at the owner's expense. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-106-8; Ord. 98-12, repealed and replaced, 2000)

17.18.110 Driveway access requirements.
Adequate ingress and egress to and from all residential, industrial, and commercial uses shall be provided for in the following manner:
1. All new subdivision construction of one lot or more shall have curb, gutter and sidewalk installed throughout the entire project as required by City Ordinance. Driveway accesses across curb, gutter, and sidewalk shall not be constructed or installed until such time as a building permit is issued for a specific structure on a specified lot within the subdivision, unless the applicant can demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that driveway locations can be reliably established prior to the issuance of building permits.
2. The Lindon City Planning Director shall approve all driveway accesses which cross a public right-of-way in residential zones. The City Engineer shall approve all driveway accesses in non-residential zones. Multiple accesses to the same property in any zone may be considered, but the City may limit the number of access with regard to how the driveway cuts impact pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
3. All driveway accesses installed in violation of this provision shall be removed before the final certificate of occupancy is issued for any residential, industrial, or commercial project.
4. Driveway accesses in residential zones shall typically not exceed 24' in width unless otherwise approved by the Planning Director, but in no case shall the driveway width exceed 40'. Driveway accesses in non-residential zones shall not exceed 40' in width unless approved by the City Engineer for unusual circumstances related to lot configuration, existing building placement, common use of large vehicle traffic, or other unique circumstances not commonly found on other lots within the vicinity.
5. Unless otherwise permitted by the City Engineer, driveway slopes for residential uses shall not exceed 16% and driveway slopes for non-residential uses shall not exceed 12%.
6. Driveways and accesses for all uses shall not be permitted within 40' of an intersection of a public street. (Ord. 99-8, adopted, 2000)

17.18.120 Bicycle parking.
Purpose. Bicycle parking is required for all uses to encourage the use of bicycles by providing safe, convenient, and readily accessible places to park.
1. Number of bicycle spaces required. 
    a. In the CG, MC, PC 1 and 2, and R&B zones, a minimum of 2 bicycle parking spaces shall be provided for all uses, with additional bicycle parking spaces added at a ratio of 8% of the total number of required vehicular parking spaces – up to 16 bicycle parking spaces per use. Non-residential uses in residential zones shall provide a minimum of 2 bicycle parking spaces. Additional bicycle spaces may be required for uses such as schools, institutional facilities, recreation centers, or other uses where it is anticipated that larger numbers of bicyclists will be frequenting the facility.
    b. In the LI and HI zones, a minimum of 2 bicycle parking stalls shall be provided for all uses with up to 50 vehicular parking spaces, and 1 additional stall being required for every 50 vehicular spaces thereafter.
    c. When there are two or more separate uses or buildings on a lot, the required bicycle parking for the site is the sum of the required parking for all required vehicular parking spaces.
2. Bicycle Parking Standards. All new development where bicycle parking is required as stated in section 1 above, shall install bicycle parking spaces and associated bicycle racks as follows:
    a. Location. Bicycle parking shall be:
        i. Outside a building and made available for employees, customers, or other visitors to the site;
        ii. At the same grade as the sidewalk or at a location that can be reached by an accessible pedestrian route; and
        iii. Within the following distances of the main entrance as follows, unless otherwise approved the Planning Director and City Engineer:
            a. Building with one main entrance. For a building with one main entrance, the bicycle parking must be within 50' of the main entrance to the building as measured along the most direct pedestrian access route. See Figure 5;
            b. Building with more than one main entrance. For a building with more than one main entrance, the bicycle parking must be along all façades with a main entrance, and within 50 feet of at least one main entrance on each façade that has a main entrance, as measured along the most direct pedestrian access route. See Figure 6;
            c. Sites with more than one primary building. For sites that have more than one primary building, but are not an institutional campus, the bicycle parking must be within 50 feet of a main entrance as measured along the most direct pedestrian access route, and must be distributed to serve all primary buildings. See Figure 7;
            d. Institutional Campus. On an institutional campus with more than one building or main entrance, the bicycle parking must be either:
                -Within 50 feet of a main entrance as measured along the most direct pedestrian access route; or
                -If the bicycle parking is more than 50 feet from a main entrance, it must be in a common bicycle parking location along a pedestrian access route.
        iv. If a lot is adjacent to City trails and/or sidewalks that are part of the Parks and Trails Master Plan Map, the development is required to provide a reasonable access to the sidewalk or trail in order to promote bicycle use to the proposed facility.
    b. Bicycle racks and spacing (See Figure 8). Bicycle parking and racks shall meet the following standards:
        i. Each required bicycle parking space must be at least 2 feet by 6 feet;
        ii. The bicycle frame and one wheel can be locked to a bicycle rack with a high security, U-shaped shackle lock if both wheels are left on the bicycle;
        iii. A bicycle six feet long can be securely held with its frame supported so that the bicycle cannot be pushed or fall in a manner that will damage the wheels or components;
        iv. The rack must be securely anchored;
        v. Each required bicycle parking space must be accessible without moving another bicycle;
        vi. There must be an aisle at least 5 feet wide behind all required bicycle parking to allow room for bicycle maneuvering. Where the bicycle parking is adjacent to a sidewalk, the maneuvering area may extend into the right-of-way; and
        vii. The area devoted to bicycle parking must be hard surfaced.Figure 1. Landscaping area at front of Parking
[IMAGE: <17.18.120_001.png>]Figure 2. Landscaping Strips
[IMAGE: <17.18.120_002.png>]Figure 3. Interior Landscaping Patterns
[IMAGE: <17.18.120_003.png>]
[IMAGE: <17.18.120_004.png>]
[IMAGE: <17.18.120_005.png>]Figure 4. Individual Tree-Planting Spaces
[IMAGE: <17.18.120_006.png>]Figure 5. Bike Parking – one building, one entrance
[IMAGE: <17.18.120_007.png>]Figure 6. Bike Parking – one building, multiple entrances
[IMAGE: <17.18.120_008.png>]Figure 7. Bike Parking – multiple buildings, multiple entrances
[IMAGE: <17.18.120_009.png>]Figure 8. Examples of Bicycle Parking Layouts
[IMAGE: <17.18.120_010.png>]
This area accommodates eight bicycles
[IMAGE: <17.18.120_011.png>]
These areas accommodate eight bicycles
[IMAGE: <17.18.120_012.png>]
This area accommodates sixteen bicycles

Chapter 17.20 CONDITIONAL USES GENERALLY

Sections:
17.20.010    Purpose and intent.
17.20.020    Permit–Required.
17.20.030    Permit–Revocation–Authority.
17.20.040    Permit–Revocation–Hearing notice.
17.20.050    Permit–Expiration.
17.20.060    Permit–Grounds for application denial.
17.20.070    Permit–Issuance dependent on affirmative findings.
17.20.080    Design and improvement standards–Variance.
17.20.090    Inspection–Generally.
17.20.100    Construction and improvement standards –Adoption.
17.20.110    Conflicting provisions.
17.20.120    Construction of improvements–Obligation.
17.20.130    Commencement of construction.

17.20.010 Purpose and intent.
The purpose of this chapter and the intent of the local jurisdiction in its adoption is to promote the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of the local jurisdiction. This subdivision accomplishes the aforesaid purpose and intent by providing sufficient flexibility to allow in certain areas compatible integration of uses which are related to the permitted uses of the district or are of a temporary nature only, but which may be suitable and desirable only in certain locations in that district due to conditions and circumstances peculiar to that location and/or upon certain conditions which make the uses suitable and/or only if such uses are designed, laid out, and constructed on the proposed site in a particular manner. While flexibility in allowing uses which would otherwise be generally suitable to a given district is an important goal of this chapter, it is also recognized that constraints on governmental decision making are a legal imperative. This subdivision, therefore, also provides a framework of standards within which those governmental decisions must be made. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-1(A))

17.20.020 Permit–Required.
A conditional use permit shall be required for all uses listed as conditional uses in this division. For the following types of conditional uses final plat approval shall constitute the conditional use permit: subdivision, and recreation vehicle parks. For all other types of conditional uses, a specified conditional use permit shall be issued for the particular use as hereinafter provided. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-1071(B); Ord. 2000-11, amended, 2000)

17.20.030 Permit–Revocation–Authority.
In the event any person holding a conditional use permit pursuant to this chapter violates the terms of the permit, or conducts or carries on such site development in such a manner as to materially adversely affect the health, welfare, or safety of persons residing or working in the neighborhood of the property of the permittee, a temporary suspension may be made effective immediately upon notification by the zoning administrator. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-1(C)(1))

17.20.040 Permit–Revocation–Hearing notice.
No conditional use permit shall be permanently revoked or suspended unless a hearing is held by the Planning Commission. The permittee shall be notified in writing of such hearing and said notification shall state:
1. The grounds for complaint or reasons for the revocation or suspension, in clear and concise language;
2. The time and place such hearing is to be held.
Such notice shall be served by registered mail or personal service on the permittee at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. At any such hearing the permittee shall be given an opportunity to be heard, and he may call witnesses and present evidence on his behalf. Upon conclusion of such hearing, the Planning Commission shall determine whether or not the permit shall be suspended or revoked. In the event the determination is to suspend or revoke the permit, the permittee may appeal the decision to the governing body in the manner provided by this division.
3. The Planning Commission shall hold a hearing to consider recommendations for revocation or suspension of permits which have been temporarily suspended, at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission, at which all conditions of Section 17.20.040 (2) can be fulfilled. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-1(C)(2))

17.20.050 Permit–Expiration.
Every conditional use permit shall expire by limitation and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit has not been commenced within one hundred and eighty (180) days, or is not completed within one year from date of issue; except that the zoning administrator may, if the permit holder presents satisfactory evidence that unusual difficulties have prevented work being started or completed within the specified time limits, grant a reasonable extension of time if written application is made before the expiration date of the permit. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-1(D))

17.20.060 Permit–Grounds for application denial.
The following shall constitute grounds for denial of a conditional use permit application:
1. Under circumstances of the particular case, the proposed use will be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing or working in the vicinity, or injurious to property or improvements in the vicinity, and there is no practical means available to the applicant to effectively mitigate such detrimental effects;
2. The applicant cannot or does not give the Planning Commission reasonable assurance that conditions imposed incident to issuance of a conditional use permit will be complied with. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-1(E))

17.20.070 Permit–Issuance dependent on affirmative findings.
1. Conditional uses may be approved by the Planning Commission in locations permitting such uses in this division. Before approval is granted, a report to the governing body by the Planning Commission shall find that the proposed development will meet the requirements of this division.
2. Exceptions. 
    a. The Planning Commission may authorize exceptions to any of the requirements and regulations set forth in this division.
    b. Application for any exception shall be made by a verified petition of the applicant stating fully the grounds of the application and the facts relied upon by the petitioner. Such petition shall be filed with the conditional use permit application. In order for the land referred to in the petition to come within the provisions of this chapter, it is required that the planning commission find all of the following facts with respect thereto:
        i. That the land is of such shape or size, or is affected by such physical conditions, or is subject to such title limitations of record that it is impossible or impractical for the developer to comply with all of the regulations of this division;
        ii. That the exception is necessary for the preservation and enjoyment of a substantial property right by the petitioner;
        iii. That the granting of the exception will not be detrimental to the public welfare or injurious to other property in the vicinity of the subject property.
    c. Each proposed exception shall be referred to the officers or agencies involved, and such officers or departments shall transmit to the Planning Commission their recommendations, which recommendations shall be reviewed prior to the granting of any exceptions.
3. Approval by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed exception, after which it may approve the conditional use permit application with the exceptions and conditions it deems necessary, or it may disapprove such conditional use permit application. Any such approval or disapproval of requested exceptions will be accompanied by written findings of fact and conclusions therefrom. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-1(F))

17.20.080 Design and improvement standards–Variance.
Where in the opinion of the governing body, the literal enforcement of the design and improvement standards in this division would result in an unreasonable utilization of land and water or undue hardship due to unique circumstances, variances may be issued from one or more of the design improvement standards according to the following procedure:
1. Application for a variance shall be made to the governing body and shall include:
    a. A description of the land to be developed;
    b. An identification of the division provision from which the variance is requested;
    c. A description of the peculiar physical conditions pertaining to the land in question and which do not pertain to other lands in the general area;
    d. A description of the hardships which will accrue to the detriment of the property owner if the requested variance is not granted;
    e. A non-refundable variance review fee, payable to the local jurisdiction, in accordance with the currently applicable fee schedule as adopted by resolution of the local governing body.
2. The governing body shall submit the variance application to the Planning Commission for review and comments upon receipt of the application.
3. The Planning Commission shall review the variance application and shall submit its written recommendations for approval or disapproval and such applications to the governing body, along with written reasons therefor within thirty calendar days from receipt of the application from the governing body at a regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission.
4. The governing body shall hold a public hearing before granting the variance. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by at least one publication in a newspaper of general circulation in the local jurisdiction. The hearing shall be held no later than thirty (30) calendar days from receipt by the governing body of the recommendations of the Planning Commission and no less than the fifteen (15) calendar days from the publication of notice.
5. Subsequent to and within fifteen (15) calendar days of the public hearing, the governing body shall approve or deny the request for a variance. A variance shall be granted only if the governing body makes a finding upon the record submitted to it that the issuance of a variance will be in the interest of the public safety, health, or welfare and the proposed development complies with the local master plan and the local zoning ordinance.
6. A record of all correspondence, recommendations, submissions, and official action regarding all variance applications shall be maintained for a reasonable time by the local jurisdiction as a public record. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-1(G))

17.20.090 Inspection–Generally.
Following the issuance of a conditional use permit by the Planning Commission, the zoning administrator shall inspect such use to ensure that development is undertaken and completed in compliance with the conditional use permit. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-1(H))

17.20.100 Construction and improvement standards –Adoption.
Construction standards, including drawings, tables, charts, references, and regulations may be adopted by the governing body, and when having been done, shall constitute standard specifications supplementing this division. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-1(I))

17.20.110 Conflicting provisions.
Where specific requirements are made or exemptions allowed under other subdivisions of this division, those requirements or exemptions shall prevail over the land development standards supplementing this division. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-1(J))

17.20.120 Construction of improvements–Obligation.
Improvements required by this division shall be constructed at the expense of the developer and shall comply with the land development standards supplementing this division. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-1(K))

17.20.130 Commencement of construction.
Site improvements or grading of any proposed development site prior to preliminary design plan approval by the Planning Commission is prohibited. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-1(L))

Chapter 17.22 PERFORMANCE STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USES

Sections:
17.22.010    Requirements–Generally.
17.22.020    Safety for persons and property.
17.22.030    Health and sanitation.
17.22.040    Environmental concerns.
17.22.050    Compliance with master plan and neighborhood characteristics.
17.22.060    Conditions relating to performance.
17.22.070    Public hearing.

17.22.010 Requirements–Generally.
Applicants for conditional use permits shall meet all specific requirements made in this division. In addition, the Planning Commission may establish additional requirements as outlined herein to meet the concerns of safety for persons and property, health and sanitation, environment, master plan proposals and neighborhood needs, performance, and administration. More specifically, the Planning Commission may require as set out in Sections 17.22.020 through 17.22.070. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-2)

17.22.020 Safety for persons and property.
Conditions relating to safety for persons and property shall be as follows:
1. Building elevations and grading plans which will prevent or minimize floodwater damage, where property may be subject to flooding;
2. The relocation, covering or fencing of irrigation ditches, drainage channels, and other potential attractive nuisances existing on or adjacent to the property;
3. Increased setback distances from lot lines where the Planning Commission determines it to be necessary to ensure the public safety and to ensure compatibility with the intended characteristics of the district as outlined in this division;
4. Appropriate design, construction, and location of structures, buildings, and facilities in relation to any earthquake fault which may exist on the property, and limitations and/or restrictions on the use and/or location of uses due to special site conditions, including but not limited to geologically hazardous areas; floodplains, fault zones, landslide areas;
5. Limitations and control of the number, location, color, size, height, lighting, and landscaping of outdoor advertising signs and structures in relation to the creation of traffic hazards and appearance and harmony with adjacent development;
6. Plans for the location, arrangement, and dimensions of truck loading and unloading facilities;
7. Construction of curbs, gutters, drainage culverts, sidewalks, streets, fire hydrants, and street lighting. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-2(A))

17.22.030 Health and sanitation.
Conditions relating to health and sanitation shall be as follows:
1. A guarantee of sufficient water to serve the intended land use, and a water delivery system meeting standards adopted by the local governing body;
2. A wastewater disposal system and a solid waste disposal system meeting standards adopted by the local governing body;
3. Construction of water mains, sewer mains, and drainage facilities serving the proposed use, in sizes necessary to protect existing utility users in the district and to provide for an orderly development of land in the local jurisdiction. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-2(B))

17.22.040 Environmental concerns.
Environmental concerns shall be as follows:
1. Limitations and/or restrictions on the use and/or location of uses in sensitive areas due to soils capabilities, wildlife and plant life;
2. Processes for the control, elimination, or prevention of land, water, or air pollution; the prevention of soil erosion; and the control of objectionable odors;
3. The planting of groundcover or other surfacing to prevent dust and erosion;
4. Restructuring of the land and planting of the same as directed by the Planning Commission when the conditional use involves cutting and/or filling the land and where such land would be adversely affected if not restructured. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-2(C))

17.22.050 Compliance with master plan and neighborhood characteristics.
Conditions relating to compliance with intent of master plan and characteristics of vicinity (or neighborhood) shall be as follows:
1. The removal of structures, debris, or plant materials incompatible with the intended characteristics of the district outlined in this division;
2. The screening of yards or other areas as protection from obnoxious land uses and activities;
3. Landscaping to ensure compatibility with the intended characteristics of the district as outlined in this division;
4. Limitations or controls on the location, height, and materials of walls, fences, hedges, and screen plantings to ensure harmony with adjacent development, or to conceal storage areas, utility installations, or other unsightly development;
5. The relocation of proposed or existing structures as necessary to provide for future streets on the major street plan of the local jurisdiction, adequate sight distances for general safety, groundwater control, or similar problems;
6. Provisions for or construction of recreational facilities necessary to satisfy needs of the conditional use;
7. Population density and intensity of land use limitations where land capability and/or vicinity relationships make it appropriate to do so to protect health, safety, and welfare;
8. Other improvements which serve the property in question and which may compensate in part or in whole for possible adverse impacts to the district from the proposed conditional use. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-2(D))

17.22.060 Conditions relating to performance.
Conditions relating to performance shall be as follows:
1. Time limits on the validity of the conditional use permit. Such time limits shall be determined by the following guidelines:
    a. A conditional use permit for uses which are of a temporary nature only may be issued for the intended duration of the temporary use or for two years, whichever period of time is shorter.
    b. Unless there is substantial action under a conditional use permit within a period of one year of its issuance, such permit shall expire.
2. The Planning Commission may grant a maximum extension for six months, when deemed in the public interest.
    a. A bond or other valuable assurance in favor of the local jurisdiction in an amount to be determined by the governing body. The amount of the bond or other valuable assurance shall not exceed the amount calculated by the developer's engineer and approved by the local engineer as necessary to assure compliance with all conditions.
    b. Specific short and long-range plans of development. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-2(E))

17.22.070 Public hearing.
A public hearing may be held when deemed by the Planning Commission to be in the public interest. However, in the following instances the holding of a public hearing shall be mandatory:
1. The Planning Commission determines that existing streets and thoroughfares are not suitable and adequate to carry anticipated traffic, and increased densities resulting from the proposed use may generate traffic in such amounts as to overload the street network outside the district;
2. The Planning Commission determines that increases in miscellaneous traffic, light, odor, or environmental pollution generated by the proposed use may significantly change the intended characteristics of the district as outlined in this division;
3. The Planning Commission determines that the architectural design of the proposed use varies significantly from the architectural characteristics of the district (as outlined in this division) in which such use is proposed. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-2(F))

Chapter 17.24 GENERAL STANDARDS FOR CONDITIONAL USE DEVELOPMENTS

Sections:
17.24.010    Applicability.
17.24.020    Ownership.
17.24.030    Landscaping, fencing and screening.
17.24.040    Signs and lighting.
17.24.050    Grading and drainage.
17.24.060    Planting.
17.24.070    Health, safety and welfare.
17.24.080    Water and sewer service.
17.24.090    Bonding.
17.24.100    Street dedications.
17.24.110    Environmental considerations.
17.24.120    Design and construction.
17.24.130    Compliance required.
17.24.140    Conformance with district characteristics.
17.24.150    Plan preparation by qualified professionals.
17.24.160    Storm drains.
17.24.170    Building permits.

17.24.010 Applicability.
When applicable, the general standards set out in this chapter shall apply to all conditional use developments within the local jurisdiction, unless waived for good and sufficient reasons by the planning commission. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3)

17.24.020 Ownership.
The development shall be in single or corporate ownership at the time of application, or the subject of an application filed jointly by all owners of the property. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(A))

17.24.030 Landscaping, fencing and screening.
Landscaping, fencing, and screening within the site and as a means of integrating the proposed development into its surroundings shall be planned and presented to the planning commission for approval, together with other required plans for the development. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(B))

17.24.040 Signs and lighting.
The size, location, design and nature of signs, if any, and the intensity and direction of area lighting or floodlighting shall be detailed in the application. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(C))

17.24.050 Grading and drainage.
A grading and drainage plan shall be submitted to the Planning Commission with the application. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(D))

17.24.060 Planting.
A planting plan showing the proposed tree, shrubbery, and lawn plantings shall be prepared for the entire site to be developed, including yards which abut upon public streets. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(E))

17.24.070 Health, safety and welfare.
It shall be shown that under the circumstances of the particular case, the proposed use will not be detrimental to the health, safety, or general welfare of persons residing in the vicinity. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(F); Ord. 2000-11, amended, 2000)

17.24.080 Water and sewer service.
All buildings used for human occupancy when completed shall be served by a central water system and central sewage disposal system which have been approved by the local health officer and which are in compliance with applicable local and state law. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(G))

17.24.090 Bonding.
In order to ensure that the development will be constructed to completion in accordance with approved plans, the Planning Commission may require the developer to post a bond or mortgage or other valuable assurance acceptable to the governing body in an amount equal to the estimated cost, plus ten percent, of constructing all required landscaping, road improvements, street lighting, pedestrian ways, curbs and gutters, hard surfacing, sewer lines, and domestic sewage disposal facilities, as shown on the final site plan. An estimate of cost shall be furnished by the developer which will be checked for accuracy by the Planning Commission staff. Final determination of the amount of the bond or other assurance shall be made by the governing body.
1. The duration of the bond or other assurance shall be for two years from the date of approval of the development by the governing body and an extension of time for completion may be granted by the governing body upon application by the developers, provided such application is submitted at least sixty days prior to the expiration of the bond or other assurance and provided the issuer of the bond is willing to extend the time of the assurance.
2. In the event the developer defaults or fails or neglects to satisfactorily install the required improvements within two years from the date of approval of the development by the governing body or to pay all liens in connection therewith, the governing body may declare the bond or other assurance forfeited and the local jurisdiction may install or cause the required improvements to be installed using the proceeds from the collection of the bond or other issuance to defray the expense thereof.
3. The developer shall be responsible for the quality of all materials and workmanship. At the completion of the work, or not less than ten (10) days prior to the release date of the bond or other assurance, the Planning Commission shall cause a preliminary inspection of the improvements to be made and shall submit a report to the governing body setting forth the conditions of such facilities. If all liens are paid and other conditions thereof are found to be satisfactory, the governing body shall release the bond or other assurance. If the condition of material or workmanship shows unusual depreciation or does not comply with the acceptable standards of durability or if any of the outstanding liens are not paid, the governing body may declare the developer in default. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(H))

17.24.100 Street dedications.
In the event that the land contained within a development is traversed by a proposed major street shown on the master plan, such development shall be designed in accordance therewith and the right-of-way across the development for the major streets shall be dedicated to the public. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(I))

17.24.110 Environmental considerations.
Grouping and spacing of buildings and dwellings in residential areas shall provide for a restful and uncrowded environment. Landscaped areas shall be encouraged as the dominant features of the development. Areas not covered by buildings or by off-street parking space or driveways shall generally be planted into natural vegetation, lawn, trees and shrubs, and otherwise landscaped and maintained in accordance with good landscape practice as approved on the final plan. Permanent sprinkler systems shall be installed when required by the Planning Commission to provide for irrigation of planted areas. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(J))

17.24.120 Design and construction.
Details of plans, plots, and documents to be submitted showing the size of water lines, sewer lines and other domestic sewage disposal facilities, garbage and trash disposal, the quality of material and improvements, protection from adverse influences, lighting, landscaping, off-street parking, grading and other details of design and construction shall conform to standards as set forth in such resolutions pertaining to such standards as may be adopted by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(K))

17.24.130 Compliance required.
The development shall meet all standards and requirements of this division and all requirements of applicable ordinances. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(L))

17.24.140 Conformance with district characteristics.
The development shall be in keeping with the general character of the district within which it is to be located. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(M))

17.24.150 Plan preparation by qualified professionals.
Depending upon the complexity of the project, the Planning Commission may require that plans for the development be prepared by a qualified professional team. In all cases, it is recommended that professional design and other assistance be obtained early in the program. It is the intent of the local jurisdiction that the developer solve his problems before approval is given and construction begins. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(N))

17.24.160 Storm drains.
Storm drainage facilities shall be so constructed as to protect residents of the development as well as adjacent property owners. Such facilities shall be of sufficient capacity to ensure rapid drainage and prevent the accumulation of stagnant pools of water in or adjacent to the development. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(0))

17.24.170 Building permits.
All structures required by this division to have building permits and all uses required to have use permits shall be inspected by the local building official in accordance with procedures established by the currently adopted building code, as adopted by the local jurisdiction and this division; provided, however, that no building permit for such structures or use permits shall be issued until the Planning Commission, or the zoning administrator if authorized by the Planning Commission, has issued a conditional use permit for the building site or use or has determined that a conditional use permit is not required by this division. (Ord. 2008-4, amended, 2008; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-3(P))

Chapter 17.30 LANDFILLS AND LAND EXCAVATIONS

Sections:
17.30.010    Purpose and intent.
17.30.020    Permit required–Exceptions.
17.30.030    Responsibility.
17.30.040    Retention of plans.
17.30.050    Inspections–Generally.
17.30.060    Applicability.
17.30.070    Hours of operation.
17.30.080    Dust and dirt control.
17.30.090    Slopes.
17.30.100    Fill material.
17.30.110    Drainage.
17.30.120    Finished cuts and slopes.
17.30.130    Backfilling.
17.30.140    Compaction of fills.
17.30.150    Erosion control and landscaping.
17.30.160    Filling for agricultural and fire protection purposes.
17.30.170    Final inspection.
17.30.180    Special precautions.
17.30.190    Excavation limitations– Exception.
17.30.200    Fill limitations–Exception.
17.30.210    Prohibited activities.

17.30.010 Purpose and intent.
This chapter is adopted to promote public safety and the general public welfare; to protect property against loss from erosion, earth movement and flooding; to maintain a superior community environment; to ensure the maximum preservation of the natural scenic character of major portions of the local jurisdiction by establishing minimum standards and requirements relating to land grading, excavations, and fills, and procedures by which these standards and requirements may be enforced. It is intended that this chapter be administered with the foregoing purpose in mind and specifically in an attempt to:
1. Ensure that the development of each site occurs in a manner harmonious with adjacent lands so as to minimize problems of drainage, erosion, earth movement and similar hazards;
2. Ensure that public lands and places, water courses, streets, and all other lands in the local jurisdiction are protected for erosion, earth movement or drainage hazards;
3. Ensure that the planning, design and construction of all development will be done in a manner which provides maximum safety and human enjoyment and, except where specifically intended otherwise, makes such construction as unobtrusive in the natural terrain as possible;
4. Ensure, insofar as practicable, the maximum retention of natural vegetation to aid in protection against erosion, earth movement and other hazards and to aid in preservation of the natural scenic qualities of the local jurisdiction. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(A))

17.30.020 Permit required–Exceptions.
No person shall commence or perform any grading or excavation, including those in gravel pits and rock quarries, in excess of the limits specified below without first obtaining a conditional use permit for grading or excavation. In this chapter, all references to “conditional use permit” mean a “conditional use permit for grading or excavation.”
1. A conditional use permit shall be required in all cases where development comes under any one or more of the following provisions unless such work is otherwise exempted elsewhere in this chapter:
    a. Excavation, fill or any combination thereof exceeding one thousand cubic yards;
    b. Fill exceeding five feet in vertical depth at its deepest point measured from the adjacent undisturbed ground surfaces;
    c. An excavation exceeding five feet in vertical depth at its deepest point;
    d. An excavation, fill or combination thereof exceeding an area of one acre;
    e. Vegetation removal from an area in excess of one acre.
2. A conditional use permit shall not be required in the following cases:
    a. Excavations below finished grade for which a building permit is required and has been issued by the local jurisdiction, including but not limited to, the following:
        i. Septic tanks and drain fields;
        ii. Tanks;
        iii. Vaults;
        iv. Tunnels;
        v. Equipment basements;
        vi. Swimming pools;
        vii. Cellars; or
        viii. Footings for buildings or structures;
        ix. Excavation or removal of vegetation within property owned by public utility companies or within public utility easements by public utility companies;
        x. Removal of vegetation as a part of the work authorized by an approved building permit;
        xi. Tilling of soil or cutting of vegetation for agricultural or fire protection purposes;
            xii. Commercial quarries operating with valid conditional use permits and/or in appropriate industrial zones as provided for in this division;
            xiii. Engineered interior fills or surcharge on the property with respect to industrial development;
            xiv. Items not covered by this chapter which are exempted from required permits by this division and the building code of the local jurisdiction;
        xv. Grading and/or excavation done pursuant to an approved final subdivision plan. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(B))

17.30.030 Responsibility.
Failure of local jurisdiction officials to observe or recognize hazardous or unsightly conditions, or to recommend denial of the conditional use permit, or of the planning commission to deny such permit shall not relieve the permittee from responsibility for the condition or damages resulting therefrom, and shall not result in the local jurisdiction, its officers or agents, being responsible for the conditions and damages resulting there from. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(C))

17.30.040 Retention of plans.
Plans, specifications and reports for all excavation conditional use permit applications submitted to the local jurisdiction for approval shall be retained by the local jurisdiction for a minimum period of two years. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6 (D))

17.30.050 Inspections–Generally.
The zoning administrator, with assistance from the local engineer, shall make the inspections hereinafter required and shall either approve that portion of the work completed or shall notify the permittee wherein the same fails to comply with this chapter. Where it is found by inspection that conditions are not substantially as stated or shown in the conditional use permit application, the inspector may stop further work until and unless approval is obtained for a revised grading plan conforming to the existing conditions.
Plans for grading work, bearing the stamp of approval from the Planning Commission, shall be maintained at the site during the progress of the grading. Until the final inspection is made, a card issued by the local jurisdiction indicating permission to grade has been granted shall be prominently displayed near the front property line of the property involved so as to be visible from the street on which the property fronts. In order to obtain inspections, the permittee shall notify the local jurisdiction at least twenty-four (24) hours before such inspection is to be made. Inspections shall be made:
1. Before commencement of grading operations and after required construction stakes have been set; and
2. When all rough grading has been completed; and
3. When all work, including installation of all drainage and other structures and required planting has been completed. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(E))

17.30.060 Applicability.
All grading and excavation shall comply with the requirements set forth in this chapter in addition to other requirements of this division. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(l))

17.30.070 Hours of operation.
All grading and excavation in or contiguous to residential neighborhoods shall be carried on between the hours of seven a.m. to five-thirty p.m. The zoning administrator may waive this requirement if it is shown that restricting the hours of operation would unduly interfere with the development of the property and it is shown that other properties or neighborhood values would not be adversely affected. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(2))

17.30.080 Dust and dirt control.
All graded or disturbed surfaces of excavations, and all equipment materials and roadways on the site shall be dampened or suitably treated, managed, or contained to prevent the deposit of dust on neighboring properties; all materials transported to or from the site shall be so contained during transportation as to prevent spillage on streets or other property outside of the site. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(3))

17.30.090 Slopes.
The zoning administrator may require the percent of slope of a cut or fill to be reduced if it is found that the cut or fill is subject to unusual or excessive erosion, or if other conditions make such requirements necessary for stability. The zoning administrator may permit steeper slopes where the material being cut is unusually stable. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(4))

17.30.100 Fill material.
All fill, except in publicly approved refuse disposal or other landfill operation, shall be earth, rock, or other materials free from organic material and free of metal, except that topsoil spread on cut and fill surfaces may incorporate humus for desirable moisture retention and plant growth properties. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(5))

17.30.110 Drainage.
Adequate provisions shall be made to prevent any surface waters from damaging the cut face of an excavation or any portion of a fill. All drainage ways and structures shall carry surface waters without producing erosion to the nearest practical street, storm drain or natural water course approved by the local engineer as a safe place to deposit and receive such waters. The local engineer may require such drainage structures to be constructed or installed as necessary to prevent erosion damage or to prevent saturation of the fill or material behind cut slopes. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(6))

17.30.120 Finished cuts and slopes.
The exposed or finished cuts or slopes of any fill or excavation shall be smoothly graded. All exposed slopes of any cut or fill shall be protected by approved planting, crib walls or walls and planting, terracing, or combination thereof. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(7))

17.30.130 Backfilling.
Any pipe trench or other trenching or excavation made in any slope of any excavation or filled site shall be backfilled and compacted to the level of the surrounding grade. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(8))

17.30.140 Compaction of fills.
Unless otherwise directed by the zoning administrator, all fills governed by this division intended to support buildings, structures, or where otherwise required to be compacted for stability, shall be compacted, inspected and tested in accordance with the following provisions:
1. The natural ground surface shall be prepared by removal of topsoil and vegetation and, if necessary, shall be graded to a series of terraces.
2. The fill shall be spread in a series of layers, each not exceeding six inches in thickness, and shall be compacted by sheepsfoot roller compactor (after each layer is spread) or other methods approved by the local engineer.
3. The moisture content of the fill material shall be controlled at the time of the spreading and compaction to obtain required maximum density.
4. The fill material after compaction shall have an average dry density of not less than ninety-five percent of maximum dry density and a minimum of ninety percent in all portions of the fill requiring compaction, as determined by the AASHTO Soil Compaction Test Method T99-57 or T180-57, or other testing method approved by the local engineer and zoning administrator.
5. A written report of the compaction, showing location and depth of test holes, materials used, moisture conditions, recommended soil-bearing pressures, and relative density obtained from all tests, prepared by a civil engineer or soils engineer licensed by the state, shall be submitted to the zoning administrator.
6. The zoning administrator may require additional tests or information if, in his opinion, the conditions or materials are such that additional information is necessary, and may modify or delete any of the above-listed requirements that in his opinion are unnecessary to further the purpose of this division. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(9))

17.30.150 Erosion control and landscaping.
All cut and fill surfaces created by grading except for firebreak purposes shall be planted with a groundcover that is compatible with the natural ground covers in the local jurisdiction. Topsoils are to be stockpiled during rough grading and used on cut and fill slopes. When slopes too steep to support continuous groundcover have been permitted and in lieu thereof niches and ledges provided for planting, such slopes need not be planted with a continuous groundcover, but may instead be screened with vines and planting. Cuts and fills along public roads may be required to be landscaped so as to blend into the natural surroundings. All plant materials must be approved by the planning commission and zoning administrator prior to issuance of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(10))

17.30.160 Filling for agricultural and fire protection purposes.
Filling of the ground for agricultural or fire protection purposes shall be accomplished with such practices as will prevent erosion and damage to natural drainage channels. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(113))

17.30.170 Final inspection.
If upon final inspection of any grading it is found that the work authorized by the conditional use permit has been satisfactorily completed in accordance with the requirements of this division and any other requirements imposed, the zoning administrator shall approve such work.
1. The zoning administrator shall have the power to revoke any conditional use permit whenever it is found that the work covered by the certificate has been materially extended or altered without prior approval, or that any planting, retaining walls, cribbing, drainage structures, or other protective devices as shown on the approved plans and specifications submitted with the application for a permit have not been maintained in good order and repair.
2. Before such revocation, the zoning administrator shall first give written notice to the owner of the property involved, specifying the defective condition and stating that unless such defective condition is remedied satisfactorily, the conditional use permit may be revoked. If the defective condition is remedied to the satisfaction of the zoning administrator, the certificate shall not be revoked. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(12))

17.30.180 Special precautions.
Special precautions shall be taken to preserve life, property values, stable soils conditions and aesthetics, including but not limited to the following:
1. Requiring a more level exposed slope, construction of additional drainage facilities, beams, terracing, compaction, or cribbing, installation of plant materials for erosion control, and reports of a registered soils engineer and/or an engineering geologist whose recommendation may be made a requirement for further work. Such requirement by a zoning administrator shall constitute a change order in the work;
2. Where it appears that storm damage may result from work performed hereunder, such work may be stopped and the permittee required to take such measures as may be necessary to protect adjoining property or the public safety. On large operations or where unusual site conditions prevail, the zoning administrator may specify the time at which grading may proceed and the time of the completion or may require that the operation be conducted in specific stages so as to ensure completion of protective measures or devices prior to the advent of seasonal rains. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(13))

17.30.190 Excavation limitations– Exception.
All excavations shall be limited as follows:
1. No cut slope shall exceed a vertical height of one hundred (100) feet unless horizontal benches with a minimum width of thirty (30) feet are installed at each one hundred (100) feet of vertical height.
2. No excavation shall be made with a cut face steeper in slope than two horizontal to one vertical.
Exception: The planning commission, upon appeal, may permit the excavation to be made with a cut face steeper in slope than two horizontal to one vertical if the applicant can reasonably show the zoning administrator that the material making up the slope of the excavation and the underlying bedrock is capable of holding satisfactorily on a steeper gradient. No slopes shall be cut steeper than the bedding planes, fault or joint in any formation where the cut slope will lie on the dip side of the strike line of the fracture, bedding plane, fault or joint. No slopes shall be cut in an existing landslide, mud flow, or other form of naturally unstable slope except as recommended by a qualified geological engineer.
Where the excavation is exposed straight above the top of the cut which will permit the entry of water along bedding planes, this area shall be sealed with a compacted soil blanket having a minimum thickness of two feet. The soil for this blanket shall be relatively impervious and must be approved for such use by the soils engineering geologist. If the material of the slope is of such composition and character as to be unstable under the anticipated maximum moisture content, the slope angle shall be reduced to a stable value.
3. No excavation for construction of new utility and telephone lines shall be made in paved streets within five years after paving. During such five-year period, tunneling under such streets may be authorized or otherwise in compliance with this chapter, where to do so would facilitate construction of new utility and telephone lines. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(14))

17.30.200 Fill limitations–Exception.
All fills shall be limited as follows:
1. No fill slope shall exceed a vertical height of one hundred (100) feet unless horizontal benches with a minimum width of thirty (30) feet are installed at each one hundred (100) feet of vertical height.
2. No fill shall be made which creates an exposed surface steeper in slope than two horizontal to one vertical unless the fill material is of such nature that a one to one slope may be permitted with the permission of the zoning administrator.
Exception: The planning commission in case an appeal is made may permit a fill to be made which creates an exposed surface steeper in slope than two horizontal to one vertical if the applicant can reasonably show the planning commission that the strength characteristics of the material to be used in the fill are such as to produce an equivalent degree of slope stability and sufficient strength characteristics to support the fill within reasonable settlement values so as to produce an equivalent degree of safety. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(15))

17.30.210 Prohibited activities.
1. The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed as permitting the removal of topsoil solely for resale, or of permitting quarrying of any nature within the limits of the local jurisdiction unless in a zoning district allowing such activities.
2. This chapter shall also not be construed as authorizing any person to maintain a private or public nuisance upon his or her property, and compliance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be a defense in any action to abate such a nuisance. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-6(F)(16))

Chapter 17.32 SUBDIVISIONS–SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS

Sections:
17.32.010    Scope.
17.32.020    Intent and purpose.
17.32.030    Exemptions.
17.32.040    Final plat recordation.
17.32.050    Subdivision Approval Procedure.
17.32.060    Exemption from plat requirements.
17.32.070    Amending a recorded subdivision plat.
17.32.080    File of recorded subdivisions.
17.32.090    Design Standards – Generally.
17.32.100    General Standards.
17.32.110    Lots.
17.32.120    Streets.
17.32.130    Street numbers and names.
17.32.140    Subdivision construction standards.
17.32.150    Major street frontage.
17.32.160    Street Grades.
17.32.170    Pathways, sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
17.32.180    Blocks.
17.32.190    Pedestrian crosswalks.
17.32.200    Lot sizes.
17.32.210    Easements.
17.32.220    Utility undergrounding.
17.32.230    Alleys.
17.32.240    Sanitary sewage disposal–Generally.
17.32.250    Sanitary sewer mains, laterals and house connections.
17.32.260    Sanitary sewers–Test procedures.
17.32.270    Water – Subdivider obligation to provide sufficient quantity.
17.32.280    Water–Culinary system–Storage facility.
17.32.290    Irrigation System.
17.32.300    Conditional use permit– Required.
17.32.310    Storm drainage and flood plans.
17.32.320    Flag lots.
17.32.330    Subdivision application expiration.
17.32.340    Phased Subdivisions.
17.32.350    Public Utility Lots.

17.32.010 Scope.
1. No person shall subdivide any tract of land which is located wholly or in part within Lindon City except in compliance with this division, and with the subdivision regulations adopted by the City Council. It shall be unlawful for any person to subdivide any tract of land or to sell, exchange or offer for sale, or purchase or offer to purchase any parcel of land which is any part of a subdivision or a larger tract of land where the transaction would result in the subdivision of land, unless such subdivision has been created pursuant to and in accordance with the provisions of this division, local, and state code regulations; provided, that this division shall not apply to any lot or lots forming a part of a subdivision created and recorded according to then applicable law prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this division, except as provided in subsection 2 of this section. This division shall apply, however, to lots created prior to adoption of the ordinance codified in this division and not in compliance with then applicable law.
2. No lot within a subdivision created and recorded prior to the effective date of the ordinance codified in this division or approved by the Planning Commission and City Council and recorded in the county recorder's office under the provisions of this division shall be further divided, rearranged, added to or reduced in area, nor shall any boundaries of any lot be altered in any manner so as to create more lots than initially recorded, or any nonconforming lot, without first obtaining the approval of the Planning Commission and the City Council. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(A))

17.32.020 Intent and purpose.
The purpose of this chapter and the intent of the local jurisdiction in adoption of the ordinance codified in this division is to promote the health, safety, convenience, and general welfare of the present and future inhabitants of Lindon City. This chapter will accomplish this purpose by:
1. Providing policies, standards, requirements, and procedures to regulate and control the design and improvement of all subdivisions;
2. Assisting in the implementation of the objectives, policies, and programs of the master plan by ensuring that all proposed subdivisions, together with provisions for their design and improvement, are consistent with the master plan and all applicable specific plans;
3. Preserving and protecting, to the maximum extent possible, unique and valuable natural resources and amenities, including topographic and geologic features, beaches and natural watercourses, fish and wildlife habitats, historical and cultural places, and scenic vistas and attractions; and improving the public's access to and enjoyment of such resources and amenities through the dedication or continuance of appropriate public easements thereto;
4. Preserving and protecting the special environmental quality and aesthetic character of all hillside and mountainous areas; preventing detrimental impacts on the soil mantle, vegetative cover, and other environmental factors; reducing the hazards to life and property from fire, flood, erosion, sedimentation and soil slippage; and relating the amount of grading within a subdivision to the slope of the natural terrain;
5. Consider the clustering (consideration of density as opposed to lot size) of housing developments where subdivisions are permitted in hillside and mountainous areas, minimizing grading, preserving the natural terrain, and enlarging the open space;
6. Relating land use intensity and population density to existing developments, street capacity and traffic access, the slope of the natural terrain, the availability and capacity of public facilities and utilities, and open spaces;
7. Providing lots of sufficient size and appropriate design for the purposes for which they are to be used;
8. Providing streets of adequate capacity and design for the traffic that will utilize them, and ensuring maximum safety for pedestrians and users of vehicles;
9. Ensuring adequate access to each building site;
10. Providing sidewalks, pedestrian walkways, and multi-use trails for the safety, convenience, and enjoyment of residents of new developments;
11. Providing adequate systems of water supply, sanitary sewage disposal, storm drainage, street lighting, and other utilities needed for public health, safety, and convenience;
12. Providing adequate sites for public facilities needed to serve residents of new developments;
13. Ensuring that costs of providing land for streets, alleys, pedestrian walkways, easements, and other rights-of-way and for the improvements therein needed to serve new developments are borne by the subdivider(s);
14. Preventing land which is actually or potentially dangerous by reason of flood hazard, inundation, inadequate access, inadequate water supply or fire protection, insufficient sewerage facilities, or hazardous geological conditions from being subdivided for any use or in any manner tending to create an increased detriment to the public health, safety, or welfare;
15. Ensuring that, insofar as possible, land is subdivided in a manner that will promote the public health, safety, convenience, and general welfare and the physical, social and economic development of the area in conformance with the master plan. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(B))

17.32.030 Exemptions.
Any land divided for any purpose into three or more parts after the passage of the ordinance codified in this division shall be subject to the provisions and regulations herein, except the following, which are exempt therefrom:
1. Land divided into parcels, the smallest of which equals or exceeds one-quarter of a standard section, the boundaries of such parcels to coincide with standard boundaries for the division of sections, i.e., one-quarter sectional boundaries;
2. Land divisions which are bona fide divisions or partitions of agricultural land for agricultural purposes, and defined herein. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(C))

17.32.040 Final plat recordation.
The Planning Director, or his/her authorized agent, shall record the final plat with the county clerk and recorder after approval of the final plat by the Development Review Committee or the Lindon City Council, whichever is required. The subdivider shall pay the expense of such recording. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(D))

17.32.050 Subdivision Approval Procedure.
1. A person may not submit a plat of a subdivision to the County Recorder’s Office for filing or recording unless a recommendation has been received from the Planning Commission and the plat has been approved by the City Council or other City Officers as designated by the City Council.
2. Subdivision requests and applications shall follow application requirements as established in Lindon City Code Section 17.12.- Document Submission and Review. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001)

17.32.060 Exemption from plat requirements.
In subdivisions of less than 3 lots, land may be sold by metes and bounds, without the necessity of recording a plat if:
1. A recommendation has been received from the Planning Commission;
2. The deed contains a stamp or other mark indicating that the subdivision has been approved by the City Council or other City Officers as designated by the City Council;
3. The subdivision is not traversed by mapped lines of a proposed street as shown in the Lindon City General Plan and does not required the dedication of any land for street or other public purposes;
4. The subdivision is located in a zoned area, each lot in the subdivision meets the frontage, width, and area requirements of the zoning ordinance or has been granted a variance from those requirements by the Board of Adjustment. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001)

17.32.070 Amending a recorded subdivision plat.
Applications to amend, vacate or change a subdivision plat shall follow procedure as established in Title 10-9-808 of the Utah State Code. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(F))

17.32.080 File of recorded subdivisions.
Lindon City shall maintain a filing system of all subdivisions, which includes copies of all maps, data, and official subdivision action; also master location map (or maps) referenced to the filing system, for public use and examination. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(G))

17.32.090 Design Standards – Generally.
All subdivisions shall comply with the following standards unless a variance from one or more provisions of this section is approved by the City Council in accordance with the variance procedure of this division. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H))

17.32.100 General Standards.
1. The design and development of subdivisions shall preserve insofar as possible the natural terrain, natural drainage, existing topsoil, and trees.
2. Land subject to hazardous conditions such as slides, mud-flows, rock-falls, snow avalanches, possible mine subsidence, shallow water table, open quarries, floods, and polluted or nonpotable water supply shall be identified and shall not be subdivided until the hazards have been eliminated or will be eliminated by the subdivision and construction plans.
3. No lot containing five acres or less shall be created which is more than three times as long as it is wide. The Planning Commission and City Council may approve up to a 20% increase in the depth of a lot if they determine that the proposed development is the best us of the property and in the best interest to the City and surrounding properties. (Ord. 2007-2, amended, 2007; Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(l))

17.32.110 Lots.
1. No single lot shall be divided by a municipal or county boundary line.
2. A lot shall not be divided by a road, alley, or other lot.
3. No wedge-shaped lot shall be less than thirty feet in width at the front property line, or the lot frontage required in the zoning district, whichever is larger.
4. Side lot lines shall be at right angles or radial to street lines, except where justified by the subdivider and approved by the Planning Commission and/or City Council.
5. All residential lots in subdivisions shall front on a public street. Required frontage shall not be considered to be provided if vehicular access across the street line is prohibited. Double frontage lots are prohibited unless approved by the Planning Commission for reasons of topography. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(2))

17.32.120 Streets.
1. The street layout shall conform to the Lindon City general plan and official Lindon City street master plan map adopted by the planning commission and city council.
    a. Upon the finding of a compelling public purpose, the land use authority may approve a subdivision plan with a street layout that varies from the street master plan map; provided, that there is an existing roadway which provides adequate traffic flow and street connectivity to and from the proposed subdivision and maintaining the street master plan map’s current configuration serves the public purpose of identifying the location and alignment of the right-of-way of future arterials and major collectors.
    b. A land use application which does not require a subdivision approval, but which still requires approval of a street design and/or construction as part of the application process under Chapter 17.17, shall likewise have a street layout that conforms to the Lindon City general plan and official Lindon City street master plan map, subject to the provisions of layout that conforms to the Lindon City general plan and official Lindon City street master plan map, subject to the provisions of subsection (1)(a) of this section.
2. Minor streets shall be laid out to discourage through traffic.
3. Stub streets shall be provided where needed to connect to adjacent undeveloped land and new streets must be provided where needed to connect to existing stub streets in adjacent subdivisions.
4. Intersections of minor streets with major streets shall be kept to a minimum.
5. Minimum right-of-way widths for public streets shall be determined by resolution of the city council for various categories of streets, but shall in no case be less than the following:
    a. Use street category minimum right-of-way width (in feet);
    b. Major street, eighty-two feet (82');
    c. Collector street, sixty-six feet (66');
    d. Minor street, fifty feet (50').
6. Public streets shall have roadway widths as approved by the city council, but shall in no case be less than the following and meet the following requirements:
    a. Major street, fifty-six feet (56');
    b. Collector street, forty-four feet (44');
    c. Minor street or frontage road, twenty-eight feet (28').
    d. Minimum roadway widths for private streets shall be determined by use, and shall meet public street standards.
    e. The Lindon City standard street cross sections and utility locations (Drawing 2a - Lindon City Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings Manual) and street and trail cross sections and utility locations (Drawing 2b - Lindon City Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings Manual) may be amended, changed, altered, and/or revised by the Lindon City Council for new development and/or reconstruction of existing improvements when deemed in the best interest of the general public to resolve or assist in resolving present or anticipated future conflicts with storm drainage improvements, trail and/or pathway access, aesthetics of the community, public safety, and/or other reasons when clearly identified by the city council. Before such time as the city council amends, revises, alters, or changes the above mentioned cross sections, they shall receive a recommendation from the development review committee (DRC) and if deemed necessary by the DRC and/or the city council, the planning commission shall also made a recommendation.
    f. No partial width streets are permitted, except if required to complete a partial width street already existing or unless the city council, after review by the planning commission, determines a partial width street is necessary to resolve problems with future road alignments of streets and/or intersections, or future development.
    g. Stub streets shall be permitted or required by the planning commission and city council only to provide future road access to adjoining property where such access would serve as a future second access. The planning commission and city council shall determine if stubbed streets, existing or proposed, have through access to planned future or existing public streets before such streets shall be extended or approved for construction.
7. Permanent cul-de-sac streets serving no more than fourteen (14) lots, and not more than six hundred fifty feet (650') long, whichever is more restrictive, may be permitted and shall be provided with a right-of-way at the turnaround of fifty feet (50') radius or more.
8. No more than four (4) streets shall enter an intersection.
9. Streets shall intersect at ninety (90) degrees, except where otherwise approved as necessary by the planning commission.
10. The centerline of two (2) subordinate streets meeting a through street from opposite sides shall extend as a continuous line, or the centerline shall be offset at least one hundred fifty feet (150').
    a. The city engineer may grant a variance to the above standards upon findings that such a variance will not be contrary to the safety of vehicular or other forms of transportation. For instance, if the centerline offset is less than one hundred fifty feet (150') and will not result in increased conflict zones for left-turning vehicles from the major street onto the subordinate streets, a variance may be granted. Notwithstanding this paragraph, a continuous centerline or offset of one hundred fifty feet (150') are the preferred standards. (Ord. 2019-10 §1, amended, 2019; Ord. 2016-24 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2002-8, amended, 2002; Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 2000-11, amended, 2000; Ord. 99-18, amended, 2000; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(3))

17.32.130 Street numbers and names.
Street numbers shall always be preferred over street names. Streets shall have the numbers and/or names of existing streets which are in alignment. There shall be no duplication of street numbers and/or names within the area. All street numbers and/or names must be approved by the Planning Commission, and opportunity shall be given the local recorder for review and recommendations prior to the approval of street names by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(4))

17.32.140 Subdivision construction standards.
Public improvements associated with any subdivision shall be constructed according to provisions established in the Lindon City Land Development Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings Manual. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001)

17.32.150 Major street frontage.
Where a residential subdivision abuts a major street, frontage roads may be required. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(6))

17.32.160 Street Grades.
All street grades shall be designed as follows:
    1. Major and collector streets shall be limited to a maximum grade of ten percent (10%). Sustained grades (600 feet or more) shall be limited to seven percent (7%).
    2. Minor streets shall be limited to maximum grade of twelve percent (12%). Sustained grades (600 feet or more) shall be limited to nine percent (9%).
    3.  Cul-de-sacs with a negative grade progressing toward the turnaround shall be limited to a maximum grade of six percent (6%). The cul-de-sac shall terminate with a grade not to exceed three percent (3%) for the last one hundred (100) feet of traveled surface. The cul-de-sac shall be limited to a maximum length of six hundred fifty (650) feet and have adequate easement for drainage.
    4. Street intersections shall have a vertical alignment such that the centerline grade shall not exceed three percent (3%) for a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet each way from the centerline of the intersection.
    5. Maximum grades shall be approved only when accompanied by changes to a lesser grade, and where length of that portion of that road at maximum grade is less than six hundred (600) feet.
    6. All changes in vertical alignment shall be made by vertical curves with minimum length of one hundred (100) feet for minor streets and three hundred (300) feet for major streets. Actual vertical curve length shall be a function of design speed.
    7. Streets in mountainous terrain shall be designed at less than maximum allowable grade in order that they can be safely negotiated and that snow can be removed during winter.
The City Council shall have the authority to make minor modifications to street grade requirements when a recommendation has been given by the Development Review Committee and the Planning Commission and one or more of the following conditions apply:
    1. To facilitate the construction of essential and vital public infrastructure;
    2. To facilitate the development of private property when street grade requirements would render the property undevelopable because of topographic conditions, and conditions are present or measures are proposed that would acceptably mitigate the negative effects of the steeper grades.
Street grade modifications shall be limited to single instances. Multiple street grade modification requests to allow the development of large private development projects shall not meet the purpose and intent of this section. Financial hardships associated with private development requests shall not be justification for a street grade modification. (Ord. 2001-9, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(8))

17.32.170 Pathways, sidewalks, curbs and gutters.
Sidewalks, curbs and gutters shall be provided on both sides of all streets to be dedicated to the public, except as provided for in 17.32.120(6)(e) and in industrial subdivisions west of Geneva Road where solely curb and gutter shall be required. Right-of-ways identified as part of the Lindon City Pathways and Trails System shall be improved with sidewalks, pathways, planter strips, multi-use trails, equestrian pathways, and trails as per the Parks, Pathways and Trails Element of the Lindon City General Plan and Chapter 17.74. Pathways and Trails of the Lindon City Code. Sidewalks, curbs and gutters may be required by the City Council on existing streets bordering the subdivision. (Ord. 2001-9, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7 (H)(9))

17.32.180 Blocks.
Block lengths shall be reasonable as approved by the Planning Commission, and in total design shall provide for convenient access and circulation for emergency vehicles. (Ord. 2001-9, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(10))

17.32.190 Pedestrian crosswalks.
Where blocks exceed one thousand (1000) feet in length, pedestrian rights-of-way of not less than ten (10) feet in width may be required by the Planning Commission through blocks where needed for adequate pedestrian circulation. Walk improvements (paving) of not less than five feet in width shall be placed within the rights-of-way, when required by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(11))

17.32.200 Lot sizes.
Where no zoning regulations are in effect, density standards or minimum lot size requirements may be specified by the Planning Commission, based on interpretations made from the Lindon City General Plan, and other available information. All lots shall conform to area requirements of any existing zoning ordinance. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(12))

17.32.210 Easements.
1. Easements shall follow rear and side lot lines whenever practical and shall have a minimum total width of fifteen feet (15"), apportioned equally in abutting properties.
2. Where front-line easements are required, a minimum of seven feet and one-half feet (7½') shall be allocated as a utility easement. Perimeter easements shall be not less than fifteen (15) feet in width, extending throughout the peripheral area of the development, if required by the Planning Commission.
3. All easements shall be designed so as to provide efficient installation of utilities or street planting. Special guying easements at corners may be required if any utilities are to be overhead. Public utility installations shall be so located as to permit multiple installations within the easements. The developer shall establish final utility grades prior to utility installations. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(13))

17.32.220 Utility undergrounding.
Unless the Planning Commission and City Council determine, upon application by the subdivider, supported by recommendations of the City Engineer, that it is not feasible to do so, all power lines, telephone lines, and other normally overhead utility lines shall be placed underground by the subdivider. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(14))

17.32.230 Alleys.
The Planning Commission may approve service access to the interior of blocks where deemed to be in the public interest, in which case such alleys must be indicated in the preliminary design plans and on the final plat. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(15))

17.32.240 Sanitary sewage disposal–Generally.
1. Except as otherwise provided in this section, the subdivider shall provide, or have provided, a piped sanitary sewerage system to the property line of every lot in the subdivision. The sewerage system shall meet the minimum standards and requirements of the local health officer, the State Division of Environmental Health, and this division.
2. Septic tanks and/or sealed vaults will be approved only when an existing sanitary sewer system is more than one-half (½) mile from boundary of the subdivision and shall be disapproved in any case unless approved in writing by the local health officer and the State Division of Health. In order to determine the adequacy of the soil involved to properly absorb sewage effluent and to determine the minimum lot area required for such installations, an interpretive map based on the National Cooperative Soil Survey showing the suitability of the soil for septic tank fields or pits shall be submitted, along with the results of percolation tests. The results of this data will be reviewed by the local health officer and the State Division of Health, in addition to any other information available to them, for recommendation to the Planning Commission. The following requirements shall be met:
    a. Land made, altered, or filled with non-earth materials within the last ten (10) years shall not be divided into building sites which are to be served by soil absorption waste disposal systems.
    b. Each subdivided lot to be served by an on-site soil absorption sewage disposal system shall contain an adequate site for such system. An adequate site requires a minimum depth of eight (8) feet from the surface of the ground to impermeable bedrock, and a minimum depth of six (6) feet from the surface of the ground to the groundwater surface (based on annual high water level). Each site must also be at least one thousand five hundred (1500) feet from any shallow water supply well and one hundred (100) feet from any stream or water course, and at least two hundred (200) feet from any major live stream; and at least ten (10) feet from any dwelling or property line.
    c. Soils having a percolation rate slower than or faster than standards allowed by the local health officer or the State Division of Environmental Health shall not be divided into building sites to be served by soil absorption sewage disposal systems.
    d. Land rated as having severe limitations for septic tank absorption fields as defined by the county soil survey, US Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service shall not be divided into building sites to be serviced by soil absorption sewage disposal systems unless each such building site contains not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet of other soils rated suitable for building construction and installation of an on-site soils absorption sewage disposal system.
3. An applicant desiring to install soil absorption sewage disposal facilities on the soils having severe limitations, as determined in the preliminary plan review, shall: have additional on-site investigations made, including percolation tests; obtain the certification of a soils scientist that specific areas lying within these soils are suitable for the proposed soil absorption sewage disposal system; and meet local health officer and Utah State Division of Health standards and regulations. In addition, the local health officer shall find that the proposed corrective measures have overcome or will overcome the severe soil limitations.
4. Other applicable standards adopted by the City Council and local and state health departments. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(16))

17.32.250 Sanitary sewer mains, laterals and house connections.
Where local, county and regional master plans indicate that construction or extension of sanitary sewers may serve the subdivision area within a reasonable time, the Planning Commission may require the installation and capping of sanitary sewer mains and house connections by the subdivider, in addition to the installation of temporary individual on-lot sanitary sewage disposal systems by the subdivider or lot purchaser. Whenever individual on-lot sanitary sewage disposal systems are proposed, the subdivider shall either install such facilities or require by deed restrictions or otherwise as a condition of the sale of each lot or parcel within such subdivision that on-lot sanitary sewage disposal facilities be installed by the purchaser of said lot at the time the principal building is constructed, and no building permit shall be issued until such installation is assured. In all other cases, sanitary disposal facilities for sewage shall be provided for every lot or parcel by a complete community or public sanitary system. All sewer mains shall be a minimum of eight inches in diameter. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(17))

17.32.260 Sanitary sewers–Test procedures.
Tests of sanitary sewer mains, laterals, and house connections shall be conducted in accordance with US Public Health Service Publication No. 526, 1963 Edition, and with other local and state health requirements. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(18))

17.32.270 Water – Subdivider obligation to provide sufficient quantity.
The procurement of water shall be the responsibility of the subdivider; and water shall be provided for the exclusive use of Lindon City according to LCC Section 17.66. In residential zones one share of North Union Water or its equivalent per net acre shall be submitted 9rounded to the nearest 1/10th share per acre) and in non-residential zone one half (½) share of North Union water or its equivalent per net acre shall be submitted (rounded to the4 nearest 10 th share per acre). Water shares other than North Union shall be accepted as per the Lindon City Fee Schedule and LCC Section 17.66. (Ord. 2007-8, amended, 2007; Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(19))

17.32.280 Water–Culinary system–Storage facility.
The culinary water storage facility shall extend to the property line of every lot and shall be capable of delivering the flows required by the Uniform Fire Code as adopted by Lindon City. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(21))

17.32.290 Irrigation System.
1. Where an existing irrigation system consisting of open ditches is located on or adjacent to or within one hundred (100) feet of a proposed subdivision, complete plans for relocation or covering or other safety precautions shall be submitted with an application for preliminary approval of a plat.
2. All pressure irrigation systems in or within one hundred (100) feet of a proposed subdivision shall be identified and otherwise color-coded as to pipe and valve color to meet state standards and regulations. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(22))

17.32.300 Conditional use permit– Required.
A conditional use permit shall be required for the development of any subdivision. Final plat approval shall constitute such conditional use permit for any subdivision. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(H)(23))

17.32.310 Storm drainage and flood plans.
1. Complete drainage systems for the entire subdivision area shall be designed by a professional engineer, licensed in the state and qualified to perform such work, and shall be shown graphically. All existing drainage features which are to be incorporated in the design shall be so identified. If the final plat is to be presented in sections, a general drainage plan for the entire area shall be presented with the first section, and appropriate development stages for the drainage system for each section indicated.
2. The drainage and flood plan systems shall be designed to:
    a. Permit the unimpeded flow of natural water courses;
    b. Ensure adequate drainage of all low points;
    c. Ensure applications of the following regulations regarding development in designated flood-plains:
        i. Construction of buildings shall not be permitted in a designated flood-way with a return frequency more often than a one-hundred-year storm,
        ii.  Building construction may occur in that portion of the designated flood-way where the return frequency is between a one-hundred-year and a maximum probable storm, provided all usable floor space is constructed above the designated maximum probable flood level,
        iii. Where flood-way velocities are generally determined to be under five feet per second and maximum flood depth will not exceed three feet, such uses as cultivated agriculture, nurseries, parks and recreation facilities and accessory parking may be permitted,
        iv. Any use of land is prohibited where flooding would create a public health hazard or problem. This includes shallow wells, encased deep wells, sanitary landfills, septic tank and on-lot sewage disposal systems, water treatment plants, and also sewage disposal systems not completely protected from inundation,
    d. Any contemplated flood plain encroachment or channeling shall be thoroughly analyzed and its effect on stream flow determined before such encroachment is undertaken. Any construction, dumping, and filling operations in a designated flood-way constitute an encroachment and must be approved by the Planning Commission before accomplishment,
    e. No lot one acre or less in area shall include flood-lands. All lots more than one acre shall contain not less than forty thousand square feet of land which is at an elevation at least two feet above the elevation of the one-hundred-year recurrence interval flood, or, where such data is not available, five feet above the elevation of the maximum flood record;
    f. Consider the drainage basin as a whole and shall accommodate not only runoff from the subdivision area but also, where applicable, the system shall be designed to accommodate the runoff from those areas adjacent to and “upstream” from the subdivision itself, as well as its effects on lands downstream;
    g. All proposed surface drainage structures shall be indicated on the plans;
    h. All appropriate designs, details, and dimensions needed to clearly explain proposed construction materials and elevations shall be included in the drainage plans. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-107-7(I))

17.32.320 Flag lots.
1. Purpose. Flag lots are intended to allow reasonable utilization of property that has sufficient acreage for development, but lacks the required street frontage. Flag lots may be considered on parcels where the extension of public streets cannot or should not be extended due to the disruption of sensitive lands and natural features, or potential of significant impacts to the surrounding neighborhood that would be caused by a public street. Although standard frontage requirements and public roadways are encouraged, the intent of this ordinance is to allow flag lots if the development is the most harmonious to the existing subdivision layout and/or is the least disruptive configuration for the neighborhood. Additionally, flag lots may be considered for properties that have topographic constraints, off lot configuration, constraints caused by the built environment, etc. for which access by a public road is not feasible. It is not the intent of this ordinance to promote flat lots in order to merely ‘maximize’ the number of potential lots within a subdivision or to alleviate subdividing hardships that are self imposed.
2. Flag lots are only permitted when one of the following two circumstances exists:
    a. At the time of application, development using standard public streets is not possible. The property has specific constraints that limit access, public street frontage, and/or construction of a standard public roadway. These abnormal constraints may be restrictive topography, constraints caused by built environment, irregular lot configuration, ownership limitations, environmental constraints such as wetlands, springs, ditches, or canals, etc.
    b. Development using standard public streets is possible, but not in the best interest of the public.
3. In order to demonstrate that this circumstance exists, the applicant shall provide conceptual development plans showing the development with and without the proposed flag lot that demonstrate that each of the following characteristics is present:
    a. The design of the flag lot is harmonious and compatible with the configuration of the overall subdivision and/or neighborhood and will not adversely affect the living environment of the surrounding area.
    b. Standard public street construction would cause disruption to the neighborhood in a significant physical or aesthetic manner, therefore making the flag lot access preferable to a public street.
    c. Development of the flag lot will decrease public infrastructure while still providing in-fill development and efficient use of the land that is compatible with Lindon City development standards.
4. Assuming an application meets the criteria in #2 above, no more than one flag lot shall be permitted at the time of an initial subdivision application unless, at their sole discretion, the Planning Commission and City Council determine that additional flag lots within a development provide for the most compatible overall design within a neighborhood. As stated in the ‘purpose’ of this ordinance, it is not the intent of the City to promote flag lots in order for developers to merely ‘maximize’ the number of potential lots within a subdivision.
5. A flag lot must be a minimum of 20,000 square feet, and the remaining parcel from which the flag was created must meet or exceed the minimum lot area requirements of the zone in which it is located. The square footage calculation of such lots shall not include the area of any driveway access (flag pole) for the flag lot.
6. Frontage, driveway and development procedures apply as follows:
    a. The lot shall have at least twenty-five (25) feet of frontage on a dedicated public street, which frontage serves as access only to the subject lot. The 25 foot width shall be maintained for the full length of the ‘flag pole’ portion of the platted lot.
    b. Prior to recording the subdivision plat, the developer shall post a bond with the City to cover installation of the driveway and utilities to the end of the ‘flag pole’ portion of the lot.
    c. Prior to issuance of a building permit for a dwelling on the flag lot, installation of road base for the driveway and utilities shall be installed to at least the end of the ‘flag pole’ portion of the lot.
    d. The driveway serving the flag lot must have a surface traversable by a fire truck that is at least twenty (20) feet wide, of which 16 feet must be paved with a hard surface prior to the issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for the proposed dwelling. Where a fire hydrant is located along the ‘flag pole’ portion of the lot the width of the lot adjacent to the fire hydrant must be thirty-one (31) feet wide (rather than 25 feet wide), and the surface traversable by a fire truck must be at least 26 feet wide (rather than twenty (20) feet wide).
    e. Prior to issuance of a Certificate of Occupancy for a dwelling on a flag lot, the edges of the driveway area (flag pole) that are not paved shall be landscaped and properly maintained. Such landscaping shall not hinder emergency vehicle access to the property.
    f. An adequate emergency vehicle turn-around at the end of the driveway shall be constructed as approve by the Fire Chief. An accessible fire hydrant shall be located within 200 feet of any dwelling on the flag lot. Possible adverse impacts of excessive driveway lengths shall be considered by the Planning Commission, City Council, and emergency services.
    g. No parking or storage of any kind shall be allowed on the designated driveway.
    h. A flag lot driveway shall not serve more than one lot, and shall have no more than one dwelling unit and an accessory apartment per lot. Other than accessory apartments, R2 Overlay projects are not permitted on flag lots.
    i. Adjoining lots shall not be permitted to have access from a flag lot driveway.
7. Construction of residences and accessory buildings on flag lots shall be limited to a maximum building height of 35 feet from finished grade. Building height restrictions shall be noted on the subdivision plat.
8. In order to further regulate the height of proposed structures, fill at the perimeter of buildings on the flag lot shall be limited to no more than 4 feet above the street grade from which the property has access. Properties that have a pre-existing grade that is higher than 4 feet above the street level are exempted from this fill limitation. The Planning Director and City Engineer may waive or modify the 4 foot ‘fill limitation’ in specific instances where the fill limitation is found to be overly burdensome to the property owner (ex., the limited fill would prohibit utility connections to the dwelling, or the limited fill creates drainage problems that can’t be reasonably mitigated, etc.).
9. The address of the dwelling on the flag lot shall be clearly displayed and visible from the public road and shall be maintained in a way to differentiate the flag lot from any adjacent properties.
10. Setbacks for the residence on the flag lot shall be defined as follows: Front yard setback shall be 30 feet, rear yard setback shall be 30 feet, and side yard setbacks shall be 15 feet on each side yard of the dwelling unit. Minimum setbacks shall be noted on the subdivision plat.
11. For purposes of determining the setbacks of the flag lot, the front property line shall be the nearest line that is most parallel with the street from which the driveway accesses. Orientation of the dwelling is not regulated.
12. Accessory structures for flag lots may be permitted in accordance with applicable section of the Lindon City Code, but shall be limited to 25' maximum height. No accessory buildings shall be permitted on the ‘flag pole’ portion of the driveway of the flag lot.
13. Flag lots shall only be permitted in the R1-12 and R1-20 zones.
14. Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission and City Council, all flag lot driveway access points on a public road must have at least two legal parcels located between any other flag lot driveway on the same side of the street. Flag lots may only be adjacent to each other if the flag lots are accessed from different roadways or at least two legal parcels are located between any other flag lot driveway on the same side of the street.
15. In addition to the minimum requirements above, the Planning Commission and City Council may impose additional conditions on flag lots including, but not limited to, the following;
    a. Fencing and screening requirements.
    b. Installation of one or more fire hydrants or other safety related items.
    c. Installation of curb and/or gutter along private drives.
    d. Other conditions that increase the compatibility of the proposed project with existing conditions and surroundings.
16. Due to the typical nature of flag lots being created from long, deep parcels, flag lots are exempted from any width-to-depth ratio requirements. (Ord. 2015-01, amended, 2015; Ord. 2008-2, amended, 2008; Ord. 2007-10, amended, 2007; Ord. 2006-8, amended, 2006; Ord. 2002-12, amended, 2002; Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001; Ord. 99-14, amended, 2000)

17.32.330 Subdivision application expiration.
Subdivision applications shall not be considered for processing and/or approval after such time as no new submittals are received by Lindon City for a period of six (6) months. Resubmitted subdivision applications related to an expired application shall conform to current zoning and subdivision standards at the time of resubmittal. (Ord. 2001-8, amended, 2001)

17.32.340 Phased Subdivisions.
1. Purpose. The intent of this section is to allow for incremental recordation of final plats and posting of public improvement bonds. By allowing these steps in the subdividing process to be phased, Lindon City can approve a subdivision’s master plan while relieving the applicant of the requirement of coming before the Land Use Authority for each proposed phase. This also reduces application processing time, resulting in cost savings for the city. Additionally, phasing may grant opportunity for traditional up-front costs of subdividing to be spread out over time, thus granting an applicant a greater ability to see a project through to completion.
2. This section provides the steps required for phased subdivisions but is not intended to contain a comprehensive listing of all requirements of the Lindon City Code.
3. If the applicant is proposing phasing a subdivision into two or more sections for purposes of recording final plats, such information must be included as a part of the preliminary plat submission.
    a. A phasing plan describing each phase, anticipated number of lots and associated improvements of each phase, the order of phasing and the projected time for recording and development of each phase shall be submitted.
    b. The entire project, with all phases, shall be represented on the Preliminary Plat and be subject to the application submittal requirements for preliminary subdivision plans as outlined in the Land Development Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings manual.
4. Upon preliminary approval and starting with phase one (1), final improvement and plat drawings for each phase may be submitted independently, according to the original project-phasing plan. Submittals shall be subject to the application submittal requirements for final plat and final improvement drawings as outlined in the Land Development Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings manual.
    a. Phase one (1) final plat and final improvement drawings must be submitted within one (1) year of preliminary approval.
    b. Subsequent phases must submit final plat and final improvement drawings within one (1) year of recording the previous phase plat.
    c. The Design Review Committee (DRC) shall have final approval authority in determining which infrastructure improvements are required in each phase.
    d. Failure to reach submittal deadlines as outlined in a. and b. above shall result in the expiration of the preliminary plan approval and a new application shall be required.
5. Bonding requirements as found in LCC 17.38 shall apply to phased subdivisions. However, bonding for public improvements may be posted with Lindon City phase by phase with specific details regarding the improvements requiring bonding to be finalized by the Design Review Committee.
6. Additional fees according to the Lindon City Fee Schedule may be required for bond reviews, final plat reviews, and final improvement drawing reviews associated with phased subdivisions. (Ord. 2013-1, adopted, 2013)

17.32.350 Public Utility Lots.
1. Public Utility Lot is defined as a lot or parcel used for public utility facilities, including but not limited to Lindon City facilities, and may contain facilities or uses such as natural gas pressure regulating stations, power substations, communications antennae, power or telecommunication pedestals, water wells, water reservoirs/tanks, storm drainage facilities, pump stations, trails or pedestrian ways and related support facilities, and other similar uses. Public Utility Lots shall not be considered buildable lots for the purpose of constructing habitable buildings or structures intended for occupancy. Construction of non-habitable structures for the purpose of housing utility equipment or other similar uses is permitted.
2. Public Utility Lots shall be exempt from the following:
    a. Minimum lot size requirements.
    b. Minimum lot frontage requirements provided easement documents are recorded ensuring perpetual access to the lot.
3. Notwithstanding section 2 above, all other standards of the underlying zone may be imposed, subject to review and consideration by the Planning Commission of whether or not the standard or condition is necessary in order to protect the public health, safety, welfare, and aesthetics of the area, or is otherwise in the public interest.
4. Regulation of uses shall apply as listed in the Standard Land Use Table (LCC, Appendix A). This chapter is not intended to allow uses otherwise identified in the Standard Land Use Table as not being permitted within a specific zone.
5. Site plans for installation of public utility facilities are subject to Planning Commission approval as a Conditional Use. (Ord. 2013-11, adopted, 2013)

Chapter 17.33 AMENDING A RECORDED PLAT

Sections:
17.33.010    Purpose.
17.33.020    When these regulations apply.
17.33.030    Application requirements.
17.33.040    Review process and requirements for approval.
17.33.050    Adjustment of boundaries between adjacent lots (Lot Line Adjustment).
17.33.060    Recording a plat amendment.

17.33.010 Purpose.
A plat amendment is a change or alteration to a recorded plat that does not create any new parcels or lots, not including the adjustment of boundaries between adjacent lots. (The change may be the relocation of multiple property lines, the elimination of a property line within the plat, a change in notations or lot numbers on the plat, a change of the title or name of the plat, etc.) A plat amendment is an alternative to having to go through a subdivision application process in order to amend a recorded plat when no new parcels or lots will be created. These regulations will ensure that:
1. A plat amendment does not result in properties that violate the requirements of this Title or other currently adopted zoning and development standards of Lindon City; and
2. A plat amendment does not alter the coverage or availability of existing utility services to existing lots or parcels.

17.33.020 When these regulations apply.
A plat amendment is required to change or alter an existing subdivision plat when said changes or alterations do not create additional lots or parcels, excluding adjustment of boundaries between adjacent lots. Changes or alterations that create additional lots or parcels and/or initiate installation of new public improvements (other than utility relocations) constitute a subdivision, not a plat amendment, and are subject to the subdivision approval process.

17.33.030 Application requirements.
Application submittal requirements shall be followed as listed in the Land Development Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings manual (Development Manual). The submittal requirements for subdivisions shall apply unless specific requirements for Plat Amendments are shown.

17.33.040 Review process and requirements for approval.
Plat Amendments are reviewed by Staff, the City Engineer, and the Land Use Authority in the same manner and process as a subdivision plat per LCC 17.32, and as outlined in the Development Manual. A request for a plat amendment shall be denied by the Land Use Authority if it is determined that the application fails to meet requirements found within Lindon City Code. In addition to any requirements required as part of a typical subdivision plat review, the following items shall be met:
1. Properties.
    a. For purposes of this subsection, the plat amendment will not cause any involved properties to move out of conformance with any of the regulations of this Title (become non-conforming), except as follows:
        i. If a property or lot is already out of conformance with a regulation in this Title, the plat amendment will not cause the property or lot to move further out of conformance with the regulation(s);
    b. The plat amendment will not result in the creation of a flag lot;
    c. No new building lot or additional housing units will result from the amendment;
    d. The plat amendment does not result in remnant land that did not previously exist;
    e. The plat amendment will not result in a property that is in more than one zone (split zoning), unless that property was already in more than one zone;
2. Utility Services and Lot Improvements.
    a. The availability of utility services to the properties or lots must be maintained with no new utility services being installed other than utility relocations (i.e., realignment of property lines that require relocation of utility stubs).
    b. Water shares must be submitted per LCC Section 17.32.270 for any acreage or lots within the plat for which water shares have not already been turned into the City;
    c. A plat amendment that results in new street frontage being added to an existing lot or parcel is acceptable as long as the new street frontage will not result in the creation of any new lots or parcels and the new street frontage already has all typically required public improvements installed (curb, gutter, sidewalk, utilities, etc.). If any new public improvements are necessary along unimproved street frontages (not just relocation of existing utilities) and are to be included within the amended plat, then the request needs to go through a subdivision application – not a plat amendment.

17.33.050 Adjustment of boundaries between adjacent lots (Lot Line Adjustment).
1. The owners of record of adjacent lots in a recorded plat may exchange title to portions of those lots through a Lot Line Adjustment (LLA) if the exchange of title is approved by the Land Use Authority as provided in this subsection.
    a. Applicants requesting an LLA shall not be required to follow the submittal requirements listed in the Land Development Policies, Standard Specifications, and Drawings Manual (Development Manual), but shall submit such documents and information requested by Staff to determine the effects of the adjustment and the resulting lots.
2. A request for an LLA shall be reviewed by Staff. The City Engineer and the Lindon City Planning Director shall constitute the Land Use Authority for approving such requests.
    a. The Land Use Authority may approve a request for an LLA if the resulting lots meet the requirements of this Title.
    b. The Land Use Authority shall deny a request for an LLA if it is determined that the application fails to meet Lindon City Code requirements.
    c. If the Planning Director and the City Engineer, in their sole discretion, determine that an LLA request presents a difficult question or would create a unique or unanticipated result, they may refer the request to the Planning Commission for final decision.
        i. Upon referral of an LLA request, the Planning Commission shall become the Land Use Authority.
    d. If the Land Use Authority denies an LLA request, the applicant may file an appeal pursuant to LCC 17.09.
        i. The Planning Commission shall be the Appeal Authority on Lot Line Adjustment requests.
        A. If the original request was referred by Staff to the Planning Commission the City Council shall act as the Appeal Authority on appeal.
3. Upon approval of an LLA request, Planning Director shall execute a Notice of Approval to be recorded with the Utah County Recorder’s Office.
    a. The Notice of Approval shall contain the following:
        i. the signatures of all property owners involved;
        ii. an acknowledgment for each party executing the notice in accordance with the provisions of U.C.A. Title 57, Chapter 2a; and
        iii. descriptions of both the original lots and the lots created by the exchange of title.
    b. It shall be the applicant’s responsibility to provide the legal description required in the Notice of Approval and to secure the signatures of all the property owners.

17.33.060 Recording a plat amendment.
The approval and recording process for plat amendments will be the same as an approval for a subdivision plat as found within LCC 17.32 and the Development Manual. (Ord. 2015-8, amended, 2015)

Chapter 17.34 PARCEL BOUNDARY ADJUSTMENT

Sections:
17.34.010    Purpose.
17.34.020    When these regulations apply.
17.34.030    Review of Resulting Parcels.
17.34.050    Illegal Parcels.

17.34.010 Purpose.
1. Parcel Boundary Adjustment (PBA) is the relocation or elimination of a common property line between two or more abutting properties that are not part of a platted subdivision lot. A PBA may not create any new parcels or lots. Pursuant to Utah Code Section 10-9a-523, a PBA may be executed by a boundary line agreement or quit claim deed and these transactions are not subject Land Use Authority review. The resulting parcels, however, are still subject to compliance with the requirements of this Title or other adopted Lindon City zoning and development standards. The regulations of this Chapter are designed to ensure that:
    a. the developed parcels modified or altered by a PBA continue to comply with City requirements for parcel size and acreage, street frontage, water shares regulations, and parcel improvements; and
    b. a PBA does not alter the coverage or availability of existing utility services to existing lots or parcels.

17.34.020 When these regulations apply.
A PBA does not require Land Use Authority approval, but a parcel that may be modified or altered by a PBA must comply with the provisions of this Title. Lindon City may require a property owner to bring parcels into compliance with this Title and Chapter through a zoning enforcement action, including denial of permits or licenses, the issuance of stop work orders, or red tagging the lot. Amendments to property lines that are part of a platted subdivision lot may not be completed through a PBA, but instead shall follow the requirements set forth in LCC 17.33.

17.34.030 Review of Resulting Parcels.
Upon learning that a lot has been modified or altered by a PBA and fails to comply with requirements for parcel size and acreage, street frontage, water shares regulations, and parcel improvements as set forth in this Title, the City may require the property owner to bring the parcel into compliance with this Title and other zoning and development standards that shall include, but not be limited to, the following:
1. Separate Utility Services. The availability of separate utility services to all properties or lots must be maintained. If the availability of separate utility services are not maintained to all parcels, the property owner whose property lacks access to separate utility services shall be responsible for establishing such availability. Lindon City may deny licenses and permits or otherwise prohibit the use of the property or red tag a parcel until separate utility services are provided to the parcel.
2. Water Shares. Water shares must be submitted per LCC Section 17.32.270 for any acreage of the properties for which water shares have not already been turned into the City. Lindon City may deny licenses and permits or otherwise prohibit the use of the property or red tag a parcel until the required water shares are provided as required.
3. Street Improvements. No new lot or public improvements (curb, gutter, sidewalk, etc.) are required if a PBA creates additional street frontage that is added to an existing parcel or lot unless the frontage of the existing lot contains improvements, in which case the improvements shall be extended from the existing point where the improvements end and shall be continued across any unimproved street frontage within the lot. Improvement plans and an improvement bond will be required prior to approval. Payment of any additional fees for engineering reviews of improvement plans and/or bonds will be the responsibility of the applicant. Lindon City may deny licenses and permits or otherwise prohibit the use of the property or red tag the parcel until such improvements are made.

17.34.050 Illegal Parcels.
Any lot or parcel modified or altered by a PBA so as to violate any provisions of this Title, or any other Lindon City zoning or development standards, shall become an illegal lot or parcel and any use thereon shall become an illegal, non-conforming use. Such illegal parcels or uses created by Parcel Boundary Adjustments are not grandfathered parcels or uses as provided in LCC Chapter 17.16 because the modifications or alterations resulting in the illegal or nonconforming status of the parcels are the result of actions of private property owners and not governmental acts of Lindon City. (Ord. 2015-8, amended, 2015)

Chapter 17.38 BONDS FOR COMPLETION OF IMPROVEMENTS TO REAL PROPERTY

Sections:
17.38.010    Improvement Completion Assurances and Improvement Warranties Generally.
17.38.015    Definitions.
17.38.020    Improvement Completion Assurance for Public Improvements.
17.38.030    Improvement Completion Assurance for Private Improvements.
17.38.040    Required Forms.

17.38.010 Improvement Completion Assurances and Improvement Warranties Generally.
All required landscaping or infrastructure improvements shall be completed prior to any plat recordation or development activity unless the applicant requests to post an Improvement Completion Assurance under the terms of this chapter. In all cases shall the Improvement Warranty be posted prior to any plat recordation or development activity. If desiring to record a plat (in the case of subdivision improvements being incomplete) or obtain a certificate of occupancy (in the case of land developments in which a certificate of occupancy is requested before all required improvements are completed) any person or entity subdividing, improving, building upon or otherwise developing real property (hereinafter “developer”) shall post for the benefit of Lindon City an Improvement Completion Assurance and Improvement Warranty in such amount and of adequate security, as set forth hereinafter, ensuring the timely and proper completion of all improvements required by the Lindon City Code, the Lindon City Development Review Committee (“DRC”), and all applicable building codes, standards, and specifications. (Ord. 2015-9, amended, 2015; Ord. 2000-2, amended, 2000)

17.38.015 Definitions.
“Improvement Completion Assurance” means an irrevocable letter of credit, escrow bond, cash bond, or combination bond posted by a developer to guarantee the proper completion of required improvements.
“Improvement Warranty” means a an irrevocable letter of credit, escrow bond, cash bond, or combination bond posted by a developer to unconditionally warrant that accepted improvements comply with the approved plans and the municipality’s written standards for design, materials, and workmanship, and are and will remain free of defects (or will be repaired or replaced at no cost to the City) within the improvement warranty period.
“Public Improvements” (for the purpose of this ordinance) means:
    a. Utility installations, including piping of culinary and irrigation water, sanitary sewer, storm drainage, and other required utilities as established by Lindon City;
    b. Utility improvements required for service by the following utilities, but not provided by the utility company: power, telephone, natural gas, cable television, and telecommunications.
    c. Roads, grading, curb, gutter, sidewalks, trails, street lights, erosion control, and related items;
    d. Any other improvement that may or may not appertain to an individual lot being developed but which benefits the property or that the DRC reasonably deems necessary to the development of the property; required by or promised to the City; required by ordinance or statute; shown on plans approved by the City; or required by the City Engineer, the DRC or the Legislative Authority as part of the land development process.
“Private Improvements” means:
    a. Parking, storm drain, landscaping, fencing.
    b. Any other improvement on the property that was promised to the City, required by City ordinances, shown on plans approved by the City, or that was required by the DRC, City Engineer, Building Official or Legislative Authority as part of the land development or building approval process.

17.38.020 Improvement Completion Assurance for Public Improvements.
1. When required infrastructure improvements are not complete and the applicant requests recordation of a subdivision plat, approval of a building permit or conditional use permit, any developer making “Public Improvements,” as defined above, to real property shall post an Improvement Completion Assurance for the proper and timely installation and completion of all such Public Improvements. The Improvement Completion Assurance shall be executed by agreement between the City and the developer, with the City Administrator, or other designated City representative, having authority to enter into said agreement.
2. The Improvement Completion Assurance shall guarantee that all required improvements will:
    a. Be constructed in accordance with the City's construction standards and specifications; as represented in the construction drawing approved by the City Engineer; as promised to the City; and as required by the City Engineer, the DRC or the Legislative Authority.
    b. Be completed and pass city inspection within one (1) year of the date that the final plat is recorded or building permit is issued, except that required improvements for plats recorded or building permits issued between October 1 and March 31 must be completed by the next October 1. For example, the required improvements for a plat recorded on February 6, 2015 must be completed by October 1, 2015. The purpose of this requirement is to give the City an opportunity to collect on the bond and complete required asphalt improvements before the asphalt batch plants close for the winter and before the weather prohibits the completion of the improvements. The City may retain and use the Improvement Completion Assurance for work not timely completed. The developer may request extensions from the DRC and such extensions shall be granted for good cause shown.
3. The Improvement Completion Assurance guaranteeing the timely and proper installation of required improvements shall be equal in value to at least one hundred percent (100%) of what it would cost the City to have the required improvements constructed, as estimated by the City Engineer. This estimated cost is intended to include all costs associated with the City having the required improvements constructed, including costs such as engineering costs, inspection costs, administrative costs, and collection costs, including court costs and attorney’s fees. The purpose of the bond is to enable the City to make or complete the required improvements in a timely manner in the event of the developer's inability or failure to do so. The City need not complete the required improvements before collecting on the bond. The City may, in its sole discretion, delay taking action on the bond and allow the developer to complete the improvements if it receives adequate assurances that the improvements will be completed in a timely and proper manner. The City shall not release more than 90% of the Improvement Completion Assurance until the following have been completed:
    a. A certificate of final acceptance of required improvements has been issued by the Lindon City Public Works Department.
    b. The Developer has submitted record drawings to the City.
    c. The Developer has posted the Improvement Warranty for the amount required in 17.38.020(5).
4. The Improvement Completion Assurance may be posted before beginning construction or during construction. If it is posted during construction, the costs established by the City Engineer for those improvements already constructed and accepted by the City may be deducted from the required bond amount.
5. The Improvement Warranty is required and:
    a. Shall guarantee that all required improvements will remain free from defects for a period of one (1) year following the date that a certificate of final acceptance of required improvements has been issued by the Lindon City Public Works Department. The developer shall repair or replace any improvements which are or become defective during this time period. Subdivision public improvements shall remain free from defects for a period of one (1) year following the date that all improvements pass City inspection.
        i. The DRC may require a warranty period beyond one (1) year in order to protect the public health, safety, and welfare if there is substantial evidence:
            a. of prior poor performance by the developer; or
            b. that the area upon which the infrastructure will be constructed contains suspect soil and the City has not otherwise required the developer to mitigate the suspect soil.
    b. Shall be in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the lesser of the:
        i. City Engineer’s original estimated cost of completion of required improvements; or
        ii. developer’s reasonable, proven cost of completion of required improvements.
    c. Shall be executed by agreement between the City and the developer, with the City Administrator, or other designated City representative, authorized to enter into said agreement.
    d. Must be posted before the City will record the subdivision plat (in the case of improvements associated with a subdivision) or before the City will issue a Certificate of Occupancy (in the case of improvements not associated with a subdivision).
6. Further, the Improvement Warranty will guarantee that all repairs to, or replacements of, the required improvements will be made to the satisfaction of the DRC, the Public Works Department, and the City Engineer. The Public Works Director or his authorized designee may require the developer to guarantee and warrant that any repairs will remain free of defects for a period of six (6) months following the date that the repairs pass City inspection, or until April 15th of the following year, whichever time period is longer. The City may retain the Improvement Warranty until the repairs have lasted through the warranty period, and may take action against the bond if necessary to properly complete the repairs. The Improvement Warranty shall not be released until the Public Works Director or his authorized designee has certified in writing that the promised performance is completed and the warranty period has expired.
7. The Improvement Completion Assurance and Improvement Warranty shall be an irrevocable letter of credit, escrow bond, cash bond or combination bond in favor of the City. The requirements relating to each of these types of bonds are detailed in the approved bond form as maintained by the Development Review Committee. The City must approve any bond submitted pursuant to this section. The City reserves the right to reject any of the bond types if it has a rational basis for doing so. Letters of credit shall be from a federally insured bank or financial institution and shall be submitted on one of the forms set forth in this section or as approved by the DRC. Escrow bonds shall be held by a federally insured bank, credit union, or similar financial institution or a title insurance underwriter authorized to do business in the State of Utah.
8. The City shall have the sole right to enforce the Improvement Completion Assurance and Improvement Warranty. Private parties shall not be third-party beneficiaries of the Improvement Completion Assurance or Improvement Warranty.
9. Whenever a temporary turn-around is approved as part of a subdivision and in anticipation of a future through road being constructed, the applicant constructing the temporary turn-around shall post a cash payment to the City equal in amount, as estimated by the City Engineer, to the cost of removing the temporary turn-around and construction of the required street improvements along the street frontage where the temporary turn-around will have previously existed. This cash payment will be applied to construction costs at the time the through road is constructed. (Ord. 2015-9, amended, 2015; Ord. 2000-2, amended, 2000)

17.38.030 Improvement Completion Assurance for Private Improvements.
1. Any developer making private improvements to real property that are not completed at the time of application for an occupancy permit shall post an Improvement Completion Assurance for the proper and timely installation of all such Private Improvements. The Improvement Completion Assurance shall be executed by agreement between the City and the developer, with the City Administrator, or other designated City representative, having authority to enter into said agreement.
2. The Improvement Completion Assurance shall guarantee that all required improvements will:
    a. Be constructed in accordance with the City's construction standards and specifications and the plans approved by the City Engineer and Building Official, as promised to the City, and as required by the DRC, City Engineer, Building Official and Legislative Authority.
    b. Be completed and pass City inspection within one (1) year of the date that the occupancy permit is issued. Improvements required between November 1 and March 31 must be completed by the next October 1. For example, the required improvements for an occupancy permit issued on February 6, 2015 must be completed by October 1, 2015. The purpose of this requirement is to give the City an opportunity to collect on the bond and complete any required asphalt improvements before the asphalt batch plants close for the winter and before the weather prohibits the completion of the improvements. The City may retain and use the Improvement Completion Assurance for work not timely completed. The developer may request extensions from the DRC and such extensions shall be granted for good cause shown.
3. The Developer retains full responsibility for failure or defects of Private Improvements. Any failure in materials or workmanship of a Private Improvement after the item passes inspection is not the responsibility of the City. The City’s review and concern for Private Improvements is that they pass inspection if specific code requirements apply to the item, and/or the improvements meet substantial conformance with an approved plan at the time of inspection.
4. The Improvement Completion Assurance guaranteeing the timely and proper installation of required improvements shall be equal in value to at least one hundred percent (100%) of the cost of what it would cost the City to have the required improvements constructed, as estimated by the City Engineer. This estimated cost is intended to include all costs associated with the City having the required improvements constructed, including costs such as engineering costs, inspection costs, administrative costs, and collection costs, including court costs and attorney’s fees. The purpose of the bond is to enable the City to make or complete the required improvements in a timely manner in the event of the developer's inability or failure to do so. The City need not complete the required improvements before collecting from or foreclosing on the bond. The City may, in its sole discretion, delay taking action on the bond and allow the developer to complete the improvements if it received adequate assurances that the improvements will be completed in a timely and proper manner.
5. The bond shall be an irrevocable letter of credit, escrow bond, cash bond or combination bond in favor of the City. The requirements relating to each of these types of bonds are detailed in the approved bond form as maintained by the Development Review Committee. The City must approve any bond submitted pursuant to this section. The City reserves the right to reject any of the bond types if it has a rational basis for doing so. Letters of credit shall be from a federally insured bank or financial institution and shall be submitted on one (1) of the forms set forth in this section or as approved by the DRC. Escrow bonds shall be held by a federally insured bank, credit union, or similar financial institution or a title insurance underwriter authorized to do business in the State of Utah.
6. The City shall have the sole right to enforce the Improvement Completion Assurance. Private parties shall not be third-party beneficiaries of the Improvement Completion Assurance. (Ord. 2015-9, amended, 2015; Ord. 2000-2, adopted, 2000)

17.38.040 Required Forms.
1. Any person posting an Improvement Completion Assurance or Improvement Warranty shall use the original stamped forms listed below and maintained by the DRC.
    a. DRC Form No.1 — Improvement Completion and Warranty Agreement Form.
    b. DRC Form No. 2 — Irrevocable Letter of Credit Form.
2. The DRC shall have power to create, maintain, and amend such forms as necessary to fulfill the purposes of this ordinance. (Ord. 2015-9, amended, 2015; Ord. 2000-2, adopted, 2000)

Chapter 17.40 ZONING DISTRICT ESTABLISHMENT

Sections:
17.40.010    Establishment.
17.40.020    Filing of land use code and map.
17.40.030    Rules for locating boundaries.
17.40.040    Authorized uses within districts are plenary.
17.40.050    Additional requirements in each district.
17.40.060    Zoning at time of annexation.

17.40.010 Establishment.
For the purposes of this division the territory of Lindon City to which this division applies is divided into one or more of the following listed zoning districts as shown on the officially adopted Lindon City Zoning map:
1. Residential district, R1-20;
2. Residential district, R1-12;
3. R2 Overlay;
4. General Commercial district, C-G;
5. Mixed Commercial, MC;
6. Planned Commercial, PC-1;
7. Research and Business, R&B;
8. Heavy Industrial, HI;
9. Light Industrial, LI;
10. Transportation Influence Zone, T;
11. Recreation Mixed Use (East and West), RNU-E, RMU-W;
12. Public Facilities, PF;
13. Sensitive Lands District (overlay), SA;
14. Hillside Protection District (overlay), HP. (Ord. 2002-9, amended, 2002; Ord. 7-92 §1(part) 1992, amended, 1992; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-109-1)

17.40.020 Filing of land use code and map.
This division and map or maps shall be filed in the custody of the clerk of the local jurisdiction and may be examined by the public subject to the reasonable regulations established by the clerk. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-109-2)

17.40.030 Rules for locating boundaries.
Where uncertainty exists as to the boundary of any district, the following rules shall apply:
1. Wherever the district boundary is indicated as being approximately upon the centerline of a street, alley, or block, or along a property line, then, unless otherwise definitely indicated on the map, the centerline of such street, alley, or block, or such property line shall be construed to be the boundary of such district.
2. Whenever such boundary line of such district is indicated as being approximately at the line of any river, irrigation canal or other waterway, or railroad right-of-way, or public park or other public land, or any section line, then in such case the center of such river or stream, canal or waterway, or of such railroad right-of-way, or boundary line of such public land or such section line shall be deemed to be the boundary of such district.
3. Where such district boundary lines cannot be determined by the above rules, their location may be found by the use of the scale appearing upon the map.
4. Where the application of the above rules does not clarify the district boundary location, the Planning Commission shall interpret the map. (Ord. 2002-9, amended, 2002; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-109-3)

17.40.040 Authorized uses within districts are plenary.
The uses of land allowed in each district shall be plenary and uses of land not specifically allowed as set forth in Appendix A - Standard Land Use Table shall be prohibited in the respective district. (Ord. 2002-9, amended, 2002; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-109-4)

17.40.050 Additional requirements in each district.
In addition to the requirements imposed within each district, the requirements of Chapters 17 may also be applicable in each of the other districts, and applicability of these chapters shall be evidenced by the zoning map and/or pertinent sections of this division. (Ord. 2002-9, amended, 2002; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-109-5)

17.40.060 Zoning at time of annexation.
If the local jurisdiction is a municipality to which land is to be annexed, the Planning Commission and governing body of the municipality shall proceed with rezoning procedures as required for land within the municipality and shall declare the land upon annexation to be zoned to the zoning district or districts determined appropriate by such procedures and by declaration of the governing body of the municipality. (Ord. 2002-9, amended, 2002; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-109-6)

Chapter 17.41 ANDERSON FARMS PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ZONE (PD ZONE)

Sections:
17.41.010    PURPOSE AND INTENT.
17.41.020    LIMITATION ON LOCATION OF THE PD ZONE.
17.41.030    CREATION OF THE PD ZONE AND DESIGNATION OF PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ON ZONING MAPS.
17.41.040    DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
17.41.050    APPLICATIONS.
17.41.060    CONCEPT PLAN.
17.41.070    DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
17.41.080    PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES.
17.41.090    DENSITY.
17.41.100    ACREAGE REQUIREMENT.
17.41.110    SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
17.41.120    BUFFERING BETWEEN RESIDENTIAL AND NON-RESIDENTIAL USES.
17.41.130    AMENDMENTS OR MODIFICATIONS OF PD ZONE.
17.41.140    EXPIRATION OF PD ZONE (SUNSET PROVISIONS).
17.41.150    R-2 OVERLAYS EXCLUDED.
17.41.160    DISCRETION OF CITY COUNCIL.

17.41.010 PURPOSE AND INTENT.
The purpose of the Anderson Farms Planned Development Zone (PD Zone) is to encourage efficient use of land and resources and to provide flexibility in the City's zoning scheme in order to allow for unique, innovative, and well planned developments not otherwise provided for under one of the City's other existing zoning classifications. The PD Zone is not intended for use in situations where a proposed development is reasonably feasible under one of the City's other zoning classifications or in situations where the primary purpose is to obtain a relaxation of standards applicable to similar types of development in other zones. It is the sole responsibility and burden of the applicant to convince the Planning Commission and City Council that the proposed PD Zone is preferable to traditional zoning.
The provisions contained herein are intended to accomplish the following purposes and goals:
1. To encourage and promote more detailed and specific planning and analysis for certain areas of the City.
2. To encourage the inclusion of special development amenities that are in the interest of the general public.
3. To develop a sense of community within a development and to ensure compatibility with surrounding areas while providing opportunity to create reasonable buffers and transitions between different zones.
4. To establish provisions and regulation which enable the City to address unique areas of the City or where other characteristics exist that warrant a comprehensive set of land use policies and standards which will encourage efficient and imaginative development.
5. To provide flexibility in zoning and allow for development using mixtures of density and uses to achieve a higher quality development while ensuring performance standards are implemented within the zone. Examples of this type of situation may include the following:
    a. Where the setbacks, building height limits or other standards of an existing zone are not necessary for the protection of neighboring properties or the general welfare of the City because of the proximity of a parcel of property to a particular landscape feature such the Freeway; and
    b. Where additional setbacks, or other adjustments to buffers and boundaries between zones may be appropriate to protect neighboring properties from uses to be employed on a parcel of property.

17.41.020 LIMITATION ON LOCATION OF THE PD ZONE.
The PD Zone shall only be available in those portions of Lindon City as identified by the map below. The Lindon City Zoning Map shall show the actual boundaries of the zone at any given time.
[IMAGE: <17.41.020_001.jpg>]

17.41.030 CREATION OF THE PD ZONE AND DESIGNATION OF PLANNED DEVELOPMENT ON ZONING MAPS.
The PD Zone shall be applied to the land area as the related and independent zone. Property within the PD Zone shall be developed pursuant to the requirements and conditions of an approved and adopted development agreement. The Zoning map shall be amended to reflect the location and boundaries of the PD Zone.

17.41.040 DEVELOPMENT AGREEMENT REQUIRED.
Prior to, or in conjunction with, the creation of the PD Zone, an applicant shall enter into a detailed development agreement that sets forth the entire project, the total amount of units or lots, the amounts of open spaces and landscaped areas, any other amenities that the applicant will provide as part of the development, and any specific development requirements which may be applicable to the PD Zone. Accompanying, and incorporated into, the final development agreement shall be the correct legal descriptions of the property and of any dedications of property, easements, or rights-of-way to be granted to the City. At the request and discretion of the City Council, other language may be required in the development agreement to assure the City that the concept plans will match the final product built. Said agreement shall be recorded with the Utah County recorder's office, and will be attached to the title of each lot, parcel, or pad within the zone to inform future or prospective property buyers of the requirements of developing the property under the PD Zone designation. The development agreement may only be renegotiated or modified through a petition to the City to amend the PD Zone as per the requirements of this Chapter.

17.41.050 APPLICATIONS.
An application for the PD Zone shall be processed following the procedures set forth for a zone change application in the Lindon City Code and in the City’s Land Development Polices, Standard Specifications, and Drawings manual. The application for the development of individual plats, parcels, or phases within a PD Zone shall likewise be processed pursuant to the Lindon City Code and Land Development Polices, Standard Specifications, and Drawings manual unless expressly modified in the development agreement approved in conjunction with the related PD Zone.

17.41.060 CONCEPT PLAN.
A concept plan shall be submitted prior to or with the application to create the PD Zone. The Planning Commission shall review the concept plan and shall provide its recommendation to the City Council. The concept plan shall at a minimum include the following:
1. A description of the proposed PD Zone in sufficient detail as to identify the purpose and intent of the zone regulations, including intended land uses and land use standards that would apply in the zone;
2. The proposed name for the PD Zone;
3. The legal description of the subject property;
4. A topographic map of the subject property and adjacent property within fifty (50) feet of the subject property;
5. A tabulation of the total land area and the percentage thereof designated for various proposed uses;
6. The number of residential units per acre and a proposed layout of anticipated lots, if applicable;
7. Identify access and availability of necessary utilities and services, and indicate any major infrastructure improvements that may be necessary;
8. A general circulation plan indicating both public and private vehicular and pedestrian ways;
9. A layout of all parking areas, amenities, open spaces, landscaped areas and drive accesses;
10. Proposed buffering and transitioning treatments between uses both within the PD Zone and with existing uses adjoining the PD Zone;
11. Locations of any critical lands; and
12. Any additional information that the City may deem necessary to determine whether the proposed PD Zone is in the interest of the public health, safety, and welfare. Such information may include, but is not limited to: proposed building footprints, building heights, and the orientation of all buildings; architectural renderings that illustrate the architectural style(s), materials and the designs to be employed in the development; a preliminary title report; a preliminary plan for storm drainage, sewage disposal, grading, and public utilities and statements indicating the future form of ownership (e.g., sole owner, condominiums, etc.) and responsibility for maintenance of the project areas such as streets, structures and open spaces.
The required development agreement may modify or supplement the information provided in the concept plan without a formal amendment to the concept plan.

17.41.070 DEVELOPMENT AND DESIGN STANDARDS.
Unless expressly modified in the development agreement approved in conjunction with the related PD Zone, or unless otherwise modified in this Chapter, the development/design standards and regulations for a given use within the PD Zone shall be the same standards and regulations for that given use as set forth in Title 17 of the Lindon City Code and in the City’s Land Development Polices, Standard Specifications, and Drawings manual.

17.41.080 PERMITTED AND CONDITIONAL USES.
Permitted and conditional uses within a PD Zone shall be the respective uses designated as permitted and conditional uses for residential zones (R1-12, R1-20 and R3 zones) in the Standard Land Use Table and any additional uses expressly allowed in the development agreement approved in conjunction with the related PD Zone.

17.41.090 DENSITY.
The residential density allowed in a PD Zone shall be High Residential as defined by the City’s General Plan, unless expressly modified in the development agreement approved in conjunction with the related PD Zone.

17.41.100 ACREAGE REQUIREMENT.
The minimum size requirement for any project applying for a PD Zone shall be no less than 100 acres.

17.41.110 SETBACK REQUIREMENTS.
Setback requirements for residential uses within a PD Zone may be established by the development agreement approved in conjunction with the related PD Zone. However, under no circumstances shall setbacks be less than the following standards:
+----------------------+---------------------------------+
| 1. Front Setback     | Twenty feet (20')               |
+----------------------+---------------------------------+
| 2. Rear Setback      | Twenty feet (20')               |
+----------------------+---------------------------------+
| 3. Side Setback      | Five feet and five feet (5'/5') |
+----------------------+---------------------------------+
| 4. Side Road Setback | Fifteen feet (15')              |
+----------------------+---------------------------------+

17.41.120 BUFFERING BETWEEN RESIDENTIAL AND NON-RESIDENTIAL USES.
Any phase or plat of a planned development within a PD Zone which locates residential uses next to non-residential uses, shall provide a buffer between the residential and the non-residential uses so as to minimize the impact of such uses on one another within the PD Zone and to reduce the impact of the PD Zone on existing uses on adjoining properties. At the discretion of the City, specific requirements to minimize the impact of the PD Zone on existing uses may be imposed in the development agreement approved in conjunction with the related PD Zone.

17.41.130 AMENDMENTS OR MODIFICATIONS OF PD ZONE.
An established PD Zone, including the required development agreement, may only be amended or modified pursuant to a formal application to amend. Such applications shall be submitted and processed using the procedures established by Lindon City for a zone change application.

17.41.140 EXPIRATION OF PD ZONE (SUNSET PROVISIONS).
After 10 years from the City Council’s original approval of the PD Zone, the PD Zone designation shall expire as to any phase, parcel, or plat of land that is not included within a final plat that has been recorded in the Utah County Recorder’s Office. The zoning on such property for which a PD Zone expires, shall automatically revert back to the zoning that existed prior to the adoption of the PD Zone.
The ten (10) year time period established in this section may be extended by either:
1. The express terms of the development agreement approved in conjunction with the related PD Zone, but which may not exceed a total of 20 years from the time of the original approval; or
2. On the motion of the Planning Commission to grant an extension. The Planning Commission may not grant an extension unless it finds, based on substantial evidence placed in the record, all of the following:
    a. Substantial progress is being made toward the final recording of the plat(s) with PD Zone;
    b. The conditions of the PD Zone approval are still viable based on the currently applicable requirements of this Code; and
    c. An ordinance change has not occurred or has not been initiated that may substantially affect the activity of the planned development authorized by the PD Zone approval.

17.41.150 R-2 OVERLAYS EXCLUDED.
As the stated purpose of the PD Zone is to provide opportunities for higher density developments than are otherwise allowed in Lindon, and whereas it is not the City’s intent to further increase the higher density allowed under the PD Zone through the provisions of the R-2 overlay zone, the use of these the R-2 overlay zone is expressly excluded and disallowed within the PD Zone.

17.41.160 DISCRETION OF CITY COUNCIL.
The provisions and standards provided within this Chapter are adopted with the sole intent to benefit the general population of Lindon City by allowing certain modifications and exceptions to standard zoning requirements in order to encourage high quality developments within unique areas of the City. Therefore, it is the sole burden of an applicant to convince the Planning Commission and City Council that a requested PD Zone is warranted and that the proposed planned development will further the purposes and intent of this Chapter. (Ord. 2016-7, amended, 2016)

Chapter 17.42 MU–MULTIPLE USE DISTRICT

Sections:
17.42.010    Purpose.
17.42.020    Permitted uses.
17.42.030    Conditional uses.
17.42.040    Special provisions.
17.42.050    Area, width, frontage, yard, coverage and height regulations.

17.42.010 Purpose.
It shall be the purpose of the MU district to provide open and generally undeveloped lands where human habitation and activity would be limited in order to protect land resources; to reduce unreasonable requirements of the public utility and service expenditures; to avoid the premature development of lands by discouraging intensive development until the ultimate best use of the land can be recommended by the Planning Commission to the governing body; and to promote the health, safety, convenience, order, prosperity, and general welfare of the inhabitants of the community. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-110-1)

17.42.020 Permitted uses.
Permitted uses in the MU district shall be as follows:
1. Agriculture. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-110-2)

17.42.030 Conditional uses.
All uses allowed as permitted or conditional uses in the R1-20 district are allowed in the MU district upon issuance of a conditional use permit. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-110-3)

17.42.040 Special provisions.
1. Any parcel larger than one acre at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this division may be divided or developed only by conditional use permit. No new lot smaller than one acre may be created.
2. Every conditional use permit approval shall be based primarily on how the development, as proposed in the application, will contribute to compatibility and mutual private and public benefit from existing, proposed, and potential buildings and uses in the area; the efficient, effective, and aesthetic use of land, buildings, landscaping and amenities; and the improvements to be made in land use, building construction and appearance, traffic safety and control, landscaping and drainage. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-110-4; Ord. 2000-11, amended, 2000)

17.42.050 Area, width, frontage, yard, coverage and height regulations.
Area, width, frontage, yard, coverage and height regulations for the MU district shall be determined by conditional use permit. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-110-5)

Chapter 17.43 RB–RESIDENTIAL/BUSINESS DISTRICT OVERLAY ZONE (RBO)

Sections:
17.43.010    Purpose statement.
17.43.020    Site requirements.
17.43.030    Business license required.
17.43.040    Permitted uses.
17.43.050    Site and building requirements.
17.43.060    Prohibited activities.
17.43.070    Business hours.
17.43.080    Patrons per hour regulated.
17.43.090    Additional employees.
17.43.100    Parking and vehicular traffic.
17.43.110    Maintenance of premises.
17.43.120    Signs.
17.43.130    Code compliance.
17.43.140    Impact on neighborhood.

17.43.010 Purpose statement.
The purpose of the RBO residential/business district overlay is to allow small scale instruction, service, and office uses oriented to the local area within residential neighborhoods along higher volume streets and/or within or adjacent to nonresidential zones. Development is intended to be pedestrian oriented while acknowledging the need for automobile access and parking. The standards for the district are intended to promote appropriately scaled building and site design that focuses on compatibility with existing uses. The RBO is not intended to replace home occupation permits available in residential zones throughout the city as outlined in Section 17.04.400. (Ord. 2018-7 §1, adopted, 2018)

17.43.020 Site requirements.
Site requirements for properties to be eligible for the RBO (eligibility does not grant a right to the RBO zoning designation, but rather provides an opportunity for property to be rezoned to the RBO through the established rezoning application process subject to the land use authority’s decision):
1. Property must have a minimum of fifty feet (50') of street frontage along a major collector road as identified by the Lindon City street master plan map.
2. Property must be a minimum of thirty thousand (30,000) square feet.
3. Property must be adjacent to the general commercial zone along State Street or within a nonresidential zone. For purposes of this chapter, the commercial farm zone is not considered a nonresidential zone.
4. Property may be required to have street improvements including curb, gutter, and sidewalk along all street frontage; however, an exception may be granted for any or all of these improvements by city council at the time of zoning approval.
    a. The city council may grant a waiver of the street improvements only if it makes a written finding that one (1) of the following conditions exists on the proposed property:
        i. Potential pedestrian traffic in area is so minimal that improvements are not warranted or needed to ensure public health and safety;
        ii. Properties surrounding the proposed property are without curb, gutter, and sidewalks and requiring street improvements would result in disconnected or isolated improvements;
            A. A waiver under this condition may only be granted upon the execution of a development agreement to install the improvements at a later date as required in this section;
        iii. The natural topography or vegetation preexisting in the area is desirable to maintain and can be done without creating unreasonable risks to pedestrians; or
        iv. The requirement to construct the improvements would cause an unreasonable hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the purpose of this chapter.
            A. To grant a waiver under this condition the city council must further find that:
                (1)There are special circumstances unique to the proposed property which do not generally apply to other similar properties;
                (2)The asserted hardship was not self-imposed; and
                (3)Granting the waiver is within the spirit of this chapter, will not be contrary to the public interest, and substantial justice will be done.
    b. When such improvements are required to be constructed, the final improvement design shall be reviewed by the city engineer who has the authority to approve such plans.
        i. Prior to commencement of business activities, required improvements shall be completed or, alternatively, bonded for according to Chapter 17.38.
        ii. Prior to final acceptance by the city of any public improvements, a warranty bond in the amount of ten percent (10%) of the total cost of those improvements shall be posted by the applicant to warrant workmanship of those improvements.
        iii. Failure to meet the obligations described above will, at minimum, result in the denial and/or revocation of any business license associated with the property in question.
    c. If any exception for construction of public improvements is granted by the city council, including postponement of such improvements to a future date, a development agreement shall be required which outlines those exceptions, unless in such cases a waiver of the obligation for all public improvements is granted. (Ord. 2018-7 §1, adopted, 2018)

17.43.030 Business license required.
No business activity shall be conducted without first obtaining a business license pursuant to this chapter and Chapter 5.04.
1. Additional business license application requirements in the RBO zone include:
    a. Floor plan of all rooms within buildings in which business activities will be conducted.
        i. As determined by the chief building official, a life safety plan showing emergency egress as prepared by a design professional may be required depending on the occupant load where the business activity is conducted. All interior layouts and uses shall be provided to the chief building official for review and approval.
    b. Site plan of property drawn to scale, identifying parking areas, building dimensions and distances between buildings and to property lines.
    c. Written documentation that the property is the primary residence of the applicant.
2. The city administrator, or his/her appointed designee, may grant a business license in the RBO zone, provided the use applied for meets all of the standards set forth in this section. (Ord. 2018-7 §1, adopted, 2018)

17.43.040 Permitted uses.
The following business activities, which either require a client to come to the home or which may result in neighborhood impacts if not properly managed, are authorized within an RBO upon receipt of a business license and pursuant to the standards specified in this section:
1. Barbers, cosmetologists, manicurists.
2. Culinary, bakery, food preparation.
3. Consultant or professional services with additional employees or contractors.
4. Contractor, “handyperson,” and landscape or yard maintenance contractor; subject to the special conditions that no construction materials or equipment will be stored on the premises outside of an approved structure.
5. Preschool.
6. Home instruction including, but not limited to, in-home lessons such as: musical instruments, voice, dance, acting, graphic arts, art, and educational subjects, swimming, tennis, and other athletic instruction.
7. Other permitted uses include any land use permissions in the underlying zone. (Ord. 2018-7 §1, adopted, 2018)

17.43.050 Site and building requirements.
1. Any business activity occupying more than five hundred (500) square feet or more than twenty-five percent (25%) of the total space of a residence must comply with current building code requirements as determined by the chief building official as determined by use, occupancy and type of construction.
2. Maximum building height in an RBO in a primarily residential area is thirty-five feet (35'). In cases where the RBO is in a nonresidential area the city council may allow up to ten (10) additional feet or a height equal to the building in the surrounding area.
3. Minimum yard/setback requirements shall be the same as the underlying zone with the following exceptions:
    a. Rear Yard Setback. Twenty feet (20') when abutting residential zones. For properties which abut nonresidential zones the setback shall be ten feet (10').
    b. Accessory Buildings and Structures in Yards. Accessory buildings and structures may be located in a required side or rear yard area so long as they are set back from all property a minimum of five feet (5') and do not encroach into any easement unless proper approvals are obtained from the easement holder.
4. Required Landscape Yards. All front and corner side yards shall be maintained in landscaping with vegetation in a living, healthy condition. A minimum of eight feet (8') of landscaping, measured from back of walk, is required adjacent to all public rights-of-way, with seventy percent (70%) of the said landscaping covered with living vegetation and trees planted every thirty feet (30') on center. A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of the lot must be maintained in landscape area.
    a. If parking areas are within twenty-four feet (24') of the property line, additional landscape buffering or fencing shall be required to shield the parking area.
5. Storm Water Runoff. All storm water runoff generated on site must be handled on site or properly discharged into the city’s storm sewer system and not discharged onto surrounding properties without express written permission to do so.
6. Maximum Building Coverage. The surface coverage of all principal and accessory buildings shall not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the lot area.
7. Design Standards. All principal buildings within residential zones constructed or remodeled after September 4, 2018, shall conform to the following design standards:
    a. The remodeling of residential buildings or new construction within the overlay for business use shall be allowed only if the residential character of the exterior is maintained;
    b. Building orientation shall be to the street or side street on corner lots; and
    c. Building additions shall consist of materials, color and exterior building design consistent with the existing structure, unless the entire structure is resurfaced. (Ord. 2018-7 §1, adopted, 2018)

17.43.060 Prohibited activities.
There shall be no external evidence of the business activity (except as may be required by state law or city ordinance), nor any exterior displays, displays of goods, nor advertising signs (except as allowed by this section) visible from outside of the building. It shall not be permitted to conduct any activity outside the primary structure with the following exceptions: instruction for athletics, e.g., swimming and tennis. It shall not be permitted to store materials or products, including vehicles and equipment for business use, outside the primary structure unless it is within an accessory structure approved as part of the business or obscured from view by fencing or other means of screening. (Ord. 2018-7 §1, adopted, 2018)

17.43.070 Business hours.
Properties within the overlay that are located within a residential neighborhood shall not generate business traffic between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:30 a.m. (Ord. 2018-7 §1, adopted, 2018)

17.43.080 Patrons per hour regulated.
Businesses should not create the demand for more than ten (10) patrons per hour, with the exception of preschool and home instruction. In the case of preschool and home instruction, the number of participants shall be determined by maximum occupancy load as determined by the fire inspector and chief building official based on the prevailing International Building Code and International Fire Code. Small businesses of this nature are encouraged to stagger classes/sessions/start time so as to minimize the impact of vehicle trips and parking requirements. (Ord. 2018-7 §1, adopted, 2018)

17.43.090 Additional employees.
Business activities with additional employees or contractors, as is necessary or practical, may have up to five (5) employees or contractors not residing on the premises during appropriate business hours to work at the location, if required off-street parking is provided for the employee(s) per Section 17.43.100. (Ord. 2018-7 §1, adopted, 2018)

17.43.100 Parking and vehicular traffic.
1. Parking spaces in an RBO zone are exempted from the surfacing, striping, and interior landscaping requirements as found in Chapter 17.18, but shall be provided with a dustless, hard surface material such as compacted gravel, asphalt, or concrete and shall be provided with a similar hard surfaced access from a public street.
2. Parking stalls shall be nine feet (9') wide by eighteen feet (18') long.
3. Parking areas shall comply with current ADA standards and Section 17.43.050(4)(a).
4. An ADA accessible route shall be required per the applicable ADA building standards.
5. Customer off-street parking shall be provided based on the business activity as follows:
    a. Barbers, Cosmetologists, Manicurists. One (1) stall for every customer chair;
    b. Culinary, Bakery, Food Prep. One (1) stall per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of service area;
    c. Consultant or Professional Services with Additional Employees or Contractors. One (1) stall per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of office area;
    d. Contractor, “Handyperson,” and Landscape or Yard Maintenance Contractor. One (1) stall per three hundred fifty (350) square feet of office area;
    e. Preschool. One (1) per ten (10) children;
    f. Home Instruction. One (1) per six (6) students on site at peak operational hours.
6. Employee/contractor parking shall be provided off street at the rate of one (1) stall per employee on the premises at peak operational hours.
7. All residents, visitors, and employees/contractors who arrive at the property shall be legally parked on the lot occupied by the residence/business or on that part of the street that immediately abuts the lot.
8. For home instruction, a plan showing pick up and drop off zones with the associated traffic patterns requires city engineer review and approval. (Ord. 2018-7 §1, adopted, 2018)

17.43.110 Maintenance of premises.
No excessive or offensive noise, dust, odor, smoke, or light shall be emitted which is discernible beyond the site or parcel boundary lines in question, except that which emanates from the movement of motor vehicles. Premises shall be maintained in such a manner so as to avoid unreasonable interference with adjacent uses and to avoid public nuisances. (Ord. 2018-7 §1, adopted, 2018)

17.43.120 Signs.
Businesses within the overlay shall have no more than one (1) permanent sign, not larger than six and one-half (6.5) square feet, attached to the building. The sign shall be aesthetically pleasing and made of similar materials and colors as the building to which it is attached. The sign shall not be directly lit. One (1) temporary sign shall also be allowed up to four (4) square feet and not to exceed eight (8) square feet combined, if double sided, to be displayed during operating hours.
1. Temporary signs for the purposes of advertising events, sales or promotions may be allowed with the approval of the planning director. Such signs shall not be larger than thirty-two (32) square feet and must be supported horizontally to prevent sagging.
2. Temporary signs cannot be displayed for more than a continuous two (2) week period of time and no more than eight (8) weeks in a calendar year.
3. No wind socks, inflatables, flags or fence signs will be allowed in residential areas. (Ord. 2018-7 §1, adopted, 2018)

17.43.130 Code compliance.
Businesses within the overlay shall comply with all applicable building code, occupancy requirements and fire codes as adopted by the city. (Ord. 2018-7 §1, adopted, 2018)

17.43.140 Impact on neighborhood.
Businesses within the overlay shall be good neighbors and mindful of possible impacts their activities have on the residential character of the neighborhood. All business licenses within the RBO are reviewable upon written complaint to the planning commission. The planning commission, in reviewing such complaints, shall have the authority to attach conditions to a home occupation to make it compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. If the planning commission makes a finding that the home occupation is not compatible with the surrounding neighborhood, they shall have the authority to revoke such permit. (Ord. 2018-7 §1, adopted, 2018)

Chapter 17.44 SINGLE FAMILY RESIDENTIAL

Sections:
17.44.010    Purposes and Objectives.
17.44.020    Lot Area.
17.44.030    Lot Width.
17.44.040    Lot Depth.
17.44.050    Lot Frontage.
17.44.070    Number of Dwellings Per Lot.
17.44.080    Yard Setback Requirements.
17.44.090    Projections into Yards.
17.44.100    Building Height.
17.44.110    Distance Between Buildings.
17.44.120    Permissible Lot Coverage.
17.44.130    Parking.
17.44.140    Accessory Buildings.
17.44.150    Other Requirements.

17.44.010 Purposes and Objectives.
The Single Family Residential Zones (R1) are established to provide areas for the encouragement and promotion of an environment for family life by providing for the establishment of one (1) family detached dwellings on individual lots that are separate and sheltered from non-residential uses found to be inconsistent with traditional residential lifestyles customarily found within Lindon City’s single-family neighborhoods. (Ord. 2009-3, amended, 2009; Ord. 2003-15, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-111-1(A))

17.44.020 Lot Area.
The minimum area of any lot or parcel of land in the R1 zone shall be as indicated by the subzone used in conjunction with the R1 zone designation. Subzones are designated by adding a suffix number to the R1 zoning symbol. Such suffix number shall be the minimum lot area for the subzone, stated in thousands of square feet. For example, a subzone of the R1 zone requiring lots or parcels to be a minimum of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet would be designated on the zoning map as R1-20. The minimum area of any lot or parcel of land in the R1 zone shall be as indicated below for the subzone in which the lot or parcel is situated:
R1-12 twelve thousand (12,000) square feet
R1-20 twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. (Ord. 2003-15, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-111-1(B))

17.44.030 Lot Width.
1. Each lot or parcel of land in the R1 zone shall have a width of not less than the following for the zone in which said lot or parcel is situated:
R1-12 one hundred (100) feet (measured at front yard setback)
R1-20 one hundred (100) feet (measured at front yard setback)
Width-to-depth ratio shall be within the limits established under LCC 17.32.100(3). (Ord. 2009-3, amended, 2009; Ord. 2003-15, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-111-12)

17.44.040 Lot Depth.
Each lot or parcel of land in the R1 zone shall have a minimum lot depth as indicated below for the subzone in which the lot or parcel is situated:
R1-12 one hundred (100) feet
R1-20 one hundred (100) feet (Ord. 2003-15, amended, 2003; Ord. 2000-9, amended, 2000; Ord. 2000-11, amended, 2000)

17.44.050 Lot Frontage.
1. Except for legal non-conforming lots, flag lots, or lots accessing an approved hammerhead turnaround, each lot or parcel of land in the R1 zones shall abut and have frontage along a public street for a minimum distance of fifty (50) feet, on a line parallel to the centerline of the street or along the circumference of a cul-de-sac improved to City standards.
2. Approved flag lots shall have twenty-five (25) feet of frontage along a public street on a line parallel to the centerline of the street or along the circumference of a cul-de-sac improved to City standards.
3. Lots or parcels of land with access from an approved hammerhead turn-around shall have twenty-five (25) feet of frontage along a public street on a line parallel to the centerline of the street or along the perimeter of the hammerhead turn-around improved to City Standards.
4. Frontage on a street end which does not have a cul-de-sac improved to City standards shall not be counted in meeting this requirement. (Ord. 2003-15, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-111-4; Ord. 2012-7, amended, 2012)

17.44.070 Number of Dwellings Per Lot.
Not more than one (1) single-family dwelling and one accessory apartment may be placed on a lot or parcel of land in the R1 zones unless a greater number of units are approved as part of an R2 Overlay Project. (Ord. 2009-3, amended, 2009; Ord. 2003-15, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-111-6)

17.44.080 Yard Setback Requirements.
The following minimum yard requirements shall apply in the R1 zones: (Note: All setbacks are measured from the property line, or for property lines adjacent to a street the setback shall be measured from the street right-of-way line.)
1. Front yard setback: thirty (30) feet
    Rear yard setback: thirty (30) feet
    Side yard setback: ten (10) feet
2. Side yard - Corner Lots: On corner lots, the side yard contiguous to the street shall not be less than thirty (30) feet and shall not be used for vehicle parking, except such portion as is devoted to driveway use for access to a garage or carport. Of the remaining rear and side yards on a corner lot, one rear yard setback of thirty (30) feet and one side yard setback of ten (10) feet shall be required on the remaining non-street facing sides of the lot. (Ord. 2009-3, amended, 2009; Ord. 2003-15, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-111-7)

17.44.090 Projections into Yards.
1. The following structures may be erected on or project into any required yard setback:
    a. Fences and walls in conformance with the Lindon City Code and other city codes or ordinances;
    b. Necessary appurtenances for utility service.
2. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front, side, or rear year not more than the following distances:
    a. The following may project into a minimum front, side or rear yard not more than twenty-four (24") inches: cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar architectural features; fireplace structures and bays (provided, that they are not wider than eight feet (8'), measured generally parallel to the wall of which they are a part), awnings and planting boxes or masonry planters.
    b. The structures listed below may project into a rear yard not more than twelve feet (12'): a shade structure or uncovered deck (which does not support a roof structure, including associated stairs and landings) extending from the first story of a building, provided such structure is open on at least three (3) sides, except for necessary supporting columns and customary architectural features.
    c. The following may project into a front, side or rear yard (above or below grade) not more than four feet (4') as long as they are uncovered (not supporting a roof structure): unenclosed stairways, balconies, landings, and fire escapes.
    d. Properties with a corner street side yard setback of at least thirty feet (30'): an uncovered deck located at and accessible from the first story or below the first story, inclusive of stairs, may project not more than twelve feet (12') into a required corner street side yard setback. (Ord. 2019-1 §2, amended, 2019; Ord. 2009-3, amended, 2009; Ord. 2003-15, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-111-8)

17.44.100 Building Height.
No lot or parcel of land in the R1 zone shall have a building or structure used for dwelling which exceeds a maximum average height of thirty-five (35) feet, measuring the four (4) corners of the structure from finished grade to the highest point of the roof structure. The Planning Director and Chief Building Official shall be responsible for designating and identifying the four corners of a structure. The height of churches in some cases may exceed thirty-five (35) feet and shall be reviewed and may be approved by the Planning Commission if the Planning Commission finds that no neighboring property owner will be substantially damaged by the approval of such. No dwelling shall be erected to a height less than one (1) story above grade. (Ord. 2009-3, amended, 2009; Ord. 2003-15, amended, 2003)

17.44.110 Distance Between Buildings.
The separation distance between any accessory buildings and a dwelling, or the distance between multiple detached accessory buildings, shall not be less than ten (10) feet. (Ord. 2009-3, amended, 2009; Ord. 2003-15, amended, 2003; Ord. 2001-1, amended, 2001; Ord. 2000-5, amended, 2000)

17.44.120 Permissible Lot Coverage.
1. In an R1 zone, all buildings, including accessory buildings and structures, shall not cover more than forty (40) percent of the area of the lot or parcel of land.
2. At least forty (40) percent of the area of any lot shall be maintained in landscaping. On any lot, concrete, asphaltic, or other driveway surfaces shall not cover more than fifty (50) percent of a front yard. (Ord. 2009-3, amended, 2009; Ord. 2003-15, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-111-11)

17.44.130 Parking.
1. Each use in the R1 zone shall have, on the same lot, off-street parking sufficient to comply with Chapter 17.18, of the Lindon City Code.
2. Parking spaces in residential zones shall be provided with a dustless, hard surface material such as compacted gravel, asphalt, cement, or concrete and shall be provided with a similar hard surfaced access from a public street.
3. No required parking spaces shall be within thirty (30) feet of a front property line. (Ord. 2008-6, amended, 2008; Ord. 2003-15, amended, 2003; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-111-12)

17.44.140 Accessory Buildings.
1. Accessory Building within the Buildable Area. Accessory buildings meeting all setback requirements (within the buildable area) for the main dwelling are permitted when in compliance with the following requirements:
    a. Have a building height not taller than thirty-five (35) feet. Height to be calculated as per § 17.44.100.
    b. Comply with all lot coverage requirements.
2. Accessory Building Outside the Buildable Area. Accessory buildings that do not meet the setback requirements (outside the buildable area) for the main dwelling shall comply with lot coverage requirements and meet the conditions following:
    a. Be set back a minimum of (30) feet from the front property line and five (5) feet from any other property line.
    b. Be set back a minimum of ten (10) feet from property line when located between the main dwelling and the side property line.
    c. Not be located within a recorded public utility easement, unless a release can be secured from all public utilities.
    d. Have an average building height of no more than twenty (20) feet in height measured at the four corners of the structure from finished grade to the highest point of the roof structure.
    e. Comply with distance between buildings requirements.
3. Setback Exception for Accessory Buildings on Corner Lots. 
    a. This subsection applies to lots of which at least 52% (rounded to the nearest hundredth) of the total combined lot line length abuts a public street or right-of-way.
    b. On lots described in 3a. above, and pursuant to a validly issued Setback Exception Permit, an accessory building may be situated within twenty (20) feet of a front lot line when the accessory building complies with the following dimensional and situational requirements:
        i. The building does not exceed two hundred (200) square feet in area;
        ii. The building does not exceed twelve (12) feet in height; and
        iii. The building is situated behind the primary dwelling in the area that would customarily be considered the back yard of the dwelling.
    c. The Planning Director and City Engineer may approve the location of an accessory building that meets the requirements in subsection 3b. above upon reviewing a Setback Exception Permit application and determining that the proposed height and setback will not cause a public or traffic safety hazard.
    d. If the Planning Director and City Engineer determine that the proposed height and/or the proposed setback does not satisfy the criteria in 3c. above, they may deny the Setback Exception Permit application or approve the permit with a modified height and/or modified setback that sufficiently mitigates any detrimental impacts.
4. Accessory buildings larger than two hundred (200) square feet shall be required to obtain a building permit.
5. Construction of an accessory building may precede the construction of the primary residence.
6. No accessory building or group of accessory buildings in any residential district shall cover more than 25% of the rear yard. (Ord. 2015-22, amended, 2015; Ord. 2014-18, amended, 2014; Ord. 2009-3, amended, 2009; Ord. 2008-4, amended, 2008; Ord. 2003-15, amended, 2003; Ord. 2000-11, amended, 2000; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-111-13)

17.44.150 Other Requirements.
1. Sport Courts. Outdoor sport courts are permitted when in compliance with the following conditions:
    a. Lighting of sport courts shall be contained within the sport court boundaries and shall not be directed onto another’s property.
    b. Sport court fencing shall not be taller than twelve (12) feet.
    c. Sport court fencing when taller than seven (7) feet shall maintain a minimum ten (10) foot setback from rear and side yard property lines. Any sight obscuring materials used on such fencing shall be maintained and kept in good repair. Sport court fencing shall not be allowed in the required thirty (30) foot front yard setback.
    d. The Planning Commission may modify the height of sport court fencing to be taller than twelve (12) feet and the setback requirement to be less than ten (10) feet when the following findings are made:
        i. The proposed height and/or setback modification is necessary to provide privacy and protection of private property interests.
        ii. The appearance and/or setback of the fence will not detract or cause aesthetic damage to neighboring property owners.
        iii. The proposed height and/or setback modification will not cause a public safety hazard.
        iv. The proposed additional height is necessary to provide an adequate buffer for the adjoining land owners’ use. (Ord. 2009-3, amended, 2009; Ord. 2003-15, amended, 2003)

Chapter 17.45 R-3 OVERLAY ZONE

Sections:
17.45.010    Purpose.
17.45.020    Map.
17.45.030    General requirements for all R3 Overlay applications.
17.45.040    Lot size, Setbacks, and Height Limits.
17.45.050    Lot Frontage, Width to Depth Ratio, and Lot Coverage.
17.45.060    Accessory Buildings, Projections Into Yards, Sport Courts, and Other Requirements Not Listed in This Chapter.
17.45.070    Parking.
17.45.080    Streets.
17.45.090    Declaration of Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions.
17.45.100    Application submittal requirements.

17.45.010 Purpose.
1. The purpose of the R3 Overlay zone is to provide for the opportunity to develop detached, single-family residential dwellings on the west of Geneva Road and east of 2000 West, within the Light Industrial and Mixed Commercial zones. These developments should be similar in character to other residential neighborhoods within Lindon, and also provide an opportunity for a component of housing oriented towards retirement age individuals. An additional objective of the R3 Overlay zone is to provide moderate income housing, as defined by the Utah State Code (10-9-307(2)(a)). Except as permitted by home occupations, commercial and industrial uses are not permitted if the R3 Overlay has been approved for a parcel within the overlay area.
2. The R2 Overlay zone also applies to any residential development established under the R3 Overlay. Neighborhood organizations, Homeowners’ associations and/or private citizens shall not be permitted to restrict the placement and construction of R2 Overlay projects. In specific neighborhoods and subdivisions through the use and implementation of Conditions, Covenants, and Restrictions and/or other types of restrictive legal documents. Such practices undermine Lindon City’s ability to provide for the housing needs of its citizens and prohibit attainment of established zoning requirements and General Plan Goals.
3. NOTICE OF RIGHT TO OPERATE. Given that the R3 Overlay will be established in an area adjacent to Light Industrial and Mixed Commercial zones, notice is hereby given that all activities, operation of machinery, noises, dust, odors, hours of operation, etc. that are commonly associated with any adjacent Light Industrial, Mixed Commercial, agricultural, and other non-residential uses found in the area will be allowed to continue in a reasonable fashion consistent with the zoning standards in the Lindon City Code. Nuisance complaints received from residents within the R3 Overlay regarding ‘commonly associated non-residential activities consistent with the zone in which the nuisance originates will not be taken into consideration or acted upon. This notice shall be recorded on any plat approved within the R3 Overlay and shall be recorded on a separate document for each individual lot or property sold within any R3 development.

17.45.020 Map.
This division includes a map which defines the boundaries of the R3 Overlay Zone. This overlay is site-specific and does not apply to the entire City. Any expansion of this overlay area may only be permitted after recommendation from the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council.

17.45.030 General requirements for all R3 Overlay applications.
Any development with the R3 Overlay zone is required to incorporate certain components and designs elements into the subdivision. The goal of these requirements is to allow some flexibility in design, while still incorporating desired goals and characteristics of Lindon City. The following elements are required for any development, whether only a portion of the R3 Overlay area, or development of the entire site:
1. Curvilinear Streets. To a reasonable extent, side streets not contained within the City’s Master Street Plan shall be designed in a curvilinear fashion. Long, straight roadways are discouraged.
2. Parks and open space. Any R3 subdivision shall provide the equivalent of 4-acres of public park space per 1000 residents. Residents per household shall be determined according to the most recent U.S. Census Data for Lindon City. Retirement units shall be counted as having two (2) person per household. One public park area shall be a minimum of two (2) contiguous acres, which may require a combined effort to reserve this space should multiple developments occur within the overlay area. The minimum size for public park area is 0.5 contiguous acres (1/2 acre). Open space or common areas smaller than 0.5 acres and not dedicated a ‘public park space’ will not count towards meeting the park acreage requirement, except pathway corridors connecting cul-de-sacs or adjacent streets may be counted towards the park space requirement and are exempt from the 0.5 acre minimum. Public access may not be denied to dedicated public park spaces within a retirement development. The City shall entertain possible waivers of park impact fees, waive park improvement requirements, or determine other methods of compensation for dedication of public park spaces within this development area. Under the direction and final approval of the City Council, DRC staff will negotiate any compensation terms for park dedication.
3. Retirement/Senior housing element. Any application for a subdivision shall provide approximately 10% of the buildable area as retirement community housing, but in no case shall the total number of retirement units in the entire R3 Overlay exceed fifty (50) units or cover more than nine (9) contiguous acres. The portion of retirement housing within any R3 development may be recorded as a separate plat, but must be reviewed, approved and recorded simultaneously with the single-family lots in other areas of the property being developed. The retirement housing shall be detached single-family style buildings, or twin-homes, and may be constructed as part of a home-owners association or designed with common areas around the dwellings. Each unit shall be on an individual 5,000 square foot lot. Twin-homes may have common walls that are centered on a ‘zero lot line.’
4. Pathways and Trails. Pathways connecting neighboring streets and connection of any development to regional trails is strongly encouraged in any design. When feasible with the design layout, a subdivision shall provide paved pathways connecting cul-de-sacs to through streets or connecting to other adjacent cul-de-sacs. If the length of a roadway exceeds hundred (800) feet between any connecting streets, a pathway shall be provided between the connecting streets to allow access to neighboring roadways. All pathways shall be within a minimum twenty (20) foot corridor with a ten (10) foot paved path that is centered or meandering in the corridor. Sides of the pathway within the corridor shall be landscaped with grass and irrigated with an underground sprinkler system. Pathway grades/slope, ADA access, and other design principles shall be approved by the City Engineer upon review of the subdivision plan.
5. Moderate Income Housing. All applications for a subdivision shall provide the following minimum number of homes as “moderate income housing” as defined by Utah State Code (10-9-307(2)(a)); At the time of first sale of the home to the “intended resident”, at least twenty percent (20%) of the home sales on the 10,000 square foot lots shall be within the moderate income range, and thirty percent (30%) of the retirement housing shall be within this range. The term “sale” is interpreted as the final cost of the home at the time of closing. The sale of additional units at or below the moderate income level is encouraged. An application shall provide documentation showing that each dwelling unit proposed as moderate income housing will meet the definition as per Utah State Code.
6. Compliance with Lindon City Code. Any proposal in the R3 Overlay Zone shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable Lindon City Code divisions.

17.45.040 Lot size, Setbacks, and Height Limits.
Any residential dwelling in the R3 Overlay shall maintain a minimum twenty (20) foot setback to any adjacent non-residential zone. Any structure within a non-residential zone shall also be required to maintain a 20' setback to the R3 Overlay boundary line. In this way, any dwelling unit in the R3 Overlay will be setback at least 40' from any structure in a non-residential zone. A site-obscuring fence shall be installed by the R3 developer at the property line between any R3 Overlay area and a non-residential zone. The type and size of the site obscuring fence shall be approved by the Planning Commission and City Council during the review process. The minimum lot size for single-family lots shall be ten thousand (10,000) square feet. Minimum setbacks on the 10,000 square foot lots are measured from the property line and are as follows:
+--------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Maximum Height –   | 35 feet                                  |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Front Setback –    | 30 feet                                  |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Rear Setback –     | 30 feet, except on a corner lot it shall |
|                    | be a minimum of ten (10) feet.           |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Side Yard –        | 10 feet                                  |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Street Side Yard - | 30 feet, but may be decreased at the     |
|                    | rate of one foot per additional two      |
|                    | feet of setback from the front lot line, |
|                    | except such side street setback shall    |
|                    | not be less than twenty (20) feet.       |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------+
The retirement housing minimum lot size shall be five thousand (5,000) square feet per unit. Minimum setbacks are as follows:
+--------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Maximum Height -   | 35 feet                                  |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Front Setback -    | 20 feet                                  |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Rear Setback -     | 20 feet, except on a corner lot it shall |
|                    | be a minimum of ten (10) feet            |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Side Yard -        | 7.5 feet                                 |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------+
| Street Side Yard - | 20 feet, but may be decreased at the     |
|                    | rate of one foot per additional two      |
|                    | feet of setback from the front lot line, |
|                    | except such side street setback shall    |
|                    | not be less than ten (10) feet.          |
+--------------------+------------------------------------------+
Zero lot line setbacks between units (common wall dwellings) may be established for twin-home style housing.
All other retirement housing setbacks apply for twin homes.

17.45.050 Lot Frontage, Width to Depth Ratio, and Lot Coverage.
All subdivision lots shall have a minimum lot frontage on a public road of fifty (50) feet or more, and shall not exceed a 1 to 3 width-to-depth ratio. Buildings shall not occupy more than forty percent (40%) of the total lot area.

17.45.060 Accessory Buildings, Projections Into Yards, Sport Courts, and Other Requirements Not Listed in This Chapter.
Accessory buildings are permitted as found in Chapter 17.44.140 of the Single Family Residential section of the code. For other requirements and standards, such as projections into side yards, sport courts, etc. refer to Chapter 17.44 (Single Family Residential).

17.45.070 Parking.
All lots in the R3 Overlay, including retirement lots, shall provide at least two (2) off street parking spaces that are not within the front yard or street-side yard setback area of the lot. (Ord. 2008-6, amended, 2008)

17.45.080 Streets.
1. All streets within the R3 Overlay shall comply with city standards unless other street cross-sections are proposed as part of a development and approved by the City. DRC staff shall review any proposals for varied street cross-sections and should allow flexibility in design aspect related to parking, placement of street trees, and installation of parking strips between the sidewalk and street. Flexibility in the location of the right-of-way line and street width should also be considered.
2. All driveways shall be paved with either concrete or asphalt.
3. All streets that are shown on the Lindon City Master Street Plan shall be developed as public streets according to the size and general location shown on the Lindon City Master Street Plan. The Planning Commission and City Council have the authority to require streets in an R3 proposal to connect with other public streets outside the proposed project where such connection is found necessary for proper traffic circulation in the area. All streets in an R3 proposal shall be public streets dedicated to the City.

17.45.090 Declaration of Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions.
Where covenants, conditions, and restrictions are imposed upon an R3 project, two (2) copies of the Declaration of Covenants, Conditions, and Restrictions shall be submitted to the City signed and prepared for recording at the Utah County Recorder’s office prior to final approval.

17.45.100 Application submittal requirements.
Any applicant desiring to receive approval for an R3 Overlay Zone project as described in this ordinance (17.45) shall submit a Land Use Application for a Major Subdivision with the appropriate submittal documents as found on the application. All applications shall be reviewed as a Conditional Use, subject to Planning Commission and City Council approval and findings that the application meets all requirements. (Ord. 2005-13, amended, 2005)

Chapter 17.46 R2 OVERLAY ZONE

Sections:
17.46.010    Purpose.
17.46.015    Definitions.
17.46.020    Map and district establishment.
17.46.025    Underlying Zoning Applies.
17.46.030    District unit calculations.
17.46.040    Density, lot size, and required separation distance.
17.46.050    Application submittal requirements.
17.46.060    R2 Project design criteria.
17.46.100    Accessory Apartments.
17.46.110    Second Kitchen Requirements.

17.46.010 Purpose.
1. The purpose of the R2 Overlay Zone is to provide ‘moderate income housing’, as defined by the Utah State Code, and thereby achieve a reasonable opportunity for a variety of housing types, to meet the needs of people desiring to live and fully participate in all aspects of neighborhood and community life in Lindon. This Overlay zone establishes a place where, two (2) and three (3) family dwelling units can be constructed. It shall also be the purpose of this ordinance to establish a means whereby multi-family housing can be distributed throughout the City and throughout the individual R2 Overlay planning districts. Except for accessory apartments (either internal or detached), R2 Overlay projects and applications shall be considered a Conditional Use and regulated as such.
2. Neighborhood organizations, home owners associations, and/or private citizens shall not be permitted to restrict the placement and construction of R2 Overlay projects in specific neighborhoods and subdivisions through the use and implementation of Conditions, Covenants, and Restrictions and/or other types of restrictive legal documents. Such practices undermine Lindon City’s ability to provide for the housing needs of its citizens and prohibit attainment of established zoning requirements and General Plan Goals. (Ord. 2005-6, amended, 2005; Ord. 2002-18, amended, 2002; Ord. 2000-13, amended, 2000; Ord. 98-13, amended, 2000)

17.46.015 Definitions.
For the purposes of this chapter, the terms below shall have the following meanings:
“Accessory apartment” means a residential unit that is located on the same lot or parcel as a single-family dwelling unit, either internal to or attached to the single-family unit or in a detached structure on the same lot or parcel, and which is owned by an owner occupant of the property. The accessory apartment shall be a complete housekeeping unit with a separate entrance, kitchen, sleeping area, and bathroom facilities.
“Owner occupant” means:
    1. An individual who:
        a. Possesses, as shown by a recorded deed, fifty (50) percent or more ownership in a dwelling unit, and
        b. Occupies the dwelling unit with a bona fide intent to make it his or her primary residence; or
    2. An individual who:
        a. Is a trustor of a family trust which:
            i. Possesses fee title ownership to a dwelling unit;
            ii. Was created for estate planning purposes by one (1) or more trustors of the trust; and
        b. Occupies the dwelling unit owned by the trust with a bona fide intent to make it his or her primary residence.
3. An owner occupant as defined in section 1 or 2 of this definition shall continue to be defined as such even if said owner occupant temporarily resides elsewhere due to a disability, infirmity, military service, temporary job assignments, sabbaticals, or voluntary and ecclesiastical service which requires the owner to temporarily reside at another location not to exceed three (3) years. In such event, the dwelling unit shall be considered an occupied domicile by the owner occupant during the temporary absence.
“Owner occupied” means a residential dwelling unit that is occupied by an owner occupant. (Ord. 2012-2, amended, 2012)

17.46.020 Map and district establishment.
The Planning Department shall maintain on file a map and associated documents which divide the residential areas within the city into individual R2 Overlay districts and which includes such data as: total acreage of each district, total allowable units per district, etc. The R2 Overlay Zone includes all residential zones in their entirety, and also all residential uses within non-residential zones that existed prior to April 1, 2011. (Ord. 2005-6, amended, 2005; Ord. 2002-18, amended, 2002; Ord. 98-13, amended, 2000)

17.46.025 Underlying Zoning Applies.
Unless specifically provided for otherwise in this chapter, R2 Overlay projects and accessory apartments are subject to the regulations of the underlying zoning district in which they are constructed. (Ord. 2012-2, amended, 2012)

17.46.030 District unit calculations.
The maximum number of units that are permitted within each R2 Overlay district identified on the R2 Overlay map shall be calculated by multiplying 4% of the total acreage within each district by six (6). Each dwelling unit approved as part of an R2 project, and each accessory apartment and its’ associated single-family dwelling unit, shall be counted towards the capacity of the units permitted in each district. At such time as a district reaches the maximum permitted capacity of units that district will be closed to any further R2 Overlay projects. However, owner occupied single-family dwellings with accessory apartments shall continue to be permitted even if the district reaches its capacity. (Ord. 2012-2, amended, 2012; Ord. 2008-1, amended, 2008; Ord. 2005-6, amended, 2005; Ord. 98-13, amended, 2000)

17.46.040 Density, lot size, and required separation distance.
Density: The maximum number of units allowed for any R2 Overlay project shall be four (4) units. Available multi-family projects include twin homes, condominiums, apartments, duplexes, triplexes, townhouses, or any other multi-family housing unit that has two or three units per structure. Detached single-family dwellings (one unit only) and projects with four units (4-plexes) are prohibited.
 Lot size: The maximum number of units on an approved building lot in the residential zone is two (2) units. In the event that the lots are larger than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet for the R1-20 zone and twelve thousand (12,000) square feet for the R1-12 zone, then the maximum density shall be calculated at four (4) units per net acre. Substandard legal non-conforming lots shall only be allowed a maximum number of units based on four (4) units per acre.
Separation Distance: Irrespective of R2 Overlay district boundaries, new R2 Overlay projects shall not be within seven hundred fifty (750) feet from any other approved R2 Overlay unit or other existing multi-family housing units, except for accessory apartments. (Ord. 2005-6, amended, 2005; Ord. 2000-13, amended, 2000; Ord. 98-13, amended, 2000)

17.46.050 Application submittal requirements.
1. Any applicant desiring to receive approval for an R2 Overlay Zone project as described in this ordinance (17.46) shall submit a Land Use Application and fee for a Conditional Use, including a completed site plan which includes all the project design criteria as established in this chapter and any submittal requirements as established in the Land Development Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings Manual (Development Manual).
2. Any applicant for an R2 Overlay project shall provide documentation that each proposed dwelling unit will meet the “moderate income housing” definition as per Utah State Code. On a form approved by the City, a certification regarding the owner’s understanding of the moderate income housing requirements, and an agreement to abide by said requirements, shall be recorded against the property and shall run with the land and be binding on future successors of the property. A building permit will not be issued until said documentation is received by the Planning Department.
3. The provisions of subsection 2. above shall apply to any R2 Overlay project which was approved by Lindon City after January 17, 2012. (Ord. 2012-2, amended, 2012; Ord. 2005-6, amended, 2005; Ord. 2002-18, amended, 2002; Ord. 2000-13, amended, 2000; Ord. 98-13, amended, 2000)

17.46.060 R2 Project design criteria.
1. Compliance with Lindon City Code. Any proposal in the R2 Overlay Zone shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter and all other applicable Lindon City Code divisions and the conditions imposed by the Land Use Authority. The requirements and standards set forth herein shall apply to any R2 Overlay proposal.
2. Structure Setbacks. Building setbacks shall be the same as that required in the underlying residential zone in which the project is being constructed.
3. Width to Depth Ratio. No proposed lot utilized for an R2 Overlay project shall have a width to depth ratio that exceeds one (1) to three (3) unless the subject property is a platted subdivision lot previously approved by the City.
4. Land Ownership Designation. All land within a development shall be either common area, limited common area, dedicated to public use, privately owned as a buildable lot or a combination of the above.
5. Utilities. All dwelling units shall be served by the public sewer system and public water supply. Installation of these and other utilities shall conform to applicable building codes and city ordinances. All utilities shall be placed underground.
6. Fences. A six foot (6') high sight obscuring fence shall be erected on the perimeter, except the front yard setback, of all R2 projects. The Land Use Authority may waive or modify fencing requirements if it is necessary to preserve the character and aesthetic qualities of the development or surrounding areas. These fencing requirements may be waived or modified by the Land Use Authority only if the following criteria are met:
    a. Removing or modifying the fence will still provide for an adequate buffer for the adjoining use.
    b. The appearance or removing of the fence will not detract from the uses of neighboring property.
    c. Removing or modifying the proposed fence will still provide some method of shielding for the neighboring use from noise, storage, traffic, or any other possible characteristics of an R2 overlay project.
    d. Problems with care and maintenance of fences shall be dealt with in accordance with LCC 8.20 (Nuisances).
7. Landscaping. 
    a. Except for driveways, the required front setbacks, street-side yard setbacks, and all common areas shall be permanently landscaped with trees, shrubs, lawn, or other living ground cover and shall be maintained in accordance with good landscaping practices.
    b. Landscaped areas within the front yard and street-side yard setbacks may not be used for parking.
    c. Not less than forty percent (40%) of the net acreage of the entire development shall remain in permanently landscaped areas.
8. Security Lighting. All R2 proposals with attached housing units shall include a security lighting system which shall be designed in such a way as to give control of its operation to the homeowner’s association or property owner of the project.
9. Parking. Dwelling units shall be provided with not less than two (2) off street parking spaces each. Required off-street parking spaces shall not be permitted within the front yard or street-side yard setbacks. Guest parking shall be located within seventy five feet (75') of the dwellings served. All parking spaces, parking areas, and driveways shall be hard surface and properly drained as per Lindon City Development Manual specifications. Drainage shall not be channeled or caused to flow across pedestrian walkways. All freestanding and unenclosed parking structures incorporated into an R2 Overlay project shall be to the rear of the main building. Free standing parking structures shall not be allowed in the front or side yard setback of any lot.
10. Streets. 
    a. For the purposes of this division the following definitions apply:
        i. Public Street shall mean a right-of-way owned and maintained by the City.
        ii. Driveway shall mean a vehicular right-of-way owned and maintained privately that is no more than thirty four feet (34') in width and is no less than twenty feet (20') in width. After considering public safety and access issues the Land Use Authority shall designate the width of the drive access as per this requirement.
    b. Public streets shall adhere to design and construction standards found within the Development Manual and shall be properly dedicated to the city.
    c. A driveway shall be paved with either concrete or asphalt.
    d. No “hammerhead” turnarounds shall be permitted.
    e. All streets that are shown on the Lindon City Master Plan shall be developed as public streets according to the size and general location shown on the Lindon City Street Master Plan Map. The Land Use Authority has the authority to require streets in an R2 proposal to connect with other public streets outside the proposed project where such connection is necessary for good traffic circulation in the area.
    f. All streets in an R2 proposal shall be public streets. However, driveways may be permitted provided that:
        i. They will not extend to provide service to another property or parcel not included in the project unless there is no reasonable way to access existing parcels contiguous to a private street. However, the Land Use Authority may consider limited connections of additional lot accesses to a driveway on a case-by-case basis to allow for reasonable development of surrounding properties that will compliment the R2-Overlay project and will not cause a burden or hazard from traffic flows on the private driveway. Any additional lots that are approved to access R-2 Overlay project driveways shall meet all standard lot and development requirements applicable to the zone in which the property is located, and could be accessed and served with utilities as a ‘stand alone’ lot. Shared access shall only be permitted if it is determined to provide safer access for the additional lots in question and/or provides other reasonable benefits to the surrounding neighborhood and community.
        ii. They will not provide access or travel between, or otherwise connect with two (2) or more public streets unless the street or driveway is designed to discourage through traffic.
        iii. They are designed and constructed to City Standards and Specifications found within the Development Manual.
        iv. They are designated on the final plat as perpetual right-of-way and public utility easements.
        v. They shall not be longer than one hundred fifty (150) feet. Driveways longer than one hundred fifty (150) feet shall be dedicated public streets and comply with all City standards for public streets.
        vi. Private driveways, private streets, and private utilities will not be maintained and/or serviced by the City.
11. Common Areas. Common areas of a development shall be developed according to the plan approved by the Land Use Authority and maintained in accordance with the provisions of this chapter.
12. Storage Areas and Central Waste Receptacles. Exterior storage areas available to multiple tenants for the keeping of boats, RVs, or other miscellaneous items, shall be enclosed with a 6' high site obscuring fence. Said storage areas shall only be permitted on the side or rear of the dwelling units. Central waste receptacles shall only be permitted within a trash enclosure which meets standards found in the Development Manual. Trash enclosures shall be located in the side or rear of the dwelling units and must be accessible for garbage trucks. All individual garbage containers shall have the ability to be serviced from a public street.
13. Architectural Styles and Treatments. The intent of the architectural styles and treatment requirements is to maintain the single-family residential appearance of R2 multi-family projects and to avoid obvious recognition that the structure is a duplex, twin home, or triplex. R2 project proposals shall be designed according to traditional residential styles which are compatible with other home in the immediate vicinity. The building colors shall be in earth tone(s) (refer to Commercial Design Guidelines for color palate). Unless otherwise existing, the building shall have no more than one front door and garage/carport entrance facing the street frontage or facing the same direction unless in the rear of the building. Corner lots shall have no more than one front door and garage/carport entrance facing each street or side-street frontage unless otherwise existing. (See Table 17.46 A) The applicant shall submit building elevations with details on exterior materials and colors addressing the requirements listed above. (Ord. 2008-12, amended, 2008; Ord. 2008-6, amended, 2008; Ord. 2008-1, amended, 2008; Ord. 2007-14, amended, 2007; Ord. 2005-6, amended, 2005; Ord. 2004-1, amended, 2004; Ord. 2002-18, amended, 2002; Ord. 2000-13, amended, 2000; Ord. 98, amended, 1983)

17.46.100 Accessory Apartments.
This section establishes requirements and regulations regarding accessory apartments.
1. Purpose Statement. It is the intent of the R2 overlay zone to allow accessory apartments in conjunction with owner occupied single-family homes in residential zones, where such single-family homes were not approved as part of an R2 overlay project. The purpose of the accessory apartment provisions are to:
    a. Provide a mix of housing options that responds to changing family needs and smaller households;
    b. Offer a means for residents, particularly seniors, single parents, and families with grown children, to remain in their homes and neighborhoods, and obtain extra income, security, companionship, and services;
    c. Provide a broader range of affordable housing;
    d. Create new housing units within existing residential zones while respecting the look and scale of single-family dwelling development within Lindon.
2. General Requirements for All Accessory Apartments. 
    a. Location.  Accessory apartments shall be allowed only in conjunction with owner occupied single-family dwellings, but shall not be approved in conjunction with other R2 overlay projects.
    b. Number of Accessory Apartments. A maximum number of one (1) accessory apartment shall be allowed in conjunction with each owner occupied single-family dwelling.
    c. Parking. A single-family dwelling with an accessory apartment shall provide at least four (4) total off-street parking stalls (two (2) for the single-family dwelling and two (2) for the accessory apartment). Parking stalls within a garage or carport utilized by the single-family dwelling shall not count toward the two (2) additional required parking stalls for the accessory apartment, or vice versa, unless the garage is sized for more than two (2) vehicles and an accessible route from the garage parking to the accessory apartment can be maintained. No required parking shall be within the front or street-side yard setback. Tandem (end-to-end) parking in a side yard may be acceptable for the required parking. Parking areas and driveways shall be provided with a dustless, hard surface material such as asphalt, concrete, compacted gravel, masonry, or concrete pavers. A hard surfaced path, sidewalk, or walkway shall be provided from the accessory apartment entrance to the required accessory apartment off-street parking stalls.
    d. Size Restrictions. The size of an accessory apartment shall be at least three hundred (300) square feet and shall not contain more than three (3) bedrooms.
    e. Building Code. All construction and remodeling shall comply with building codes in effect at the time of construction or remodeling.
    f. Building Entrances. A single-family dwelling approved with an accessory apartment shall not have a separate entrance at the front of the building or side of the building facing the street where the sole purpose of the entrance is to provide access to the accessory apartment. Entrances to detached accessory apartments shall also not face a street unless the detached accessory apartment is placed behind the primary residence so that the entrance is not substantially visible from the street. The purpose of this requirement is to preserve the single-family residential appearance of the single-family dwelling and/or the detached accessory apartment.
    g. New or existing garages and accessory buildings substantially attached to the main dwelling by covered walkways, covered breezeways, and covered porches may include an accessory apartment. In such instances, the garage/accessory building shall not be more than a distance of eighteen feet (18') from the main dwelling unit measured linearly between the foundation lines of the two (2) structures, and the apartment may not exceed sixty percent (60%) of the footprint of the primary residence livable floor area, but in no case shall it exceed one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of maximum livable floor area.
    h. Apartment Address. The address of the accessory apartment shall be clearly posted so as to be seen from the public street.
    i. Ownership. An accessory apartment shall not be sold separately, or subdivided from the principal dwelling unit, parcel, or lot.
3. Additional Requirements for Detached Accessory Apartments. 
    a. Height Restrictions. Detached accessory apartments are limited to two (2) stories above grade with a maximum height not to exceed the height of the primary residence or thirty feet (30') high, whichever is less. Building height is determined by averaging the measurements of the four (4) corners of the structure from finished grade to the highest point of the roof structure. The planning director and chief building official shall be responsible for designating and identifying the four (4) corners of a structure and determining building height.
    b. Setbacks. A detached accessory apartment must meet the same setbacks as the primary residence for the underlying zone in which it is located, except that it shall be set back at least ten feet (10') further from a front-facing façade of the primary residence which faces a street. Detached accessory apartments on the street-side yard of corner lots are only required to be set back ten feet (10') further than the front-facing façade of the primary residence. No additional setback applies to street-side yard areas. See Table 17.46B. If a deck is constructed on the second story, the building setback will be measured from the deck.
    c. Size Limit. The detached accessory apartment may be attached to or part of other accessory structures, but in no case shall the maximum livable floor area of the detached accessory apartment exceed one thousand five hundred (1,500) square feet or forty percent (40%) of the primary residence, whichever is less. The total livable square footage is calculated for both stories and does not apply separately to each story. Stairways for access to the second story shall be constructed on the interior of the accessory apartment. No exterior staircases shall be constructed unless required by building code. If an accessory apartment is connected to or constructed above a garage, the apartment shall have a separate entrance from the garage area.
    d. Exterior Design. Architectural features and roofline of the detached accessory apartment shall be designed and constructed to be compatible with the character and materials used on the exterior of the primary residence.
    e. Utilities. Except for sewer service, all public and private utility services to the detached accessory apartment shall be provided through utility lines which service the primary residence. Additional utility meters, utility laterals, or secondary service hook-ups are not permitted except as approved by the chief building official and/or the public works director in cases where options to provide utilities through the primary residence service laterals are not feasible or cause significant hardship to the applicant.
4. Accessory Apartment Permit. Any person constructing or causing the construction of a residence that has an accessory apartment or any person remodeling or causing the remodeling of a residence for an accessory apartment, or any person desiring an accessory apartment shall obtain a building permit from the city. Before the permit is issued the applicant shall:
    a. Submit a site plan drawn accurately to scale that shows property lines and dimensions, the location of existing buildings and building entrances, proposed buildings or additions, dimensions from buildings or additions to property lines, and the location of parking stalls.
    b. Include detailed floor plans drawn to scale with labels on rooms indicating uses or proposed uses and other criteria required by the chief building official.
5. The city shall evaluate the permit and shall approve or deny the application based on the criteria as outlined in this section. If the application meets all requirements, the city shall mail notice to owners of record within three hundred feet (300') of the subject property. This notice shall summarize the nature of the request, give the location of the apartment, list the approval criteria with an indication that the city intends to issue the permit, and inform the property owners that they may request that the accessory apartment application be reviewed by the planning commission if they feel that the application does not meet the approval criteria. Any interested party requesting planning commission review shall submit a written request to the planning commission within fourteen (14) days after the date of the notice received and shall state how the application does not meet the ordinance criteria. If no written request for planning commission review is received by the city within fourteen (14) days after the date of the notice, the permit for the accessory apartment can be issued.
6. Upon submittal to the planning department of a written request for planning commission review, the planning commission shall hear the item at their next regularly scheduled meeting and shall review the request to determine compliance with the approval criteria as found within this chapter. The planning commission shall then approve, continue, or deny the application.
7. Upon issuance of the accessory apartment building permit, the applicant shall pay fees in accordance with the currently adopted Lindon City fee schedule.
8. Affidavit and Agreement Requirements. The following affidavits and agreements shall be required prior to issuance or final approval of a building permit for an accessory apartment:
    a. The owner of any single-family dwelling requesting an accessory apartment shall sign an affidavit therein stating that the primary dwelling and/or the accessory apartment on the lot or parcel will be owner occupied. This affidavit shall be recorded against the property and run with the land and be binding on future successors of the property; and
    b. The owner shall provide documentation that the accessory apartment rental rates will meet the “moderate income housing” definition as per Utah State Code. On a form approved by the city, a certification regarding the owner’s understanding of the moderate income housing requirements and an agreement to abide by said requirements shall be signed by the owner and recorded against the property and shall run with the land and be binding on future successors of the property.
    c. The provisions of subsection (8)(b) of this section shall apply to any accessory apartment which was approved by Lindon City after February 1, 2012. (Ord. 2019-6 §1, amended, 2019; Ord. 2012-2, amended, 2012; Ord. 2008-6, amended, 2008; Ord. 2008-1, amended, 2008; Ord. 2001-10, amended, 2001; Ord. 2000-13, amended, 2000; Ord. 99-22, amended, 2000; Ord. 98-13, amended, 2000)

17.46.110 Second Kitchen Requirements.
1. Single family homes with more than one kitchen shall not be considered to have an accessory apartment (unless specifically approved as such by issuance of a building permit) and shall comply with the following requirements:
2. The home shall have only one address.
3. An interior access shall be maintained to all parts of the home. This requirement is to assure that an accessory apartment is not created. For example, doors between the second kitchen and the remainder of the home shall have no locks or deadbolt mechanisms which could restrict access. Other methods for limiting or restricting access from the second kitchen to the remainder of the home shall also not be permitted. Access to a second kitchen through a garage shall not be considered “interior access.”
4. The home shall have no more than one electrical meter.
5. A kitchen shall be defined as a place with permanent food preparation facilities which shall include a stove/range appliance.
6. The owner of any single-family dwelling requesting a second kitchen shall sign an affidavit on a form prepared by the City, therein stating that the second kitchen area in the dwelling will not be used as a duplex or accessory apartment. Presence of a second kitchen does not constitute approval of a multi-family unit. This affidavit shall be recorded against the property and run with the land and be binding on future successors of the property.Table 17.46 A. (Sample layouts for R2 Projects in which only one entrance faces the street)
[IMAGE: <17.46A_001.png>]
[IMAGE: <17.46A_002.png>]
[IMAGE: <17.46A_003.png>]
[IMAGE: <17.46A_004.png>]
[IMAGE: <17.46A_005.png>]
[IMAGE: <17.46A_006.png>]Table 17.46 B. (Typical setbacks for detached accessory apartments)
[IMAGE: <17.46B_001.png>]
(Ord. 2012-2, amended, 2012; Ord. 2002-18, amended, 2002; Ord. 2001-10, adopted, 2001)

Chapter 17.47 RESEARCH AND BUSINESS (R&B) ZONE

Sections:
17.47.010    Purpose and objectives.
17.47.020    Uses.
17.47.030    Site design and maintenance.
17.47.040    Lot, Building and yard requirements.
17.47.050    Parking requirements.
17.47.060    Landscaping objectives.
17.47.070    Signs.
17.47.080    Other requirements.

17.47.010 Purpose and objectives.
1. The purpose of the Research and Business (R&B) zone is to provide an aesthetically attractive working environment exclusively for and conducive to the development and protection of offices, research and development institutions, and certain specialized assembling and packaging uses as a secondary use to the primary function of the building. The essential purpose of this zone is to achieve development in a park-like setting that is an economic asset to the owners, neighbors, and the community. This zone is more restrictive than other commercial and manufacturing zones in the city with grounds that have an abundance of landscaping, and land uses that do not create air, ground, noise, or water pollution. Because the zone may be located adjacent to residential development it must be properly screened with a wall and landscaping to create compatibility. The zone should always be located adjacent to collector or arterial streets. The zone is to be characterized by attractively designed buildings and off-street parking lots situated among lawns, shrubs, and trees which give a more pleasing appearance than other commercial and business zones.
2. The objectives of this chapter are to establish a zone with rules, regulations, standards, and procedures to:
    a. Strengthen and sustain the economic potential of the city and to create jobs.
    b. Advance and promote sound growth and the general welfare.
    c. Implement the adopted policies of the Lindon City General Plan.
    d. Ensure efficient, safe, and aesthetic land development.
    e. Provide a unique work environment that will attract skilled and professional people.
    f. Provide a work place that is architecturally and aesthetically pleasing and compatible with surrounding areas.
    g. Preserve existing natural resources and give proper consideration to the physical constraints of the land.
    h. Provide for safe and efficient vehicular and pedestrian circulation.
    i. Provide for compliance with appropriate design standards to ensure adequate light and air, proper building arrangements, and minimum adverse effect on surrounding property.
    j. Ensure the provision of adequate water supply, drainage and stormwater management, sanitary facilities, and other utilities and services.
    k. Develop proper safeguards to minimize the impact on the environment, including but not limited to air and water pollution, hazardous waste contamination, noise levels, soil erosion and sedimentation. (Ord. 98-7, adopted, 2000)

17.47.020 Uses.
1. Uses within the R&B zone shall be allowed as outlined in Appendix A, Standard Land Use Table of the Lindon City Code as presently constituted and as may be amended from time to time.

17.47.030 Site design and maintenance.
1. Unity of design. Overall unity of site design shall be accomplished through:
    a. Architectural harmony of buildings and structures.
    b. Design integration of the common open space systems and storm drainage system.
    c. Unifying themes in an overall landscaping plan.
    d. Unified design of street furniture, such as street signs, poles, light standards and luminaries, project entrances, perimeter fencing, pavement treatment, plazas, and handicapped curb ramps; housings for power facilities, telephone service boxes, and grouped mail box stanchions; illumination of buildings, walkway railings and steps.
2. External Storage and Activities. All uses except surface parking, recreational activities and utilities shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. All storage of product and material used shall be in a completely enclosed building constructed with the same exterior finish as the main building.
3. Solid waste. Solid Waste removal shall not take place between the hours of 10:00 PM to 6:00 AM. Any solid waste receptacle shall be placed in an entirely sight-obscuring enclosure that is at least one (1) foot higher than the receptacle with a minimum height of six (6) feet and constructed on three (3) sides of masonry with a similar exterior finish as the main building, and gated on the fourth side with a minimum access width of fourteen (14) feet. Solid waste receptacles shall be located a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from any residential lot line. Solid waste removal practices by the property owner of the solid waste removal company shall be reviewed by the Planning Commission upon written complaint.
4. Utilities. All utilities shall be placed underground.
5. Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment incidental to any building, including roof mounted mechanical equipment, shall be screened so as to be an integral part of the architectural design of the building to which it is attached or related.
6. Loading. Loading Operations shall not take place between the hours from 10:00 PM to 6:00 AM. Loading operations shall either be conducted within the building or be screened so as to not be totally visible from a public street, and conducted in such a way that in the process of loading or unloading, no vehicle will block the passage of other vehicles on the service drive or extend into any other public or private drive or street used for traffic circulation.
7. Hazards and nuisances. No use shall cause the discharge of any harmful waste materials into or upon the ground, into or within any sanitary or storm sewer system, into or within any water system or water, or into the atmosphere. No use or activity shall be conducted or permitted which is dangerous or offensive to persons or property by reason of the creation of a fire, explosion, or other physical hazard, or by reason of air pollution, odor, smoke, noise, dust, vibration, radiation, or fumes. In addition, no use shall be permitted or conducted where the same creates a public or private nuisance. The following specific standards shall apply:
    a. Incineration. There shall be no incineration on any site of any waste material.
    b. Vibration. There shall be no activity on any site which causes ground vibration which is perceptible, without instruments, at the boundary line of the lot.
    c. Air pollution. There shall be no emission on any site of air pollutants in excess of levels permitted by the Utah Bureau of Air Quality. Water vapor is not considered a pollutant. The normal venting of a building shall not be prohibited.
    d. Wastes. The quality and nature of industrial wastes shall not overburden the public sewage disposal facilities or cause odor and unsanitary effects beyond the property line. Such wastes shall not be discharged into the ground, or any surface or subsurface waterways. Disposal of all hazardous wastes shall comply with all applicable federal and state regulations. Sewage shall also comply with all local, state, and federal regulations.
    e. Storm water. All facilities shall be designed according to the requirements of Section 3.01 of Chapter 2 of the Lindon Land Development Policy handbook.
8. Vacant lots. Vacant lots shall be maintained free of unsightly storage of equipment, or overgrown weeds and nuisance vegetation. (Ord. 98-7, adopted, 2000)

17.47.040 Lot, Building and yard requirements.
1. Lot area. The minimum size of any lot shall be one (1) acres.
2. Building setbacks. Buildings on all lots shall be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from any property line.
3. Required open space. All building and parking areas on any lot shall not occupy more than seventy percent (70%) on the total area of the lot. The remaining portion of the lot shall be landscaped appropriately.
4. Building height. No building shall be constructed to a height exceeding three (3) stories with a maximum height of forty-eight (48) feet.
5. Buildings per lot. More than one (1) main building may be placed on a lot. (Ord. 98-7, adopted, 2000)

17.47.050 Parking requirements.
1. Parking layout and construction standards. All parking spaces, parking areas and driveways shall be constructed in accordance with standards established in 17.18 and the Lindon City Development Manual, titled “Land Development Policies, Standard Specifications, and Drawings.”
2. Parking setbacks. All parking areas shall be set back a minimum of thirty (30) feet from all dedicated public streets and ten (10) feet from exterior boundaries of the zone.
3. Screening of parking areas. Where topography permits, required parking setbacks shall be landscaped with lawn and shall be planted with trees of sufficient height to screen and buffer parking and loading areas from adjoining public access streets.
4. Structured parking. Any parking structure above the finished ground elevation shall have the same setback requirements as outlined for buildings, and shall be architecturally integrated through use of the same or similar materials, colors, rhythm, landscaping, etc.
5. Parking structure height. Freestanding parking structures shall comply with the same height requirements as main buildings. (Ord. 2008-6, amended, 2008; Ord. 98-7, adopted, 2000)

17.47.060 Landscaping objectives.
1. Landscaping objectives. Landscaping plans shall be prepared with a view toward accomplishing the following design objectives (plans will be approved or denied based on how well these objectives are satisfied):
    a. Enhance the visual environment by:
        i. Adding visual interest through texture, color, size, shape, etc., and
        ii. Enhancing perspective by framing views complimenting architecture, screening and creating points of interest and activity.
    b. Ensure public safety by:
        i. Guiding the circulation of cars and people,
        ii. Controlling access to parking lots,
        iii. Making traffic diverters prominent, and
        iv. Creating street identification by varying the species, height, and location of landscaping.
    c. Minimize noise and glare.
    d. Conserve energy.
    e. Complement architecture by landscaping around buildings.
    f. Screen areas of low visual interest.
2. Overall landscaping plan. With the application for site plan approval, an overall landscaping plan shall be submitted. Landscaping plans shall show details on specific types and locations of trees and shall also identify areas to be sod or other types of vegetation or ground cover. Additional ‘interior parking lot landscaping’ may be required per LCC 17.18.
3. Open space. A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of each lot shall be maintained in permanent landscaped open space.
4. Landscaping Strip. Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission, a landscaped berm at least three (3) feet high and twenty (20) feet in width shall be planted with grass and maintained in a living, growing condition along all public street frontages.
    a. The measurement of the twenty (20) feet in landscaping will be measured from the back of walk, or back curb if no sidewalk exists. Areas with meandering sidewalks will have the twenty (20) feet measured from back of curb but may not count sidewalk width as part of the twenty (20) feet in landscaping requirement.
    b. Thirty percent (30%) of the landscaping strip may consist of decorative rock, bark, mulch, and/or other ground covers other than grass. A planting/landscaping plan detailing types of ground covers, weed barriers, sprinklers, etc., I the non-grass areas shall be submitted and approved by the Planning Director.
    c. Trees shall be planted thirty (30) feet on center, centered ten (10) feet from the edges of the strip in all required landscaped and bermed areas.
    d. Landscaping requirements concerning berming, trees, and landscape materials can be changed and/or altered (with regard to location and design) upon approval of the Planning Commission at the site plan review stage of an application. No net loss of landscaping should occur with any approved alterations. Other landscaping layouts consistent with the Lindon City Commercial Design Guidelines may also be considered by the Planning Commission.
5. Trees. Recommended trees may be found in the list of tree species located in the Lindon City Tree Planting Guide and, unless otherwise specified, shall be at least two (2) inch caliper, measured one (1) foot above the ground and shall be at least six (6) feet in height when planted.
6. Sprinkling and irrigation. All plantings shall be serviced by an acceptable underground automatic irrigation or sprinkler system, and maintained in a healthful living condition. Dead plant materials shall be replaced as necessary within the first year of planting.
7. Landscaping around buildings. A perimeter landscape strip at least five (5) feet wide shall be placed around all buildings. (Ord. 2008-10, amended, 2008; Ord. 98-7, adopted, 2000)

17.47.070 Signs.
All signage shall be installed and maintained in accordance with the standards of the City of Lindon Sign Ordinance. (Ord. 98-7, adopted, 2000)

17.47.080 Other requirements.
1. Walls and fences. Fencing of individual lots in the R&B zone is prohibited except as otherwise provided for herein.
2. Perimeter screening. 
    a. A masonry or concrete fence seven (7) feet high, shall be constructed and maintained along any property line between the R&B zone and a residential use or a residential zone. The fence shall be constructed and maintained by the owner of the non-residential development. Perimeter fencing shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height without approval by the Planning Commission. The Planning Commission may approve a landscaping screen in lieu of a fence, a fence other than a masonry fence or approve a fence height greater than seven (7) feet if it makes the following findings:
        i. The proposed fence/landscape screen provides an adequate buffer for the adjoining residential use.
        ii. The appearance of the fence/landscape screen will not detract from the residential use and/or commercial use of the property.
        iii. The proposed fence/landscape screen will shield the residential use from noise, storage, traffic or any other characteristic of the non-residential use that is incompatible with residential uses. The Planning Commission may waive or adjust this fence/screening requirement upon findings that the fence is not needed to protect adjacent residential uses from adverse impacts and that such impacts can be mitigated in another appropriate manner.
    b. A fifteen (15) foot landscaped planter shall be provided on the R&B zone side of the masonry wall with deciduous trees having a minimum three (3) inch caliper, or evergreen trees having a minimum height of ten (10) feet, planted on a minimum spacing of every twenty-five (25) feet.
3. All building lighting fixtures shall be designed to shine away from neighboring residential property. (Ord. 2012-11, amended, 2012; Ord. 98-7, adopted, 2000)

Chapter 17.48 COMMERCIAL ZONES

Sections:
17.48.010    General provisions.
17.48.020    Zone area and dimensional standards.
17.48.025    Lindon Village commercial (LVC) zone.
17.48.030    Landscaping within the general commercial zones (CG, CG-A, CG-A8, CG-S).
17.48.040    Fencing and screening.
17.48.050    Storage and merchandise.
17.48.060    Maintenance of premise.
17.48.070    Site lighting.
17.48.080    Architectural design.
17.48.090    Special provisions.
17.48.100    Planned commercial zone.
17.48.200    Vehicle sales lots.

17.48.010 General provisions.
The Commercial Ordinance is established to promote commercial and service uses for general community shopping. The objective in establishing commercial zones is to provide areas within the City where commercial and service uses may be located. These zones include the General Commercial Zones (CG, CG-A, CG-A8, CG-S), Lindon Village Commercial Zone and the Planned Commercial (PC-1 and PC-2) Zones. For a full list of permitted uses in these zones, refer to the Standard Land Use Table in Appendix A. (Ord. 2016-23 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 98-6, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 2006-10, amended, 2006; Ord. 2013-12, amended, 2013)

17.48.020 Zone area and dimensional standards.
Refer to Table 17.48.020 below for general area and dimensional standards in the various CG zones.
+----------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+------------+--------------+
|                      |      CG      |     CG-A     |    CG-A8     |     CG-S     | PC-1, PC-2 |     LVC      |
+----------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+------------+--------------+
| Min lot size         | 20,000 sq/ft | 20,000 sq/ft | 20,000 sq/ft | 20,000 sq/ft | 1 acre     | 20,000 sq/ft |
+----------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+------------+--------------+
| Front setback        | 20'          | 20'          | 20'          | 20'          | 30'        | 20'          |
+----------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+------------+--------------+
| Side or rear         | 0'           | 0'           | 0'           | 0'           | 0'         | 0'           |
| yard setback         |              |              |              |              |            |              |
| when adjacent        |              |              |              |              |            |              |
| to a nonresidential  |              |              |              |              |            |              |
| zone                 |              |              |              |              |            |              |
+----------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+------------+--------------+
| Side or rear         | 40'          | 40'          | 40'          | 40'          | 50'        | 40'          |
| yard setback         |              |              |              |              |            |              |
| when adjacent        |              |              |              |              |            |              |
| to a residential     |              |              |              |              |            |              |
| use or a residential |              |              |              |              |            |              |
| zone                 |              |              |              |              |            |              |
+----------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+------------+--------------+
| Street side          | 20'          | 20'          | 20'          | 20'          | 30'        | 20'          |
| yard setback         |              |              |              |              |            |              |
| (corner lot)         |              |              |              |              |            |              |
+----------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+------------+--------------+
| Minimum structure    | 10'          | 10'          | 10'          | 10'          | 14'        | 10'          |
| height               |              |              |              |              |            |              |
+----------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+------------+--------------+
| Maximum structure    | 48'          | 48'          | 80'          | 48'          | 48'        | 48'          |
| height               |              |              |              |              |            |              |
+----------------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+--------------+------------+--------------+
(Ord. 2016-23 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2015-5, amended, 2015; Ord. 2013-12, amended, 2013; Ord. 2008-6, amended, 2008; Ord. 2006-10, amended, 2006; Ord. 99-6, amended, 2000; Ord. 98-6, repealed and replaced, 2000)

17.48.025 Lindon Village commercial (LVC) zone.
1. Purpose. The purpose of this section is to ensure that the Lindon Village commercial zone is developed cohesively. In addition to the planning requirements identified below for individual districts, it is intended that each district will develop in context and with consideration of adjacent districts to create a consistent and coherent development corridor. To accomplish this goal, the following principles are encouraged:
    a. Transportation networks should be interconnected within and between districts. Networks should provide multiple routes to and from destinations, and should consider pedestrian, bicycle, and vehicle users.
    b. Development should include high quality architectural treatments and amenities that create a desirable, comfortable, and consistent experience. Development design should include gathering places and thoroughfares that include continuous tree cover, ample sidewalks, appropriate street furniture and lighting, and supportive building frontages.
    c. The general plan identifies district 15 and the surrounding area, which includes districts 11 through 20, as a future transit node. These districts should be designed and developed to be transit ready by placing a special emphasis on pedestrian orientation. Design and amenities in these districts should create a pleasant pedestrian experience.
    d. All development in the Lindon Village commercial zone shall comply with the Lindon City commercial design standards. For further guidance on implementing the principles identified above, consult Section II on streetscape considerations, Section III on site design, and Section V on architectural character.
2. Permitted Land Uses. Permitted, conditional, and nonpermitted uses in the LVC zone mirror those uses as reflected in the standard land use table for the general commercial (CG) zone with the exception of the following uses which are not permitted in the LVC zone:
    a. Motor vehicles/trucks/marine – new vehicle dealership;
    b. Used cars/trucks – used vehicle sales lots;
    c. Auto lube and tune-up;
    d. Auto tire shops/tire sales/tire services;
    e. Light equipment rental and leasing – automobile and light-truck rental;
    f. Indoor gun ranges;
    g. Assisted living facilities – large or small as defined by Chapter 17.72.
3. Sales Tax Production Required. On corners at full movement intersections Figure 1 identifies general areas approximately one (1) acre in size (identified by letters a through u).
    a. Any project or business utilizing these identified areas shall have a sales tax producing component, wherein said sales tax is collected in and of benefit to Lindon City.
    b. These areas can be developed as standalone pad sites or in conjunction with a larger project within a development district (outlined in Subsection 4 of this section).
    c. Verification of sales tax production shall be required prior to any final site plan approval and subsequent business license approval.
    d. Upon recommendation from the planning commission, the city council may allow these identified areas to move within a district or between districts in a multi-district development or grant exceptions to this requirement altogether after finding that a project is of more benefit to the public than sales tax production.
4. District Plans. The following applies to the areas identified in Figure 1 at the end of this section:
    a. Figure 1 divides the 700 North Commercial Corridor into twenty-three (23) development districts. An applicant proposing to develop any portion of a 700 North Commercial Corridor development district must either develop the entire district as a single, coherently planned site, or, if the proposed site involves only a part of the district in which it is located, the following shall be submitted:
        i. A district plan showing:
            A. The location of the proposed site as it forms part of the entire district; and
            B. A future street system, lot configurations, and building orientations that demonstrate how the balance of the undeveloped area could be developed in a way that will preserve access and corridor visibility for the remaining undeveloped part of the district.
    b. The land use authority shall approve a district plan with each site plan approved on the 700 North Commercial Corridor (see Figure 1). The approved district plan shall become a basis or standard for future development within the applicable district. It is anticipated that a district plan may evolve in response to subsequent development. An applicant may propose modifications to an existing district plan, and the land use authority may approve requested modifications, that promote quality and orderly development.
5. Standards for landscaping, fencing and screening, storage and merchandise, maintenance of premises, site lighting, and special provisions in the LVC zone shall be the same as the CG zones.Figure 1. LVC Districts (1 – 23) and Sales Tax Production Corners (a through u) Map
[IMAGE: <17.48.025.jpg>]
(Ord. 2017-13 §1, amended, 2017; Ord. 2016-23 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2015-5, amended, 2015)

17.48.030 Landscaping within the general commercial zones (CG, CG-A, CG-A8, CG-S).
1. Landscaping Objectives. Landscaping plans shall be prepared with a view toward accomplishing the following design objectives (plans will be approved or denied based on how well these objectives are satisfied).
    a. Enhance the visual environment by:
        i. Adding visual interest through texture, color, size, shape, etc., and
        ii. Enhancing perspective by framing views, complementing architecture, screening and creating points of interest and activity.
    b. Ensure public safety by:
        i. Guiding the circulation of cars and people,
        ii. Controlling access to parking lots,
        iii. Making traffic diverters prominent, and
        iv. Creating street identification by varying the species, height, and location of landscaping.
    c. Minimize noise and glare.
    d. Conserve energy.
    e. Complement architecture by landscaping around buildings.
    f. Screen areas of low visual interest.
2. Overall Landscaping Plan. With the application for site plan approval, an overall landscaping plan shall be submitted. Landscaping plans shall show details on specific types and locations of trees and shall also identify areas to be sod or other types of vegetation or ground cover. Additional interior parking lot landscaping may be required per Chapter 17.18.
3. Open Space. A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of each lot shall be maintained in permanent landscaped open space.
4. Landscaping Strip. Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, a landscaped berm at least three feet (3') high and twenty feet (20') wide shall be planted with grass and maintained in a living, growing condition along all public street frontages.
    a. The measurement of the twenty feet (20') in landscaping will be measured from the back of walk, or back curb if no sidewalk exists. Areas with meandering sidewalks will have the twenty feet (20') measured from back of curb but may not count sidewalk width as part of the twenty feet (20') in landscaping requirement unless otherwise approved in a subdivision cross section. A minimum width of five feet (5') of the landscaping shall be on private property adjacent to the street right-of-way.
    b. Thirty percent (30%) of the landscaping strip may consist of decorative rock, bark, mulch, and/or other ground covers other than grass. A planting/landscaping plan detailing types of ground covers, weed barriers, sprinklers, etc., in the nongrass areas shall be submitted and approved by the planning director.
    c. Trees shall be planted thirty feet (30') on center, centered ten feet (10') from the edges of the strip in all required landscaped and bermed areas.
    d. Landscaping requirements concerning berming, trees, and landscape materials can be changed and/or altered (with regard to location and design) upon approval of the planning commission at the site plan review stage of an application. No net loss of landscaping should occur with any approved alterations. Other landscaping layouts consistent with the Lindon commercial design standards may also be considered by the planning commission.
5. Trees. Recommended trees may be found in the list of tree species located in the Lindon City tree planting guide and, unless otherwise specified, shall be at least two-inch (2") caliper, measured one foot (1') above the ground and shall be at least six feet (6') in height when planted.
6. Sprinkling and Irrigation. All plantings shall be serviced by an acceptable underground automatic irrigation or sprinkler system, and maintained in a healthful living condition. Dead plant materials shall be replaced as necessary within the first year of planting.
7. Concrete curbing shall be provided between landscaped areas and off-street parking areas that is as at least six inches (6") higher than the parking areas. (Ord. 2016-23 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2015-28, amended, 2015; Ord. 2013-12, amended, 2013; Ord. 2006-10, amended, 2006; Ord. 2008-10, amended, 2008; Ord. 99-6, amended, 2000; Ord. 98-6, repealed and replaced, 2000)

17.48.040 Fencing and screening.
1. A masonry or concrete fence seven feet (7') high shall be constructed and maintained along any property line between a nonresidential development and a residential use or a residential zone. The fence shall be constructed and maintained by the owner of the nonresidential development. Perimeter fencing shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height without approval by the planning commission. In all commercial zones the planning commission may approve a landscaping screen in lieu of a fence, a fence other than a masonry fence or approve a fence height greater than eight feet (8') if it makes the following findings:
    a. The proposed fence/landscape screen provides an adequate buffer for the adjoining residential use.
    b. The appearance of the fence/landscape screen will not detract from the residential use and/or nonresidential use of the property.
    c. The proposed fence/landscape screen will shield the residential use from noise, storage, traffic or any other characteristic of the nonresidential use that is incompatible with residential uses. The Planning Commission may waive or adjust this fence/screening requirement upon findings that the fence is not needed to protect adjacent residential uses from adverse impacts and that such impacts can be mitigated in another appropriate manner. (Ord. 2016-23 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2000-3, amended, 2000; Ord. 99-6, amended, 2000; Ord. 98-6, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 2006-10, amended, 2006; Ord. 2013-12, amended, 2013; Ord. 2014-7, amended, 2014)

17.48.050 Storage and merchandise.
1. The storage of merchandise outside an approved building shall be in an area approved as a part of the site plan and shall be within an area enclosed with a sight obscuring fence of at least six feet (6') in height. However, promotional displays, vehicle sales lots, and plant materials may be displayed outside of an approved building or enclosed area so long as they are placed adjacent to a building wherein the business displays the bulk of its goods for sale.
2. This subsection shall not apply to temporary site plans under Chapter 17.17.
3. Landscaped areas and parking lots shall not be used for the displaying of merchandise.
4. Stacking of merchandise or materials of any kind shall not be allowed to protrude above required walls or fence lines unless approved by a temporary use permit.
5. No outdoor storage can be placed without any required fencing first being installed.
6. For outdoor storage areas required to be visually obscured, the planning commission may approve a landscaping screen in lieu of a fence, a fence other than a sight obscuring fence or approve a fence height greater than six feet (6') if it makes the following findings:
    a. The proposed fence/landscape screen provides an adequate buffer for the adjoining uses.
    b. The appearance of the fence/landscape screen will not detract from adjoining uses and/or use of the property.
    c. The proposed fence/landscape screen will shield the adjoining uses from noise, storage, traffic or any other characteristic of the storage use that is incompatible with adjoining uses.
    d. The planning commission may waive or adjust this fence/screening requirement upon findings that the fence is not needed to protect adjacent uses from adverse impacts and that such impacts can be mitigated in another appropriate manner. (Ord. 2016-23 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 98-6, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 2006-10, amended, 2006; Ord. 2012-12, amended, 2012)

17.48.060 Maintenance of premise.
1. No excessive or offensive noise, dust, odor, smoke, or light shall be emitted which is discernible beyond the site or parcel boundary lines in question, except that which emanates from the movement of motor vehicles. Premises shall be maintained in such a manner so as to avoid unreasonable interference with adjacent uses and to avoid public nuisances.
2. No person shall store junk, unlicensed and/or inoperable vehicles, partially or completely dismantled vehicles, or salvaged materials in any commercial zone outside a building.
3. All solid waste storage facilities shall be enclosed with a masonry wall and constructed as per adopted city standards. The minimum access width to a solid waste storage facility shall be fifteen feet (15').
4. No trash, rubbish, or weeds shall be allowed to accumulate on any lot in the CG, PC-1 or PC-2 zones. The space around buildings and structures in these zones shall be kept free from refuse, debris, and weeds. All waste shall be concealed from view from adjacent property.
5. The architecture, appearance, and aesthetics of all buildings, structures, and edifices in all commercial zones shall be maintained to reasonable upkeep and maintenance standards. (Ord. 2016-23 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 98-6, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 2006-10, amended, 2006)

17.48.070 Site lighting.
1. On-site lighting shall be designed to discourage the occurrence of graffiti and enhance a crime prevention environment and shall not glare into adjacent residential areas. Lighting in parking areas shall not glare into adjacent residential areas.
2. Street lights shall be installed on all public roads according to standards established in the land development policies, standard specification and drawings manual. (Ord. 2016-23 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 98-6, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 2006-10, amended, 2006)

17.48.080 Architectural design.
1. Architectural character, streetscape, site design and other amenities in the CG, CG-A, CG-A8, or CG-S zones shall be consistent with the Lindon City commercial design standards as presently constituted and as may be amended from time to time.
2. All sides of the buildings shall receive design consideration consistent with the commercial design guidelines, particularly where exposed to vehicular traffic or adjoining properties. (Ord. 2016-23 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 98-6, repealed and replaced, 2000; Ord. 97-7, amended, 2000; Ord. 2006-10, amended, 2006; Ord. 2013-12, amended, 2013)

17.48.090 Special provisions.
1. The requirements of this section shall run with the land and be binding on successors, owners and tenants so long as the buildings are occupied or the use exists.
2. The owners of a commercial development which contains more than one (1) parcel of record or which has more than one (1) owner may be required by the approving authority to submit documents to the city for approval which assure unified control of the development.
3. Any person who desires to occupy vacant floor space, or to change the use of the floor space shall be required to first obtain a certificate of occupancy from the city. Any person constructing or altering a building in the commercial zones shall first obtain a building permit from the city for such construction or alteration and then shall obtain a certificate of occupancy from the city before the building being constructed or altered is occupied.
4. If the city determines that the developer, tenant, manager, owner or any other interested person, firm or corporation has failed to maintain the premises consistent with all applicable zoning, health, safety, and building codes and ordinances, the city shall so notify said persons, firms or corporation by written notice specifying the deficiency complained of, and unless such failure is corrected to the satisfaction of the city within thirty (30) days, such failure or deficiency shall be deemed to constitute a “public nuisance” which may be abated in any lawful manner including but not limited to the manner set forth in Title 10, Chapter 8, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended. (Ord. 2016-23 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 98-6, repealed and replaced, 2000)

17.48.100 Planned commercial zone.
Approximately between 600 South and 200 South, and 400 West and I-15.
1. Purpose. The purposes of the PC Zones are:
    a. To provide for development of regional commercial centers that can accommodate retail, office, and service uses in areas that are convenient to the traveling public while protecting the character and quality of adjacent residential areas and the overall community of Lindon.
    b. To provide aesthetic controls for building architecture and site development.
    c. To provide development guidelines to ensure effective and safe traffic control and movement while creating an aesthetically pleasing traffic environment.
2. Uses within the PC-1 and PC-2 Zones shall be allowed as outlined in Appendix A, Standard Land Use Table of the Lindon City Code as presently constituted and as may be amended from time to time.
3. Site Development Standards. 
    a. Building and Fence Setback. The building setback and fence setback from any dedicated street shall be thirty feet (30').
    b. Building Heights. No building or structure shall be higher than forty-eight feet (48') including mechanical appurtenances, which shall be properly screened, above the average grade of the street/sidewalks adjacent to the property within the PC-1 Zone.
    c. Building Design and Materials. The architecture, design theme, and construction materials of the building’s front elevation shall be applied to all exterior walls of the building. The rear of the building and any portion of the building that traditionally gets less attention to aesthetics shall be enhanced by the same architecture and design theme as those portions of the building that get high visibility from the public, except exterior building striping or similar decor shall not be installed on the rear or side exterior building walls directly adjacent to residential areas. Building exterior materials shall be eighty-five percent (85%) brick, decorative stone, fluted block, colored textured block, concrete tilt-up that meets the specific architectural theme for the development, glass and wood. Sheet metal and corrugated metal shall be prohibited, except for trim, soffits, fascia, mansards and similar architectural features. Other materials may be used if approved by the planning commission.
    d. Building Orientation. No building front shall face toward an adjacent residential zone. The only building accesses permitted with orientation toward adjacent residential zones shall be emergency accesses only as required by the currently adopted building and fire codes.
4. Landscaping. 
    a. Landscaping Objectives. Landscaping plans shall be prepared with a view toward accomplishing the following design objectives (plans will be approved or denied based on how well these objectives are satisfied):
        i. Enhance the visual environment by:
            1Adding visual interest through texture, color, size, shape, etc., and
            2Enhancing perspective by framing views, complementing architecture, screening and creating points of interest and activity.
        ii. Ensure public safety by:
            1Guiding the circulation of cars and people,
            2Controlling access to parking lots,
            3Making traffic diverters prominent, and
            4Creating street identification by varying the species, height, and location of landscaping.
        iii. Minimize noise and glare.
        iv. Conserve energy.
        v. Complement architecture by landscaping around buildings.
        vi. Screen areas of low visual interest.
    b. Overall Landscaping Plan. With the application for site plan approval, an overall landscaping plan shall be submitted. Landscaping plans shall show details on specific types and location of trees and shall also identify areas to be sod or other types of vegetation or ground cover. Additional ‘interior parking lot landscaping’ may be required per Chapter 17.18.
    c. Open Space. A minimum of twenty percent (20%) of each lot shall be maintained in permanent landscaped open space.
    d. Landscaping Strip. Unless otherwise approved by the planning commission, a landscaped berm at least three feet (3') high and twenty feet (20') in width shall be planted with grass and maintained in a living, growing condition along all public street frontages.
        i. The measurement of the twenty feet (20') in landscaping will be measured from the back of walk, or back curb if no sidewalk exists. Areas with meandering sidewalks will have the twenty feet (20') measured from back of curb but may not count sidewalk width as part of the twenty feet (20') in landscaping requirement.
        ii. Thirty percent (30%) of the landscaping strip may consist of decorative rock, bark, mulch, and/or other ground covers other than grass. A planting/landscaping plan detailing types of ground covers, weed barriers, sprinklers, etc., in the nongrass areas shall be submitted and approved by the planning director.
        iii. Trees shall be planted thirty feet (30') on center, centered ten feet (10') from the edges of the strip in all required landscaped and bermed areas.
        iv. Landscaping requirements concerning berming, trees, and landscape materials can be changed and/or altered (with regard to location and design) upon approval of the planning commission at the site plan review stage of an application. No net loss of landscaping should occur with any approved alterations. Other landscaping layouts consistent with the Lindon City commercial design standards may also be considered by the planning commission.
    e. Trees. Recommended trees may be found in the list of tree species located in the Lindon City Tree Planting Guide and, unless otherwise specified, must be at least two-inch (2") caliper, measured one foot (1') above the ground and shall be at least six feet (6') in height when planted.
    f. Sprinkling and Irrigation. All plantings shall be serviced by an acceptable underground automatic irrigation or sprinkler system, and maintained in a healthful living condition. Dead plant materials shall be replaced as necessary within the first year of planting.
    g. Concrete curbing shall be provided between landscaped areas and off-street parking areas that is at least six inches (6") higher than the parking areas.
5. Screening and Lighting. 
    a. A masonry or concrete fence seven feet (7') high, shall be constructed and maintained along any property line between a nonresidential development and a residential use or a residential zone. The fence shall be constructed and maintained by the owner of the nonresidential development. Perimeter fencing shall not exceed eight feet (8') in height without approval by the planning commission. In all commercial zones the planning commission may approve a landscaping screen in lieu of a fence, a fence other than a masonry fence or approve a fence height greater than eight feet (8') if it makes the following findings:
        i. The proposed fence/landscape screen provides an adequate buffer for the adjoining residential use;
        ii. The appearance of the fence/landscape screen will not detract from the residential use and/or nonresidential use of the property;
        iii. The proposed fence/landscape screen will shield the residential use from noise storage, traffic or any other characteristic of the nonresidential use that is incompatible with residential uses;
        iv. The planning commission may waive or adjust this fence/screening requirement upon findings that the fence is not needed to protect adjacent residential uses from adverse impacts and that such impacts can be mitigated in another appropriate manner.
    b. Lighting. Freestanding lighting fixtures of at least eight feet (8') in height and not to exceed twenty feet (20') in height and producing at least one (1) foot-candle of illumination shall be installed and maintained along the street right-of-way lines and designed to shine away from residential developments. The lighting shall be designed to discourage the occurrence of graffiti and enhance a crime prevention environment and shall not glare into adjacent residential areas. Lighting in parking areas shall not glare into adjacent residential areas.
6. Special Provisions. 
    a. Outside Storage and Display Areas. The storage of merchandise or other material outside an approved building is prohibited. Outside display areas shall be approved as a part of the site plan. Landscaped areas shall not be used for the display of merchandise nor storage of materials unless approved by a temporary use permit.
    b. Receiving Areas (Docks). Receiving areas located within one hundred fifty feet (150') of a residential zone shall be located inside an approved building or in an area enclosed on three (3) sides and covered with a roof. Access to receiving docks shall be from the front of the building or from the side of the building, provided the side of the building is not oriented toward an adjacent residential zone. Receiving areas shall be signed to indicate the hours the receiving area is operational and shall be signed to prohibit engine idling when the receiving area is closed. Receiving areas adjacent to a residential zone shall not operate between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. unless provisions can be made to bring merchandise into the store through the front or side of the store not oriented toward a residential area. Materials, such as pallets, store fixtures, and other similar items shall not be stored in the receiving area. Any and all venting of the receiving areas shall be to the interior.
    c. Solid Waste Areas. Solid waste dumpsters located within one hundred fifty feet (150') from any adjacent residential zone shall be located in an enclosure, the materials of which shall be approved by the city as a part of the site plan. Pick up of solid waste shall not occur between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.
    d. Site Maintenance. Except for snow removal, all common area maintenance of the site shall be between the hours of 6:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m. Snow removal may be conducted on the site any time as necessary.
    e. Certificate of Occupancy. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for any building on any portion of a development until the landscaping is in place or a bond, cash deposit, or equivalent is deposited with the city conditioned on and guaranteeing the installation of all landscaping shown on the approved site plan. All landscaped areas shall be maintained in a neat, clean, orderly and sightly condition. This shall include proper pruning, lawn mowing, weeding, removal of litter, fertilizing, replacing of dead plants and the regular watering of all plants. Failure to maintain the landscaping as provided herein shall be a violation of this chapter and enforceable as provided by law. (Ord. 2016-23 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2014-7, amended, 2014; Ord. 2008-10, amended, 2008; Ord. 2008-4, amended, 2008; Ord. 2000-3, amended, 2000; Ord. 98-6, repealed and replaced, 2000)

17.48.200 Vehicle sales lots.
Sales lots for automobiles, RVs, boats, trailers, motorcycles, ATVs, and similar vehicles shall only be conducted in appropriate zones according to the standard land use table and shall be fully improved to comply with current city standards, including fully paved display area, permanent sales office built to the current building code, landscaping, streetlights and permanent signage. Sales lots must be located on property that is zoned for such use. The following additional standards shall also apply:
1. Minimum Lot Size: One (1) acre.
2. Minimum Frontage on a Public Street: Two hundred feet (200'); double frontage lots may count all frontage toward this requirement.
3. Parking Spaces:
    a. See Chapter 17.18, Off-Street Parking, for minimum number of stalls for employees and customers.
    b. Dimensions shall meet requirements set forth in Section 17.18.020, Size of parking spaces and aisles.
    c. Stalls must be clearly designated as “Customer” or “Employee” with an upright pole sign designating customer and employee parking spaces in order to differentiate from display stalls. These spaces shall not be used for parking vehicles which are for sale or for the display of any merchandise.
4. Parking Lot: See Section 17.18.080, Parking lot maintenance and design.
5. Display Spaces:
    a. Dimensions shall meet requirements set forth in Section 17.18.020, Size of parking spaces and aisles, and be striped.
    b. All automobiles and other vehicles which are for sale at the auto lot shall be parked in the automobile showroom or in a parking space which is specifically designated for displaying merchandise for sale.
    c. All vehicles for sale shall be parked and stored solely within the automobile lot.
6. Display Lot: See Section 17.18.080, Parking lot maintenance and design.
7. Display Area:
    a. No merchandise shall be permitted to be stored on any required landscaped area, drive access, sidewalk or other public right-of-way or in any manner deemed a safety hazard to the general public.
    b. No merchandise displayed shall exceed ten feet (10') in height as measured from the grade of the nearest public sidewalk.
8. Buildings:
    a. Minimum one thousand (1,000) square foot building is required.
    b. Existing buildings transitioning to a vehicle sales office must be brought up to current commercial design standards.
9. Storage: All parts and material incidental to the operation of dealership must be stored in a designated area and concealed from public view.
10. Repair and maintenance: Repair and/or maintenance of any vehicle/merchandise shall take place in an enclosed building.
11. Lighting: See Section 17.48.070, Site lighting.
12. Signs on Vehicles: Signs placed on vehicles may not exceed two (2) square feet in size. (Ord. 2016-23 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2016-3, amended, 2016)

Chapter 17.49 INDUSTRIAL ZONES

Sections:
17.49.010    General provisions.
17.49.020    LI - Manufacturing and Distribution District - Purpose.
17.49.030    H I - General Industrial District - Purpose.
17.49.040    Uses.
17.49.050    Height.
17.49.060    Landscaping and Fencing.
17.49.070    Architectural design.
17.49.080    Development Standards.
17.49.090    Special Provisions.

17.49.010 General provisions.
The objective in establishing manufacturing and industrial zones is to provide areas within the City where light and heavy industrial uses may be located.For permitted uses and uses which require a conditional use permit, refer to the standard land use table.
Refer to the following chapters and subsections for additional regulations:
1. 17.04 General and Supplemental Provisions
2. 17.20 Conditional Uses Generally
3. 17.16 Nonconforming Buildings and Uses
4. 17.18 Off-Street Parking
5. Title 18, Lindon City Sign Ordinance (Ord. 98-9, amended, 2000)

17.49.020 LI - Manufacturing and Distribution District - Purpose.
It shall be the purpose of the LI district to provide areas in appropriate locations where light manufacturing, industrial processes and warehousing not producing objectionable effects may be established, maintained, and protected. The regulations of this district are designed to protect environmental quality of the district and adjacent areas. (Ord. 98-9, amended, 2000)

17.49.030 H I - General Industrial District - Purpose.
It shall be the purpose of the HI district to provide for areas in appropriate locations where heavy industrial processes may be conducted. The regulations of this district are designed to protect environmental quality of the district and adjacent areas. (Ord. 98-9, amended, 2000)

17.49.040 Uses.
No building, structure or land shall be used or developed and no building or structure shall be erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained in the industrial zones except as provided as a permitted or conditional use by the Standard Land Use Table in Appendix A. Any site which contains a legal nonconforming use must meet all applicable Lindon City ordinance requirements when the use is changed.
1. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to approve special training schools other than those associated with an industrial use when all of the following requirements are met:
    a. All neighboring businesses and property owners have been noticed by the applicant of the proposed use and have been informed of the time and date of the conditional use permit hearing proposed before the Planning Commission.
    b. The applicant has demonstrated special facility needs for the training school which is particular to large open industrial buildings.
    c. Parking, traffic, hours of operation, as well as other site plan and business practices shall be compatible with the industrial character of the LI Zone. The applicant shall demonstrate that they can provide adequate parking for the special training school without becoming a burden to neighboring property and/or business owners. (Ord. 2001-5, adopted, 2001; Ord. 98-9, amended, 2000)

17.49.050 Height.
The maximum height for all buildings and structures regulated by this chapter shall be forty-eight (48) feet in the LI zone and fifty (50) feet in the HI zone above grade. For every foot higher than fifty (50) feet in the HI zone the structure must be set back from the street ten (10) more feet in addition to the required minimum setback. The maximum height for any structure in the HI zone shall be sixty-five (65) feet. (Ord. 98-9, amended, 2000)

17.49.060 Landscaping and Fencing.
1. Landscaping objectives. Landscaping plans shall be prepared with a view toward accomplishing the following design objectives (plans will be approved or denied based on how well these objectives are satisfied):
    a. Enhance the visual environment by:
        i. Adding visual interest through texture, color, size, shape, etc., and
        ii. Enhancing perspective by framing views complimenting architecture, screening and creating points of interest and activity.
    b. Ensure public safety by:
        i. Guiding the circulation of cars and people.
        ii. Controlling access to parking lots.
        iii. Making traffic diverters prominent, and;
        iv. Creating street identification by varying the species, height, and location of landscaping.
    c. Minimize noise and glare.
    d. Conserve energy.
    e. Complement architecture by landscaping around buildings.
    f. Screen areas of low visual interest.
2. Overall landscaping plan. With the application for site plan approval, an overall landscaping plan shall be submitted. Landscaping plans shall show details on specific types and locations of trees and shall also identify areas to be sod or other types of vegetation or ground cover.
3. Landscaping Strip. Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission, a landscaped strip twenty (20) feet in width shall be planted with grass and maintained in a living, growing condition along all public street frontages.
    a. The measurement of the twenty (20) feet in landscaping will be measured from the back of walk, or back curb if no sidewalk exists. Areas with meandering sidewalks will have the twenty (20) feet measured from back of curb but may not count sidewalk width as part of the twenty (20) feet landscaping requirement.
    b. thirty percent (30%) of the landscape strip may consist of decorative rock, bark, mulch, and/or other ground covers other than grass. A planting/landscaping plan detailing types of ground covers, weed barriers, sprinklers, etc., in the non-grass areas shall be submitted and approved by the Planning Director.
    c. Tree shall be planted thirty (30) feet on center, centered ten (10) feet from the edges of the strip in all required landscaped and bermed areas.
    d. Landscaping requirements concerning trees and landscape materials can be changed and/or altered (with regard to location and design) upon approval of the Planning Commission at the site plan review stage of an application. No net loss of landscaping should occur with any approved alterations. Other landscaping layouts consistent with the Lindon City Commercial Design Guidelines may also be considered by the Planning Commission.
4. Trees. Recommended trees may be found in the list of tree species located in the Lindon City Tree Planting Guide and, unless otherwise specified, shall be at least two (2) inch caliper.
5. Sprinkling and Irrigation. All plantings shall be serviced by an acceptable underground automatic irrigation or sprinkler system, and maintained in a healthful living condition. Dead plant materials shall be replaced as necessary within the first year of planting.
6. Concrete curbing shall be provided between landscaped areas and off-street parking areas that is at least six inches (6") higher than the parking area.
7. A masonry or concrete fence seven (7) feet high, shall be constructed and maintained along any property line between a non-residential development and a residential use or a residential zone. The fence shall be constructed and maintained by the owner of the non-residential development. Perimeter fencing shall not exceed eight (8') feet in height without approval by the Planning Commission. In all zones the Planning Commission may approve a landscaping screen in lieu of a fence, a fence other than a masonry fence, or approve a fence height greater than eight (8) feet if it makes the following findings:
    a. The proposed fence/landscape screen provides an adequate buffer for the adjoining residential use;
    b. The appearance of the fence/landscape screen will not detract from the residential use and/or non-residential use of the property;
    c. The proposed fence/landscape screen will shield the residential use from noise, storage, traffic or any other characteristic of the non-residential use that is incompatible with residential uses.
    d. The Planning Commission may waive or adjust this fence/screening requirement upon findings that the fence is not needed to protect adjacent residential uses from adverse impacts and that such impacts can be mitigated in another appropriate manner.
8. If not in conflict with utilities or other infrastructure, a landscape strip with a ten foot (10') minimum width running the length of frontage along Interstate 15 shall be installed and maintained in the T zone. Trees shall be planted thirty (30) feet on center in the landscape strip. As long as there is no net loss of trees, the location of the trees can be altered by the Planning Commission if the strip of landscaping is in conflict with utilities or other infrastructure. (Ord. 2012-12, amended, 2012; Ord. 2008-10, amended, 2008; Ord. 98-9, amended, 2000)

17.49.070 Architectural design.
All buildings in the LI and HI zone shall be aesthetically pleasing, well-proportioned buildings, which blend with the surrounding property and structures. The following criteria shall be applied to all buildings and/or structures constructed in the LI, HI and T zones and any other construction requiring a building permit in the LI, HI and T zones as per the currently adopted building code for Lindon City:
1. Twenty-five percent (25%) minimum of the exterior of all buildings (except as permitted in 17.49.070(4)) shall be covered with brick, decorative block, stucco, wood, or other similar materials as approved by the Planning Commission. Precast concrete or concrete tilt-up buildings also meet the architectural treatment requirement, subject to the standards in section 17.49.070(2). (These architectural treatment standards are not applicable in the HI zone).
    a. With the consent of the property owner, the Planning Commission may allow some or all of the required architectural treatment on a proposed building or addition to be transferred to a pre-existing building or structure, or transferred to one or more sides of a proposed structure, which may be more visible from a public street. Said transfer of architectural treatment would need to improve the overall visual character of the area in a greater manner than if the treatment is only applied to the less visible building, addition, or side of the structure being considered. No net loss of treatment should occur. When considering a transfer of the architectural treatment, the Planning Commission should be conscious of visual site lines of adjacent buildings and properties to determine if they would be negatively impacted by a Planning Commission decision to allow transfer of the architectural treatment on the proposed structures.
2. Precast concrete or concrete tilt-up buildings are permitted in the LI zone and meet the architectural treatment requirement in subsection 1 above, subject to the following standards:
    a. Bare concrete exteriors are permitted if the concrete color is consistent and if the building is also finished with additional architectural details such as entrance canopies, wrought iron railings and finishes, shutters, multi-level porches, metal shades, and metal awnings.
    b. Painted or colored concrete exteriors are also permitted if the shade of each color is consistent and if the building is also finished with additional architectural details such as entrance canopies, wrought iron railings and finishes, shutters, multi-level porches, metal shades, and metal awnings.
3. All exterior building materials in the LI, HI and T zones shall be earth-tone colors. A sample color palette of acceptable earth-tone colors is found in the Appendix of the Lindon City Commercial Design Guidelines.
4. The Planning Commission may approve ribless, metal, flat-faced, stucco embossed, metal sandwich panel buildings when the Planning Commission finds that the building is aesthetically pleasing, adequately trimmed, contrasted with different colors, is well proportioned, blends in with surrounding property, and has a similar look to that achieved by 17.49.070(1). The exterior appearance of such buildings shall primarily be of earth tone colors. Applicants desiring to apply for this type of construction may consider the Lindon City Public Works building located at 946 West Center Street and the building located at 375 North 700 West in Pleasant Grove as examples of structures in compliance with this architectural design standard. (Ord. 2015-6, amended, 2015; Ord. 2008-8, amended, 2008; Ord. 2008-4, amended, 2008; Ord. 2003-1, amended, 2003; Ord. 98-9, amended, 2000)

17.49.080 Development Standards.
1. The minimum depth and/or length, in feet for yards in districts regulated by this chapter shall be as follows, provided however, all of the provisions of the currently adopted building and fire codes, and other applicable ordinances and requirements must also be complied with:
+-------------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
|                                                 |   LI    |   HI    |
+-------------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
| Minimum Zone Area:                              | 30 Ac   | 40 Ac   |
+-------------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
| Minimum Lot Area:                               | 1 Ac    | 3 Ac    |
+-------------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
| Minimum Frontage:                               | 100 ft. | 350 ft. |
+-------------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
| • Front:                                        | 20'     | 20'     |
+-------------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
| • Side:                                         | 0       | 0       |
+-------------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
| • Side when adjacent to a Street:               | 15'     | 20'     |
+-------------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
| • Side without one hour Firewall:               | 20'     | 20'     |
+-------------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
| • Rear:                                         | 0       | 0       |
+-------------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
| • Rear when adjoining a parcel in a residential | 40'     | 80'     |
| zone:                                           |         |         |
+-------------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
| • Maximum Structure Height:                     | 48'     | 50'     |
+-------------------------------------------------+---------+---------+
(Ord. 2008-4, amended, 2008; Ord. 2003-1, amended, 2003; Ord. 98-9, amended, 2000; Ord. 2015-18, amended, 2015)

17.49.090 Special Provisions.
1. Every site shall conform to the approved conditional use permit, site plan, or amended site plan. No structures or improvements may be added to a site that are not included on the approved site plan, original or amended. All emanates from the movement of motor vehicles. Premises shall be maintained in such a manner so as to avoid unreasonable interference with adjacent uses and to avoid public nuisances. Improvements shown on the approved site plan or amended site plan shall be maintained in a neat and attractive manner. Failure to complete or maintain a site in accordance with this chapter and with the approved site plan shall be a violation of this section. The City may initiate criminal and/or civil legal proceedings against any person, firm or corporation, whether acting as principal, agent, property owner, lessee, and employee or otherwise, for failure to complete or maintain a site in accordance with this chapter and with the approved site plan. Any violation of this chapter or any division there of is punishable by a class B misdemeanor.
2. No person shall store junk, partially or completely dismantled vehicles, or salvaged materials in any industrial, manufacturing, or research and development zone, except as authorized by the Planning Commission or City Council, and as shown on an approved site plan, amended or original, meeting the following standards.
    a. Any such authorized storage shall be done entirely within a building or an area enclosed by a site obscuring fence no less than six feet (6') in height.
    b. None of these materials shall be stacked in a manner to exceed the fence height.
    c. In all zones the Planning Commission may approve a landscaping screen in lieu of a fence, a fence other than a site obscuring fence or approve a fence height greater than six feet (6') if it makes the following findings:
        i. The proposed fence/landscape screen provides an adequate buffer for the adjoining residential use;
        ii. The appearance of the fence/landscape screen will not detract from the residential use and /or non-residential use of the property;
        iii. The proposed fence/landscape screen will shield the residential use from noise, storage, traffic or any other characteristic of the non-residential use that is incompatible with residential uses.
        iv. The Planning Commission may waive or adjust this fence/screening requirement upon findings that the fence is not needed to protect adjacent residential uses from adverse impacts and that such impacts can be mitigated in another appropriate manner.
3. All solid waste storage facilities shall be located at the rear of the main building or within an area enclosed with a sight-obscuring fence or wall measuring one foot (1') higher than the height of the solid waste container. The minimum access width to a solid waste storage facility shall be fifteen (15) feet.
4. No excessive dust, offensive odor, smoke, intermittent light, or noise shall be emitted which is discernible beyond the site or parcel boundary lines in question, except that which
5. No trash, rubbish, or weeds shall be allowed to accumulate on any lot in the LI or HI zones. The space around buildings and structures in the LI and HI zones shall be kept free from refuse, debris, and weeds. All waste shall be concealed from view from adjacent property, (Ord. 2008-4, amended, 2008; Ord. 98-9, amended, 2000)

Chapter 17.50 MIXED COMMERCIAL

Sections:
17.50.010    General Provisions.
17.50.020    MC - Mixed Commercial - Purpose.
17.50.030    Uses.
17.50.040    Height.
17.50.050    Fencing.
17.50.060    Landscaping and Screening.
17.50.070    Architectural Design.
17.50.080    Development Standards.
17.50.090    Parking Requirements.
17.50.100    Maintenance of Premise.
17.50.110    Storage of Merchandise.
17.50.120    Special Provisions.

17.50.010 General Provisions.
1. The objective in establishing the Mixed Commercial (MC) zone is to provide areas within the City where low intensity light industrial, research and development, professional and business services, retail and other commercial related uses may be located.
2. For permitted uses and uses which require a conditional use permit, refer to the Standard Land Use Table in Appendix A.
3. Refer to the following Chapters and subsections for additional regulations:
    a. 17.04 General and Supplemental Provisions
    b. 17.20 Conditional Uses Generally
    c. 17.16 Nonconforming buildings and uses
    d. 17.18 Off-Street Parking
    e. Title 18, Lindon City Sign Ordinance

17.50.020 MC - Mixed Commercial - Purpose.
It shall be the purpose of the MC District to provide areas in appropriate locations where low intensity light industrial (contained entirely within a building), research and development, professional and business services, retail and other commercial related uses not producing objectionable effects may be established, maintained and protected. The regulations of this district are designed to protect environmental quality, compatibility, competitiveness, and aesthetics of the district and adjacent areas.

17.50.030 Uses.
No building, structure or land shall be used or developed and no building or structure shall be erected, structurally altered, enlarged or maintained in the industrial zones except as provided as a permitted or conditional use by the Standard Land Use Table in Appendix A. Any site which contains a legal nonconforming use must meet all applicable Lindon City ordinance requirements when the use is changed.

17.50.040 Height.
The maximum average height for all buildings and structures regulated by this chapter shall be 48 feet above finished grade. (See Section 17.02.010(26))

17.50.050 Fencing.
1. A masonry or concrete fence seven (7) feet high, shall be constructed and maintained along any property line between a non-residential development and a residential use or a residential zone. The fence shall be constructed and maintained by the owner of the non-residential development. Perimeter fencing shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height without approval by the Planning Commission. In all commercial zones the Planning Commission may approve a landscaping screen in lieu of a fence, a fence other than a masonry fence or approve a fence height greater than eight (8) feet if it makes the following findings:
    a. The proposed fence/landscape screen provides an adequate buffer for the adjoining residential use;
    b. The appearance of the fence/landscape screen will not detract from the residential use and/or non-residential use of the property;
    c. The proposed fence/landscape screen will shield the residential use from noise, storage, traffic or any other characteristic of the non-residential use that is incompatible with residential uses.
    d. The Planning Commission may waive or adjust this fence/screening requirement upon findings that the fence is not needed to protect adjacent residential uses from adverse impacts and that such impacts can be mitigated in another appropriate manner. (Ord. 2012-12, amended, 2012)

17.50.060 Landscaping and Screening.
1. Landscaping Objectives. Landscaping plans shall be prepared with a view toward accomplishing the following design objectives (plans will be approved or denied based on how well these objectives are satisfied):
    a. Enhance the visual environment by:
        i. Adding visual interest through texture, color, size, shape, etc., and
        ii. Enhancing perspective by framing views, complementing architecture, screening, and creating points of interest and activity.
    b. Ensure Public Safety by:
        i. Guiding the circulation of cars and people,
        ii. Controlling access to parking lots,
        iii. Making traffic diverters prominent, and
        iv. Creating Street Identification by varying the species, height, and location of landscaping.
        v. Minimizing noise and glare.
        vi. Conserving energy.
        vii. Complementing architecture by landscaping around buildings.
        viii. Screening areas of low visual interest.
2. Overall Landscaping Plan. With the application for site plan approval, an overall landscaping plan shall be submitted.
3. Open Space. A minimum of fifteen percent (15%) of each lot shall be maintained in permanent landscaped open space.
4. Landscaping Strip. Unless otherwise approved by the Planning Commission, a landscaped strip twenty (20) feet in width shall be planted with grass and maintained in a living, growing condition along all public street frontages.
    a. The measurement of the twenty (20) feet in landscaping will be measured from the back of walk, or back curb if no sidewalk exists. Areas with meandering sidewalks will have the twenty (20) feet measured from back of curb but may not count sidewalk width as part of the twenty (20) feet landscaping requirement.
    b. Thirty percent (30%) of the landscape strip may consist of decorative rock, bark, mulch, and/or other ground covers other than grass. A planting/landscaping plan detailing types of ground covers, weed barriers, sprinklers, etc., in the non-grass areas shall be submitted and approved by the Planning Director.
    c. Tree shall be planted thirty (30) feet on center, centered ten (10) feet from the edges of the strip in all required landscaped and bermed areas.
    d. Landscaping requirements concerning trees and landscape materials can be changed and/or altered (with regard to location and design) upon approval of the Planning Commission at the site plan review stage of an application. No net loss of landscaping should occur with any approved alterations. Other landscaping layouts consistent with the Lindon City Commercial Design Guidelines may also be considered by the Planning Commission.
5. Landscaped Berms. Where possible, landscaped berms shall be constructed within required landscaped strips along public street frontages according to the following standards:
    a. Berms shall vary in height and shall be sculptured with enclaves, protrusion, etc. Berms shall be at least from two and one-half (2½) to four (4) feet in height with an average of three and one-half (3½) feet.
    b. The slope of the berm shall be such as to be mowable with a standard rider mower.
    c. Berms are not required where slopes within the required landscaped strip are excessive and would not reasonably accommodate berms.
6. Trees.
    a. Along perimeter public street frontages and along I-15, trees shall be a minimum of two inches (2") in caliper planted thirty (30) feet on center and planted at least seven (7) feet from any impermeable surface. Tree placement and location may be modified by the Planning Commission.
    b. The recommended species are Sycamore, Shademaster Honey Locust, Sunburst Honey Locust, Little Leaf Linden, Norway Maple, and all flowering tree types.
7. Sprinkling and Irrigation. All plantings shall be serviced by an acceptable irrigation or sprinkler system, and maintained in a healthful living condition. Dead plant materials shall be replaced as necessary within the first year of planting.
8. Landscaping Around Buildings. A perimeter landscape strip at least five (5) feet wide shall be placed around all buildings.
9. A landscape strip with a fifteen foot (15') minimum width running the length of frontage along Interstate 15 shall be installed and maintained in the T zone. Trees shall be planted thirty (30) feet on center in the landscape strip. The location of the trees can be altered by the Planning Commission.

17.50.070 Architectural Design.
1. All structures in the MC zone shall be aesthetically pleasing, well-proportioned buildings that blend with the surrounding property and structures. All structures in the MC zone shall have finishes of brick, decorative block, stucco, wood, concrete tilt-up, or other materials and designs approved within the Lindon City Commercial Design Guidelines, or as otherwise approved by the Planning Commission.
2. Concrete tilt-up buildings shall comply with the following standards:
    a. Painted or colored concrete exteriors are permitted. The shade of each color must be consistent.
    b. Bare concrete exteriors are not permitted.
    c. The exterior of a concrete tilt-up building shall be finished with additional architectural details such as entrance canopies, wrought iron railings and finishes, shutters, multi-level porches, metal shades, and metal awnings. (Ord. 2015-6, amended, 2015; Ord. 2012-8, amended, 2012)

17.50.080 Development Standards.
The minimum depth and/or length in feet for yards in districts regulated by this chapter shall be as follows, provided however, all of the provisions of the Uniform Building Code, the Uniform Fire Code, and other applicable Ordinances and Requirements must also be complied with:
+-----------------------------------------------------+--------+
| Minimum Lot Area:                                   | 1 Ac   |
+-----------------------------------------------------+--------+
| Minimum Frontage:                                   | 100 Ft |
+-----------------------------------------------------+--------+
| Lot Setbacks (Minimum)                              |        |
+-----------------------------------------------------+--------+
| Front:                                              | 20 Ft  |
+-----------------------------------------------------+--------+
| Side:                                               | 0 Ft   |
+-----------------------------------------------------+--------+
| Side when adjacent to a street:                     | 20 Ft  |
+-----------------------------------------------------+--------+
| Side without one hour firewall:                     | 20 Ft  |
+-----------------------------------------------------+--------+
| Rear:                                               | 0 Ft   |
+-----------------------------------------------------+--------+
| Rear when adjoining a parcel in a residential zone: | 40 Ft  |
+-----------------------------------------------------+--------+
| Maximum structure height:                           | 48 Ft  |
+-----------------------------------------------------+--------+

17.50.090 Parking Requirements.
1. Parking spaces shall be required as per chapter 17.18 - Off-Street Parking. Off street parking shall also be subject to the following standards in the MC zone:
    a. All parking spaces, parking areas and driveways shall be constructed in accordance with standards established in 17.18 and the Lindon Land Development Policies, Standard Specifications, and Drawings Handbook.
    b. Parking Setbacks. All parking areas shall be set back a minimum of twenty (20) feet from all dedicated public streets and ten (10) feet from exterior boundaries of the zone.
    c. Screening of Parking Areas. Where topography permits, required parking setbacks shall be landscaped with lawn and shall be planted with trees of sufficient height to screen and buffer parking and loading areas from adjoining public access streets.
    d. All off street parking areas in the MC zone shall provide landscaped end islands at the end of each row of parking to delineate all on-site driveways. Each island shall have one (1) deciduous tree, unless the end island is within seventy-five (75) feet of a dedicated street right-of-way or within fifty (50) feet of a store front.
    e. Structured Parking. Any parking structure above the finished ground elevation shall have the same setback requirements as outlined for buildings, and shall be architecturally integrated through use of the same or similar materials, colors, landscaping, etc.
2. Parking Structure Height. Freestanding parking structures shall comply with the same height requirements as main buildings.
3. Lindon City rights-of-way shall not be used for employee parking.

17.50.100 Maintenance of Premise.
1. No excessive or offensive noise, dust, odor, smoke, or light, shall be emitted which is discernible beyond the site or parcel boundary lines in question, except that which emanates from the movement of motor vehicles. Premises shall be maintained in such a manner so as to avoid unreasonable interference with adjacent uses and to avoid public nuisances.
2. No person shall store junk, unlicensed and/or inoperable vehicles, partially or completely dismantled vehicles, or salvaged materials in the MC zone outside a building.
3. All solid waste storage facilities shall be enclosed with a block wall. The minimum access width to a solid waste storage facility shall be fifteen (15) feet.
4. No trash, rubbish, or weeds shall be allowed to accumulate on any lot in the MC zone. The space around buildings and structures shall be kept free from refuse, debris, and weeds. All waste shall be concealed from view from adjacent property.
5. The architecture, appearance, and aesthetics of all buildings, structures, and edifices in the MC zone shall be maintained to reasonable upkeep and maintenance standards.

17.50.110 Storage of Merchandise.
1. The storage of merchandise outside an approved building shall be in an area approved as part of the site plan and shall be within an area enclosed with a sight obscuring fence of at least six (6) feet in height; provided, however, that promotional displays, new car vehicle sales lots, and plant materials may be displayed outside of an approved building or enclosed area so long as they are placed appurtenant to a building wherein the business displays the bulk of its goods for sale.
2. This subsection shall not apply to temporary site plans under 17.17.
3. Landscaped areas and parking lots shall not be used for the displaying of merchandise.
4. Stacking of merchandise or materials of any kind shall not be allowed to protrude above required walls or fence lines unless approved by a temporary use permit.
5. No outdoor storage can be placed without any required fencing first being installed.
6. For outdoor storage areas required to be visually obscured, the Planning Commission may approve a landscaping screen in lieu of a fence, a fence other than a site obscuring fence or approve a fence height greater than six (6) feet if it makes the following findings:
    a. The proposed fence/landscape screen provides an adequate buffer for the adjoining uses;
    b. The appearance of the fence/landscape screen will not detract from adjoining uses and/or use of the property;
    c. The proposed fence/landscape screen will shield the adjoining uses from noise, storage, traffic or any other characteristic of the storage use that is incompatible with adjoining uses.
    d. The Planning Commission may waive or adjust this fence/screening requirement upon findings that the fence is not needed to protect adjacent uses from adverse impacts and that such impacts can be mitigated in another appropriate manner. (Ord. 2012-12, amended, 2012)

17.50.120 Special Provisions.
1. Lighting. Freestanding lighting fixtures of at least eight (8) feet in height and not to exceed twenty (20) feet in height and producing at least one (1) candle foot of illumination shall be installed and maintained along the street right-of-way lines and designed to shine away from residential developments. The lighting shall be designed to discourage the occurrence of graffiti and enhance a crime prevention environment and shall not glare into adjacent residential areas. Lighting in parking areas shall not glare into adjacent residential areas.
2. Every site shall conform to the approved conditional use permit, site plan, or amended site plan. No structures or improvements may be added to a site that are not included on the approved site plan, original or amended. All improvements shown on the approved site plan or amended site plan shall be maintained in a neat and attractive manner. Failure to complete or maintain a site in accordance with this Chapter and with the approved site plan shall be a violation of this section. The City may initiate criminal and/or civil legal proceedings against any person, firm or corporation, whether acting as principal, agent, property owner, lessee, employee or otherwise, for failure to complete or maintain a site in accordance with this Chapter and with the approved site plan. Any violation of this chapter or any division thereof is punishable by a Class B misdemeanor. (Ord. 2012-12, amended, 2012; Ord. 2001-9, amended, 2001)

Chapter 17.51 COMMERCIAL FARM ZONE

Sections:
17.51.010    Purpose and objectives.
17.51.012    Permitted uses.
17.51.014    Owner residency required.
17.51.015    Agricultural production required.
17.51.020    Lot area.
17.51.030    Lot width.
17.51.040    Lot depth.
17.51.050    Lot frontage.
17.51.070    Number of dwellings per lot.
17.51.080    Noncommercial building yard setback requirements.
17.51.085    Commercial building yard setback requirements.
17.51.090    Projections into yards.
17.51.100    Building height.
17.51.110    Distance between buildings.
17.51.120    Permissible lot coverage.
17.51.125    Screening and fencing.
17.51.130    Parking.
17.51.140    Residential and agricultural accessory buildings.
17.51.145    Noise limits.
17.51.150    Other requirements.

17.51.010 Purpose and objectives.
Commercial farm zones (CF) are established to provide encouragement of agricultural production and associated commercial activities that are compatible with and/or promote agricultural uses within the city. Objectives of the zone include promoting and preserving agricultural production, promoting agricultural open space throughout the city, and allowing associated commercial activities which could be used as additional revenue sources to help sustain and support agricultural industry within Lindon. Although the intent of the zone is to promote agricultural uses within the city, the zone may be utilized as a “holding zone” to allow reasonable options for income from agricultural and/or commercial uses for a period of time before developing the land in conformance with the general plan land use map. (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.012 Permitted uses.
The following is a list of permitted, conditional, and nonpermitted uses in the CF zone:
1. Permitted Uses. Single-family residence; accessory buildings to a single-family dwelling; agricultural production and related accessory buildings; other permitted uses in the R1 residential zones.
2. Conditional Uses. Caretaker’s or farm-help accessory dwelling unit; commercial horse stables; farmers’ market; greenhouses; plant or garden nursery; garden center; bed and breakfast facility; educational programs and associated facilities; amphitheater; reception center; conference center; boutique; cafe; restaurant; veterinary clinic; and food manufacturing (not to exceed two thousand (2,000) square feet of processing and production area). (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.014 Owner residency required.
Each commercial farm project shall have a legal on-site residence that is owner occupied. (Ord. 2017-16 §1, adopted, 2017)

17.51.015 Agricultural production required.
1. At least forty percent (40%) of the property must be maintained in active agricultural production and be managed in such a way that there is a reasonable expectation of profit. Land used in connection with a farmhouse, such as landscaping, driveways, etc., cannot be included in the area calculation for agricultural production eligibility.
2. For the purposes of this chapter, “agricultural production” shall be defined as the production of food for human or animal consumption through the raising of crops and/or breeding and raising of domestic animals and fowl (except household pets) in such a manner that there is a reasonable expectation of profit. (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.020 Lot area.
The minimum area of any lot or parcel of land in the CF zone shall be five (5) acres. Multiple parcels that total five (5) acres or more may qualify as meeting the minimum lot area without combining the parcels only when they are under identical legal ownership and are contiguous. A deed restriction prohibiting the separation of parcels may be required in order to maintain the minimum five (5) contiguous acres. (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.030 Lot width.
Each lot or parcel of land in the CF zone, or conglomeration of parcels as defined in Section 17.51.020, shall have a width of not less one hundred feet (100') (measured at front yard setback). (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.040 Lot depth.
Each lot or parcel of land in the CF zone, or conglomeration of parcels as defined in Section 17.51.020, shall have a minimum lot depth of one hundred feet (100'). (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.050 Lot frontage.
Each lot or parcel of land in the CF zone, or conglomeration of parcels as defined in Section 17.51.020, shall abut a public street for a minimum distance of fifty feet (50'), on a line parallel to the centerline of the street or along the circumference of a cul-de-sac improved to city standards. Frontage on a street end which does not have a cul-de-sac improved to city standards shall not be counted in meeting this requirement. (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.070 Number of dwellings per lot.
Not more than one (1) single-family dwelling with an accessory apartment, and one (1) caretaker’s or farm-help dwelling, may be placed on a lot or parcel of land in the CF zone (or conglomeration of parcels necessary to meet minimum acreage requirements). In no case may the caretaker’s or farm-help dwelling be sold as a separate, subdivided lot unless it meets all requirements of the underlying zone. Owner occupancy of a primary residence on the property is required to maintain a caretaker’s or farm-help dwelling unit. (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.080 Noncommercial building yard setback requirements.
The following minimum yard requirements shall apply to noncommercial buildings in the CF zone: (Note: All setbacks are measured from the property line, or for property lines adjacent to a street the setback shall be measured from the street right-of-way line.)
1. Front yard setback: thirty feet (30').
2. Rear yard setback: thirty feet (30').
3. Side yard setback: ten feet (10').
4. Street Side Yard – Corner Lots. On corner lots, the side yard contiguous to the street shall not be less than thirty feet (30') and shall not be used for vehicle parking, except such portion as is devoted to driveway use. Of the remaining rear and side yards on a corner lot, one (1) rear yard setback of thirty feet (30') and one (1) side yard setback of ten feet (10') shall be required on the remaining non-street-facing sides of the lot. (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.085 Commercial building yard setback requirements.
The following minimum yard requirements shall apply to the following commercial buildings/structures in the CF zone: amphitheater, reception center, conference center, boutique, cafe, restaurant, veterinary clinic, and food manufacturing.
(Note: Unless otherwise noted, all setbacks are measured from the property line, or for property lines adjacent to a street the setback shall be measured from the street right-of-way line.)
1. Front yard setback: fifty feet (50').
2. Rear yard setback: twenty feet (20') to property line minimum and at least one hundred feet (100') from any neighboring primary residence.
3. Side yard setback: twenty feet (20') to property line minimum and at least one hundred feet (100') from any neighboring primary residence.
4. Street Side Yard – Corner Lots. On corner lots, the side yard contiguous to the street shall not be less than fifty feet (50'). (Ord. 2017-16 §1, adopted, 2017)

17.51.090 Projections into yards.
1. The following structures may be erected on or project into any required yard setback:
    a. Fences and retaining walls in conformance with the Lindon City Code and other city codes or ordinances.
    b. Necessary appurtenances for utility service.
2. The structures listed below may project into a minimum front, side, or rear yard not more than the following distances:
    a. The following may project into a minimum front, side or rear yard not more than twenty-four inches (24"): cornices, eaves, belt courses, sills, buttresses, or other similar architectural features; fireplace structures and bays (provided that they are not wider than eight feet (8'), measured generally parallel to the wall of which they are a part), awnings and planting boxes or masonry planters.
    b. The structures listed below may project into a rear yard not more than twelve feet (12'): a shade structure or uncovered deck (which does not support a roof structure, including associated stairs and landings) extending from the main-floor level and/or ground level of a building, provided such structure is open on at least three (3) sides, except for necessary supporting columns and customary architectural features.
    c. The following may project into a front, side or rear yard (above or below grade) not more than four feet (4') as long as they are uncovered (not supporting a roof structure): unenclosed stairways, balconies, landings, and fire escapes. (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.100 Building height.
No lot or parcel of land in the CF zone shall have a building or structure which exceeds a maximum average height of thirty-five feet (35'), measuring the four (4) corners of the structure from finished grade to the highest point of the roof structure. In all zones, the planning director and chief building official shall be responsible for designating and identifying the four (4) corners of a structure. Nonhabitable architectural features or structures not wider than ten feet (10') such as silos, steeples, cupolas, or other similar structures may exceed the building height up to forty-five feet (45'). No dwelling shall be erected to a height less than one (1) story above grade. (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.110 Distance between buildings.
The separation distance between any accessory buildings and a dwelling, or the distance between multiple detached accessory buildings, shall not be less than ten feet (10'). (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.120 Permissible lot coverage.
1. In a CF zone, all buildings, including accessory buildings and structures, shall not cover more than forty percent (40%) of the area of the lot or parcel of land, or the conglomeration of parcels as defined in Section 17.51.020.
2. At least forty percent (40%) of the front yard setback area of any lot shall be landscaped. On any lot, concrete, asphaltic, gravel, or other driveway surfaces shall not cover more than fifty percent (50%) of a front yard. (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.125 Screening and fencing.
1. The following screening and fencing requirements are required in the CF zone:
    a. A six-foot (6') high site obscuring fence shall be constructed and maintained along any property line between a residential use or residential zone and a commercial building in the CF zone when the commercial building is closer than thirty feet (30') from the property line. The fence shall be placed along the property line at an area parallel to the commercial building and shall extend a minimum of fifty feet (50') along the property line from both directions from the ends of the building.
    b. Any commercial structure closer than thirty feet (30') to a residential use or residential zone shall provide a minimum ten-foot (10') wide tree-lined buffer from the commercial building to the adjacent residential use or zone. Trees shall be planted at least every ten feet (10') along the buffer area adjacent to the residential use or residential zone. Trees must be a minimum of two-inch (2") caliper measured one foot (1') off the ground and at least six feet (6') tall when planted. In addition to any required fencing, trees shall be of a variety that will mature to a height of at least twenty feet (20') tall in order to provide an increased visual barrier between the commercial use and the residential use.
2. For purposes of this chapter, residential dwelling units and agricultural accessory buildings in the CF zone are not considered commercial structures.
3. The planning commission may waive or modify the fencing and/or landscape screening requirement upon findings that the fence and/or landscaping is not needed to protect adjacent residential uses from adverse impacts, or that such impacts can be mitigated in another appropriate manner. (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.130 Parking.
1. Each use in the CF zone shall have, on the same lot or conglomeration of parcels as defined in Section 17.51.020, off-street parking sufficient to comply with the number of spaces required by Chapter 17.18.
2. Parking spaces in a CF zone are exempted from the surfacing, striping, and interior landscaping requirements as found in Chapter 17.18, but shall be provided with a dustless, hard surface material such as compacted gravel, asphalt, or concrete and shall be provided with a similar hard surfaced access from a public street.
3. Notwithstanding subsection (2) of this section, any off-street parking lot adjacent to a residential use or residential zone shall provide a minimum ten-foot (10') landscaped buffer from the parking lot to the adjacent residential use or zone. Trees shall be planted at least every ten feet (10') along the landscaped strip. Trees must be a minimum of two-inch (2") caliper measured one foot (1') off the ground and at least six feet (6') tall when planted. Trees shall be of a variety that will mature to a height of at least twenty feet (20') tall in order to provide a visual barrier between the parking lot and the residential use/zone.
4. No required parking spaces shall be within thirty feet (30') of a front property line or street side property line unless approved by the land use authority. The land use authority may reduce this requirement where an alternative plan is proposed that meets the design intent of the commercial farm zone while also maintaining appropriate setbacks and buffers compatible with surrounding properties. There shall be no overall net loss of landscape percentage for the site.
5. All required ADA parking stalls shall be provided with smooth, hard surface asphalt or concrete paving with a similar surface provided as an ADA accessible pedestrian route between the parking spaces and any public buildings being accessed from the spaces. (Ord. 2019-9 §1, amended, 2019; Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.140 Residential and agricultural accessory buildings.
1. Accessory Building within the Buildable Area (Noncommercial). Accessory buildings meeting all setback requirements (within the buildable area) for the main dwelling are permitted when in compliance with the following requirements:
    a. Have a building height not taller than thirty-five feet (35'). Height to be calculated as per Section 17.51.100.
    b. Comply with all lot coverage requirements.
2. Accessory Building outside the Buildable Area (Noncommercial). Accessory buildings that do not meet the setback requirements (outside the buildable area) for the main dwelling shall comply with lot coverage requirements and meet the following:
    a. Be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from the front property line and five feet (5') from any other property line.
    b. Be set back a minimum of ten feet (10') from property line when located between the main dwelling and the side property line.
    c. Not be located within a recorded public utility easement, unless a release can be secured from all public utilities.
    d. Have an average building height of no more than twenty feet (20') in height measured at the four (4) corners of the structure from finished grade to the highest point of the roof structure.
    e. Comply with distance between buildings requirements.
3. Accessory buildings larger than two hundred (200) square feet shall be required to obtain a building permit.
4. Construction of an accessory building may precede the construction of the primary residence. (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017)

17.51.145 Noise limits.
1. Noise levels, as measured in decibels, from any commercial event/activity shall be limited to the following levels:
    a. Eighty-five (85) dBA between 7:00 a.m. and 10:00 p.m.
    b. Fifty-five (55) dBA between 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m.
2. Devices used to measure noise levels shall:
    a. Be set to the “A” frequency weighting and “slow” response characteristic; and
    b. Be placed at any point on the property line.
3. Any noise level greater than the approved levels above may be allowed through the issuance of a special event permit as approved by Lindon City. (Ord. 2017-16 §1, adopted, 2017)

17.51.150 Other requirements.
1. Except as otherwise stated within this chapter regarding animal uses in the CF zone, all applicable sections of Title 6 (Animal Regulations) pertain to the CF zone, including setbacks to agricultural buildings and corrals.
2. Signage. Signs allowed within the CF zone are limited to monument signs, wall signs, banner signs, flags, directional signs, and temporary display signs (balloons, banners, and pennant flags) as more fully described in Title 18. (Ord. 2017-16 §1, amended, 2017; Ord. 2011-6, amended, 2011)

Chapter 17.52 T–TRAVEL INFLUENCE DISTRICT

Sections:
17.52.010    Purpose.
17.52.020    Applicability.
17.52.030    Proposed Land Uses permitted as per Standard Land Use Table.
17.52.040    Area, Width, Yard, Height, and Coverage Regulations.
17.52.050    Repealed.
17.52.060    Repealed.

17.52.010 Purpose.
It shall be the purpose of the T district to encourage and require appropriate land uses and density of uses adjacent to major highways, freeways, freeway interchanges, and freeway approach routes which will facilitate free and unimpeded traffic flow to and from such freeways and highways and will allow reasonable and harmonious uses on such adjacent lands, and will ensure attractive and orderly views of adjacent developments from highways and freeways and their approach zones. Among other requirements, visual images are deemed critical to the freeway driver’s safety, convenience, and comfort, and as appropriate will be reviewed and controlled by the Planning Commission. (Ord. 2006-2, amended, 2006; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-114-1)

17.52.020 Applicability.
The T–Travel influence district is an overlaid district which is applied to the land extending for five hundred (500) feet in either direction from the center of the freeway right of way. All proposed land uses shall conform to code standards of the underlying zone. (Ord. 2006-2, amended, 2006; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-114-2)

17.52.030 Proposed Land Uses permitted as per Standard Land Use Table.
All proposed land uses shall be permitted according to the use matrix or Compatibility Standard as found in the Standard Land Use Table, Appendix A of the Lindon City Code. (Ord. 2006-2, amended, 2006; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-114-3)

17.52.040 Area, Width, Yard, Height, and Coverage Regulations.
Regulations shall be the same as required for the underlying regular district, except as they may be modified by conditional use permit. (Ord. 2006-2, amended, 2006; Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-114-4)

17.52.050
(Ord. 2006-2, repealed, 2006)

17.52.060
(Ord. 2006-2, repealed, 2006)

Chapter 17.54 REGIONAL COMMERCIAL (RC) ZONE

Sections:
17.54.010    Purpose.
17.54.020    Uses.
17.54.030    Site design and maintenance.
17.54.040    Development standards.
17.54.050    Architectural design.
17.54.060    Parking requirements.
17.54.070    Landscaping and screening.
17.54.080    Special provisions.

17.54.010 Purpose.
1. The objective in establishing the regional commercial (RC) zone is to promote opportunities and areas for commercial, service, professional and business uses.
2. The purpose of the regional commercial (RC) zone is to provide areas along the interstate freeway for uses that are both compatible with and dependent on freeway visibility and access.
3. Developments should be generally upscale with attention given to landscaping, architecture, coordination of traffic circulation and building placement. Developments should provide a pleasing and functional environment that represents the quality of life in the city and also enhances employment opportunities and the retail tax base of the city.
4. The zone is to be characterized by attractively designed buildings and off-street parking lots situated among lawns, shrubs, trees, and plantings, which give a more pleasing appearance than other commercial and business zones.
5. Refer to the following chapters and subsections for additional regulations:
    a. Chapter 17.04, General and Supplemental Provisions.
    b. Chapter 17.18, Off-Street Parking.
    c. Title 18, Signs.
6. In case of conflict between provisions of this chapter and other provisions of the Lindon City Code, this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 2017-11 §1, adopted, 2017)

17.54.020 Uses.
The standard land use table shall not be used to establish permitted, conditional, and nonpermitted uses in the RC zone. Rather, the following primary uses, and no others, shall be permitted in the RC zone:
1. Residential. 
    a. Hotels, motels.
    b. Caretaker facilities – accessory to main uses only.
2. Manufacturing. 
    a. General food manufacturing – under twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
    b. Candy and other confectionary products.
    c. Brewery (liquor and spirits) maximum one thousand (1,000) square feet and must be in conjunction with a restaurant.
    d. All general apparel.
    e. Publishing, printing, and miscellaneous related work.
    f. Professional, scientific, photographic, optical instruments, etc.
    g. Motion picture production (permanent studios).
    h. High-tech manufacturing; indoor production and storage only; may not produce objectionable noises, odors, or other externalities to the detriment of surrounding properties.
3. Transportation and Utilities. 
    a. Auto parking facilities – private (does not include storage of vehicles).
    b. Telephone utility lines – underground.
    c. Television broadcasting studios.
    d. Television transmitting stations and relay tower (height of tower may not exceed maximum height of zone).
    e. Electric utility lines – above ground thirty-five (35) kV or greater.
    f. Electric utility lines – underground.
    g. Gas utilities – underground.
    h. Water storage.
    i. Water pressure control stations.
    j. Sewage pressure control stations.
    k. Freight forwarding services (no outdoor transloading or transfer of truck trailers).
    l. Packing and crating services.
4. Wholesale Trade – Indoor Storage Only. 
    a. Drugs, chemicals, and allied products drugs, drug proprietaries and druggists’ sundries dry goods, piece goods, and notions, apparel and accessories.
    b. Groceries and food stuffs.
    c. Electrical apparatus and equipment, wiring supplies and construction material.
    d. Hardware.
    e. Plumbing and heating supplies.
    f. Professional equipment and supplies.
    g. Air conditioning, refrigeration equipment and supplies.
    h. Paper and paper products.
    i. Furniture and home furnishings.
5. Retail Trade. 
    a. Building material, equipment supplies and hardware – indoor storage only.
    b. Home improvement centers.
    c. Direct selling organizations – call centers.
    d. Arts, crafts, and hobbies.
    e. Musical instruments/supplies.
    f. Groceries and/or food.
    g. Candy and other confectionery products.
    h. Motorcycles, personal ATV, personal water craft, and snowmobile sales and service.
    i. Motor vehicles/trucks/marine – new vehicle dealership only (must meet site requirements found in Section 17.48.200).
    j. Gasoline service station with convenience store.
    k. Marine craft and accessories.
    l. Clothing, apparel, and accessories.
    m. Furniture and home furnishings – indoor storage only.
    n. Restaurants/fast food.
    o. Pharmacy.
    p. Books/newspapers/magazines.
    q. Office supplies.
    r. Cameras and photographic supplies.
    s. Gifts, toys, novelties, souvenirs, and antiques.
    t. Florists.
    u. Sporting goods and equipment.
    v. Computer goods and services.
    w. Optical goods.
6. Services. 
    a. Professional office uses.
    b. Chartered banks, credit unions, and other similar financial institutions.
    c. Security and commodity brokers, dealers, and exchanges.
    d. Laundering and dry cleaning services.
    e. Custom tailoring.
    f. Commercial janitorial.
    g. Photographic services.
    h. Beauty and barber shops.
    i. Massage therapy/personal care health spa.
    j. Child day care – five (5) to sixteen (16) children.
    k. Commercial preschool.
    l. Catering services.
    m. Blueprinting and photocopying.
    n. Research, development, and testing services.
    o. Photo-finishing.
    p. Motion picture distribution and services.
    q. Watch, clock, and jewelry repair.
    r. Medical, dental, and health clinic services/small outpatient type services.
    s. Hospital services.
    t. Medical and dental laboratories.
    u. Veterinarian services, animal hospitals – small animals only.
    v. Private primary and secondary schools.
    w. Universities and colleges.
    x. Professional and vocational schools.
    y. Art, music, dancing, tumbling, martial arts, and gymnastics schools.
    z. Driving schools.
    aa. Civic, social, and fraternal associations.
7. Public Assemblies. 
    a. Museums/art galleries.
    b. Motion picture and stage theaters.
    c. Dance club/music venue.
    d. Exhibit halls.
    e. Convention centers.
    f. Amusement parks.
    g. Arcades and miniature golf.
    h. Golf driving range.
    i. Recreation center/bowling lanes/roller skating rink.
    j. Water slides.
Secondary or ancillary uses to the primary uses listed above may be allowed when such use does not detract from the primary use and does not occupy more than twenty percent (20%) of the site or constitute more than twenty percent (20%) of the business revenue.
It is recognized that new types of land uses will develop and various forms of land uses not anticipated may seek to locate in the RC zone. The land use authority and city council shall review unlisted land uses based on specific criteria established in the compatibility standard in Appendix A Standard Land Use Table of the City Code after a complete application is received by the city. (Ord. 2017-11 §1, adopted, 2017)

17.54.030 Site design and maintenance.
1. External Storage and Activities. With the exception of the following paragraph below, all uses except surface parking shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building. All storage of product and material used shall be in a completely enclosed building constructed with the same exterior finish as the main building.
    a. Promotional displays may be displayed outside of an approved building or enclosed area so long as they are placed appurtenant to a building wherein the business displays the bulk of its goods for sale. Vehicles sales lots may display vehicles for sale outside of a building in accordance with the requirements found in Section 17.48.200.
        i. This subsection shall not apply to temporary site plans under Chapter 17.17.
        ii. Landscaped areas and parking lots shall not be used for the displaying of merchandise.
        iii. Stacking of merchandise or materials of any kind shall not be allowed to protrude above required walls or fence lines unless approved by a temporary use permit.
2. Solid Waste. Any solid waste receptacle shall be placed in an entirely sight-obscuring enclosure that is at least one foot (1') higher than the receptacle with a minimum height of six feet (6') and constructed on three (3) sides of masonry with a similar exterior finish as the main building, and gated on the fourth side with a minimum access width of fifteen feet (15'). Solid waste receptacles shall be located to the rear.
3. Mechanical Equipment. All mechanical equipment incidental to any building, including roof mounted mechanical equipment, shall be screened so as to be an integral part of the architectural design of the building to which it is attached or related.
4. Loading. Loading operations shall either be conducted within the building or be screened so as to not be totally visible from a public street, and conducted in such a way that in the process of loading or unloading, no vehicle will block the passage of other vehicles on the service drive or extend into any other public or private drive or street used for traffic circulation. Dock doors shall be screened from public streets through the use of screen walls, hedges, evergreen trees, berms, other landscaping or a combination of screening mediums as approved by the land use authority.
5. Lighting. On-site lighting shall be designed to discourage the occurrence of graffiti and enhance a crime prevention environment and shall not glare into adjacent residential areas.
6. Maintenance of Premises. 
    a. No excessive or offensive noises, dust, odor, smoke or light shall be emitted which is discernible beyond the site or parcel boundary lines in question, except that which emanates from the movement of motor vehicles. Premises shall be maintained in such a manner so as to avoid unreasonable interference with adjacent uses and to avoid public nuisances.
    b. No person shall store junk, unlicensed and/or inoperable vehicles, partially dismantled vehicles, or salvaged materials outside a building.
    c. No trash, rubbish, or weeds shall be allowed to accumulate on any lot in the RC zone. The space around buildings and structures shall be kept free from refuse, debris, and weeds. All waste shall be concealed from view from adjacent property.
    d. The architecture, appearance, and aesthetics of all buildings, structures and edifices in all commercial zones shall be maintained to reasonable upkeep and maintenance standards. (Ord. 2017-11 §1, adopted, 2017)

17.54.040 Development standards.
1. Lot Area. The minimum size of any lot shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
2. Building Setbacks. All buildings and structures shall be set back a minimum of thirty feet (30') from all property lines and fifty feet (50') if located along or adjacent to a UDOT right-of-way.
3. Building Height. No building shall be constructed to a height exceeding eighty feet (80'). (See Section 17.02.010).
4. Frontage. Every lot or parcel in the RC zone shall have a minimum frontage of one hundred feet (100') upon a public street or upon a private street or right-of-way.
5. Landscaping. See Section 17.54.070.
6. Street Cross Section. 
    a. The city right-of-way is sixty-six feet (66').
    b. The street cross section for public roads in the RC zone shall consist of:
        i. Fifty feet (50') of asphalt; and
        ii. Two-foot (2') curb and gutter on each side of the street; and
        iii. Eight (8') to twelve-foot (12') meandering park strips on each side of the street; and
        iv. Five-foot (5') arrhythmically meandering sidewalks on each side of the street; and
        v. A sixteen (16') to twenty-foot (20') foot planter strip behind the sidewalk on each side of the street.
    c. Property lines begin six feet (6') back of curb.
    d. A public sidewalk and street light easement of eleven feet (11') is required on private property per the cross section.
    e. For additional landscaping requirements see Section 17.54.070 below.
[IMAGE: <17.54.040_001.png>]Cross section concept. See Standard Drawing 2d in the Development Manual for specific details.
7. Street Lights. 
    a. City street lights shall be placed at one-hundred-foot (100') intervals two feet (2') in front of sidewalk along public roads; and
    b. Shall be Washington Postlite LED street lights along street frontage and esplanade LED street lights at intersections per the specifications in the Lindon City “Land Development, Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings” manual.
    c. Street light installation occurs when land is subdivided or when sites are improved (in the absence of a subdivision) which contain frontage where lights would be placed if the land were being subdivided.
8. Site plan applications must meet requirements found in Chapter 17.17 and in the Lindon City “Land Development, Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings” manual. (Ord. 2017-11 §1, adopted, 2017)

17.54.050 Architectural design.
The RC zone has specific design standards as outlined below, and, unless otherwise referenced, does not fall under requirements of the Lindon City commercial standards.
1. Massing and Orientation. 
    a. Breaking up large buildings (over twenty thousand (20,000) square feet) with multiple bays is required, and each façade should provide a meaningful purpose such as individual entrances to the larger building. On large buildings the façade should be broken up every fifty feet (50') with color, change of building materials, depth, height, or other architectural characteristics. On smaller buildings, the break in façade should be every thirty feet (30'). Appropriate detailing, scale, and proportion area elements that can be addressed through façade design shall be used.
    b. Orient buildings to the main street. If a building is on a corner lot, it may have a corner orientation.
    c. All building elevations shall be architecturally detailed, including nonstreet facing elevations.
    d. Differentiate between the ground floor and upper floors by providing for depth and variation in a façade through the use of different colors, materials, and other details.
    e. Building articulation is important to visually engage the populace. This can be accomplished through façade modulation, use of engaged columns or other expressions of the structural system, horizontal and vertical divisions through differing textures and materials.
    f. Variation in rooflines is appropriate through the use of dormer windows, overhangs, arches, stepped roofs, gables or similar devices.
    g. Avoid flat looking walls/façades and large, boxy buildings. Break up the flat front effect by introducing projecting elements such as wings, porticos, bay windows, trellises, pergolas, port-cocheres, awnings, recessed balconies and/or alcoves, cornices, or other offsets, changes in plane, and changes in height. Staggered bays will also contribute to a greater definition of a façade.
2. Exterior Walls and Surfaces – Building Materials. 
    a. Masonry building materials, such as brick, stone, and colored decorative concrete block, are highly preferred for use as the primary building material (sixty percent (60%) or greater) of commercial development. Fenestration can also be used to count toward the sixty percent (60%) of the recommended building materials. Many varieties and colors of brick or stone are available and acceptable for use. Other materials may be considered for use as a primary building material, based on review by the land use authority.
    b. Secondary building materials may include brick, stone, colored decorative concrete block, stucco, wood/cement fiber siding and timbers and other materials as approved by the land use authority.
    c. Concrete tilt up construction is permitted when stamped, stained, or textured panels are used to add character and appeal to the building; wainscot is also recommended to break up the façade; use change of color or change of material to break up large walls of cement; plain cement panels without decorative features are not permitted; windows can also be used to add character and break up the wall area.
    d. No buildings shall have blank, flat walls.
    e. Use primary building materials for façades that front onto public ways. Secondary building materials may be used as accents on these façades or on less visible façades.
    f. All roof drains, conduit and piping for any mechanical system shall be located in the interior of the building.
3. Texture, Colors, Finishes. 
    a. Avoid large areas of the same color and/or materials with no relief. Conversely, avoid the use of too many materials and/or colors, which may create busy or incongruous façades.
    b. Earth tones are generally preferred over harsh or loud colors, except where more vibrant colors are used as accents to the primary colors. A color palette of Utah earth tones as found in the Lindon City Commercial Design Standards is to be used as a reference guide to color selections in developments.
    c. Simplicity is encouraged regarding color. Excessive amounts of different colors should not be used. Brighter colors are recommended for use as accents only.
    d. Vary colors and materials to break up the monotony in larger developments.
4. Windows and Doors/Fenestration. 
    a. Building entries shall have one (1) or more of the following treatments: canopy, overhang, awning or arch; recesses or projections in the building façade including display windows surrounding the entrance; peaked roof or raised parapet structures over the door.
    b. Windows at the ground level should generally be of clear glass, and placed at a height that relates visual connection of indoor and outdoor environments.
    c. Avoid blank façades with no fenestration.
    d. Avoid the use of dark-tinted or reflective glass windows. Where possible, awnings, balconies, eaves, arbors, landscaping, and other shading devices are effective, and can be far more visually interesting.
    e. Materials for framing windows shall be compatible to the primary exterior material. Aluminum or similar framing materials that do not match are discouraged.
    f. Consider the use of canopies or awnings on windows that directly abut pedestrian walkways to provide protection from the elements.
    g. The ground floor of the primary façade shall be sixty percent (60%) fenestration at the pedestrian level.
    h. A significant amount of the primary ground story façade facing public streets, easements and other right-of-way corridors should be transparent glazing, to enhance the pedestrian environment, to connect the building interior to the outside, and to provide ambient lighting at night.
    i. Dark and obscure glazing should not be used at the ground level, except where harsh solar conditions cannot be controlled with other devices.
5. Architectural Styles – Exterior Trim and Decorative Detailing. 
    a. Materials for trim and details shall be compatible with the primary exterior material. Detailing should be authentic with the characteristics and capabilities of the materials.
    b. Excessive ornamentation is not recommended.
    c. Avoid use of pasted-on details that do not reflect internal pattern of building or are not proper use of materials.
    d. Exterior materials, massing, modulation, etc., should relate to the indoor function and use of the structure.
    e. Some form of detailing or fenestration should be used every fifteen feet (15') to twenty-five feet (25') along each side of small building (every thirty feet (30') to forty feet (40') for large buildings). Windows, doors, art or architectural detailing at the first floor level are all options for a blank wall.
    f. Enhance buildings with usable details and accents, such as a covered porch or walkway.
    g. Utilize colors, textures, and changes in building material to give definition to the façade.
6. Roofing. 
    a. Use no more than two (2) roof types in a single structure; i.e., a primary and secondary roof type.
    b. Variations in rooflines through dormer windows, overhangs, arches, stepped roofs, gables or other similar devices promote visual interest.
    c. Parapets require cornice treatments.
    d. Roof materials visible from the street (i.e., sloped roofs), should be harmonious in texture, color, and material with other building materials.
Sloped roofs should be carefully designed to shed snow away from all pedestrian ways.
7. Mechanical and Service Areas. 
    a. Mechanical, electrical, and communications equipment such as heating and cooling units, transformers, control boxes, and antennas should not be located on primary façades.
    b. Rooftop mechanical units are desirable where possible, and should be screened from view with integrated architectural elements (walls, parapets, etc.).
    c. Ground mechanical units must be screened from view with wing wall, landscaping, or a combination of both.
    d. Appropriate vegetative buffers shall be placed to screen and buffer all utility boxes and pedestals.
    e. Meters, stacks, and service pipes should be located conveniently for service and use, but not on primary façades.
    f. Loading docks should be located near parking facilities, in alley ways or private drive aisles, and designed or screened in a way that minimizes their visual impact. (Ord. 2017-11 §1, adopted, 2017)

17.54.060 Parking requirements.
1. All parking spaces, parking areas and driveways shall be constructed in accordance with standards established in Chapter 17.18, Off-Street Parking, and the Lindon City Development Manual, titled “Land Development Policies, Standard Specifications, and Drawings.” Off-street parking shall also be subject to the following standards in the regional commercial (RC) zone:
    a. Parking Setbacks. All parking areas shall be set back a minimum of twenty-seven feet (27') from all dedicated public streets, as measured from property lines and ten feet (10') from exterior boundaries of the zone.
    b. Structured Parking. Any parking structure above the finished ground elevation shall have the same setback requirements as outlined for buildings, and shall be architecturally integrated through use of the same or similar materials, colors, rhythm, landscaping, etc. Interior parking lot landscaping, as outlined in Section 17.18.085, must be provided for any parking stall in a parking structure that is visible from a “bird’s eye view.” Sub-grade stalls and parking stalls not visible from an aerial vantage point are not subject to interior landscaping requirements.
    c. Parking Structure Height. Freestanding parking structures shall not be taller than four (4) stories.
2. For parking areas with twenty-eight (28) or more total parking spaces in a double-loaded aisle, landscaping shall include at least a five-foot by thirty-six-foot (5' x 36') landscape area with two (2) trees at each end of the aisle and incorporate one (1) of the three (3) options below:
    a. A five-foot by thirty-six-foot (5' x 36') landscape area with two (2) trees placed ten (10) parking spaces apart;
    b. A five-foot (5') landscaped median with trees planted forty feet (40') apart; or
    c. Other similar designs that disperse landscaping throughout the parking area and are acceptable to city staff.
3. Where a parking area on a site is more than one hundred twenty thousand (120,000) square feet, the parking area must contain the following elements (parking areas in structures are not included):
    a. Internal access ways shall divide the parking area into smaller areas that are no greater than sixty thousand (60,000) square feet;
    b. These access ways are intended to direct business traffic to and from the adjacent street or between individual sections of the parking lot and provide safe pedestrian routes from parking areas to the building or use; and
    c. Each internal access way shall have at least one (1) auto travel lane, curbs, landscaping, and unobstructed sidewalks on both sides that provide pedestrian access to the building on the site, and shall be designed in the following method:
        i. The sidewalks must be at least six feet (6') wide. There must be a planting strip at least four feet (4') wide adjacent to the access way. The planting strip must be between the curb and the sidewalk, and be landscaped and irrigated with grass or other living vegetation with two-inch (2") caliper trees at least six feet (6') tall planted every twenty feet (20') and centered within the planting strip.
        ii. The internal access ways and associated landscaping are excluded from the portion of the parking and loading area used to calculate required interior landscaping.
4. Interior access roads require a minimum landscape strip of five feet (5') on both sides of the roadway. (Ord. 2017-11 §1, adopted, 2017)

17.54.070 Landscaping and screening.
1. Landscaping Objectives. Landscaping plans shall be prepared with a view toward accomplishing the following design objectives (plans will be approved or denied based on how well these objectives are satisfied):
    a. Enhance the visual environment by:
        i. Adding visual interest through texture, color, size, shape, etc., and
        ii. Enhancing perspective by framing views complementing architecture, screening and creating points of interest and activity.
    b. Ensure public safety by:
        i. Guiding the circulation of cars and people,
        ii. Controlling access to parking lots,
        iii. Making traffic diverters prominent, and
        iv. Creating street identification by varying the species, height, and location of landscaping.
    c. Minimize noise and glare.
    d. Conserve energy and water.
    e. Complement architecture by landscaping around buildings.
    f. Screen areas of low visual interest.
2. Overall Landscaping Plan. With the application for site plan approval, an overall landscaping plan shall be submitted. Landscaping plans shall show details on specific types and locations of trees and shall also identify areas to be sod or other types of vegetation or ground cover. Additional interior parking lot landscaping may be required per Chapter 17.18 and Section 17.54.060.
3. Open Space. A minimum of twenty-five percent (25%) of each lot shall be maintained in permanent landscaped open space. Any areas of the site plan not covered by building, parking, etc., shall be landscaped. Developments approved in phases are required to install landscaping for each respective phase at the time of development.
4. Landscaping Strip (Landscaping behind Sidewalk). Unless otherwise approved by the land use authority, a landscaped strip sixteen feet (16') to twenty feet (20') in width (based on meandering location of sidewalk) shall be planted with living plant material and maintained in a living, growing condition along all public street frontages.
    a. The measurement of the sixteen feet (16') to twenty feet (20') in landscaping will be measured from the back of the meandering sidewalk.
    b. Thirty percent (30%) of the landscaping strip may consist of decorative rock, bark, mulch, and/or other ground covers other than live plant material. A planting/landscaping plan detailing types of ground covers, weed barriers, sprinklers, etc., i.e., the nongrass areas, shall be submitted and approved by the planning director.
    c. Gravel, Rocks, and Boulders. Because rock, gravel and other hard surface materials as a ground cover retain and emit heat during the summer months when water is scarce, they may not be used within a thirty-six inch (36") radius (seventy-two inch (72") diameter) of any landscape strip tree. Otherwise, gravel, rocks, and boulders may be used on portions of the landscape strip. Rocks used as groundcover must be between one and one-half inches (1.5") and four inches (4") in size or over one foot (1') in size. Rocks of over one foot (1') in size must be located at least one and one-half feet (1.5') from the back of curb and the edge of the sidewalk.
    d. Trees shall be planted thirty feet (30') on center, centered from the edges of the strip in all required landscaped and bermed areas. Where street trees are required for park strips and street frontage landscape strips, trees may be alternated every thirty feet (30') on center between the park strip and street frontage landscape strip. At least thirty percent (30%) of the landscape strip trees shall be evergreens.
    e. Landscaped Berms. Where possible, landscaped berms shall be constructed within required landscaped strips along public street frontages according to the following standards:
        i. Berms shall vary in height and shall be sculptured with enclaves, protrusion, etc. Berms shall be at least from one and one-half feet (1.5') to three feet (3') in height with an average height of two feet (2').
        ii. The maximum allowable cut or fill slope is three feet (3') horizontal distance for one foot (1') of rise. Slopes steeper than three to one (3:1) will require retaining walls or other types of approved slope stabilization methods on the interior-facing side of the lot. The slope of the berm shall be such as to be mowable with a standard rider mower.
        iii. Berms are not required where slopes within the required landscaped strip are excessive and would not reasonably accommodate berms, as determined by land use authority.
5. Park Strip (the Landscaping between the Curb and the Sidewalk). 
    a. The property owners shall be responsible for the installation and maintenance of landscaping and fencing on private property and in the abutting public right-of-way, unless otherwise determined by Lindon City. The installation and maintenance of park strip improvements shall be the responsibility of the abutting property owner in all areas of the city, unless otherwise determined by the city. Park strips shall be a minimum of eight feet (8') and maximum of twelve feet (12') with seventy percent (70%) landscaped with living plant material and city-approved shade trees, located every thirty feet (30') on center.
    b. Gravel, Rocks, and Boulders. Because rock, gravel and other hard surface materials as a ground cover retain and emit heat during the summer months when water is scarce, they may not be used within a thirty-six inch (36") radius (seventy-two inch (72") diameter) of any landscape strip tree. Otherwise, gravel, rocks, and boulders may be used on portions of the landscape strip. Rocks used as groundcover must be between one and one-half inches (1.5") and four inches (4") in size or over one foot (1') in size. Rocks of over one foot (1') in size must be located at least one and one-half feet (1.5') from the back of curb and the edge of the sidewalk.
6. Trees. Recommended trees may be found in the list of tree species located in the Lindon City Tree Planting Guide and, unless otherwise specified, shall be at least two-inch (2") caliper, measured one foot (1') above the ground and shall be at least six feet (6') in height when planted.
7. Sprinkling and Irrigation. All plantings shall be serviced by an acceptable underground automatic irrigation or sprinkler system, and maintained in a healthful living condition. Dead plant materials shall be replaced as necessary within the first year of planting.
8. Landscaping around Buildings. A perimeter landscape strip at least ten feet (10') wide shall be placed around all buildings with the exception of loading/dock areas.
9. Concrete curbing shall be provided between landscaped areas and off-street parking areas that is at least six inches (6") higher than the parking areas. Landscaped areas on the site must be delineated with raised curbing to protect plant materials from vehicular damage.
10. Paving materials, water features and sculpture may be included as landscape design materials, provided such create useful open space, add color and texture to the design and create visual interest. Such materials may not cover more than ten percent (10%) of the required landscaped area.
11. Landscaping requirements concerning berming, trees, and landscape materials can be changed and/or altered (with regard to location and design) upon approval of the land use authority at the site plan review stage of an application. No net loss of landscaping should occur with any approved alterations. (Ord. 2017-11 §1, adopted, 2017)

17.54.080 Special provisions.
1. The requirements of this section shall run with the land and be binding on successors, owners and tenants so long as the buildings are occupied or the use exists.
2. The owners of a commercial development which contains more than one (1) parcel of record or which has more than one (1) owner may be required by the approving authority to submit documents to the city for approval which assure unified control of the development.
3. Any person who desires to occupy vacant floor space, or to change the use of the floor space shall be required to first obtain a certificate of occupancy from the city. Any person constructing or altering a building in the RC zone shall first obtain a building permit from the city for such construction or alteration and then shall obtain a certificate of occupancy from the city before the building being constructed or altered is occupied.
4. If the city determines that the developer, tenant, manager, owner or any other interested person, firm or corporation has failed to maintain the premises consistent with all applicable zoning, health, safety, and building codes and ordinances, the city shall so notify said persons, firms or corporation by written notice specifying the deficiency complained of, and unless such failure is corrected to the satisfaction of the city within thirty (30) days, such failure or deficiency shall be deemed to constitute a “public nuisance” which may be abated in any lawful manner including but not limited to the manner set forth in Title 10, Chapter 8, Utah Code Annotated 1953, as amended. (Ord. 2017-11 §1, adopted, 2017)

Chapter 17.55 UTAH LAKE SHORELINE PROTECTION OVERLAY ZONE

Sections:
17.55.010    Purpose and Intent.
17.55.015    Applicability.
17.55.020    Relationship to Other Regulations.
17.55.030    Permitted Uses.
17.55.040    Definitions.
17.55.050    Lake Buffer.
17.55.060    Site Features Map Required.
17.55.070    Development Design Approach and Site Plan Standards.
17.55.080    Phasing Plan.
17.55.090    Design Standards.
17.55.100    Ownership of Open Lands.
17.55.110    Maintenance of Open Lands.
17.55.120    Trail Corridor.
17.55.130    Trail construction, dedication, and standards.

17.55.010 Purpose and Intent.
Utah Lake provides critical recreational opportunities, wildlife habitat, and cultural value to Lindon City. As a member city of the Utah Lake Commission, Lindon City finds it vital to develop land use policies that promote and protect Utah Lake and its resources. In conformance with the Utah Lake Master Plan, adopted by the Utah Lake Commission on June 26, 2009, this shoreline protection ordinance is adopted to achieve the purposes of acquiring and protecting the shoreline of Utah Lake and its natural resources. The purposes and intent of this ordinance include:
1. Protecting the shoreline of Utah Lake;
2. Protecting natural and cultural resources and features adjacent to the lake;
3. Providing for and protecting public ownership and access to the lake;
4. Providing a corridor for a non-motorized trail around Utah Lake; and
5. Preserving and improving the use and water quality of Utah Lake.
This ordinance creates a buffer between the lake shore and adjacent development for recreational access, safety, flood protection, invasive species management, and resource protection.

17.55.015 Applicability.
The Utah Lake Shoreline Protection Overlay Zone applies to all lands within the city limits lying west of the Utah Transit Authority commuter rail lines which generally run north and south along the western most boundary of Lindon (see Zoning Map). The Overlay Zone buffer area extends fifty (50) feet beyond the settlement boundary line.

17.55.020 Relationship to Other Regulations.
The requirements of this Overlay Zone shall apply in addition to the applicable regulations for each underlying zoning district. In the event that regulations imposed by this ordinance conflict with regulations of an underlying zoning district, the most restrictive regulations shall apply.
All development within the Shoreline Protection Overlay Zone shall also comply with all applicable state and federal regulations. Documentation of compliance with applicable state and federal regulations shall be required prior to any development approvals or issuance of building permits.

17.55.030 Permitted Uses.
The permitted uses are those uses allowed by the underlying zoning district. All uses within the shoreline protection overlay zone shall also comply with the standards set forth in this section.

17.55.040 Definitions.
“Cultural and Historical Resources” means human artifacts and remains older than fifty years that are identified by the State Historic Preservation Office (SHPO) as cultural and historic resources under State law.
“Habitat” means the place or environment where a plant or animal naturally or normally lives and grows.
“Overlay Zone Buffer” means a strip of land at least fifty (50) feet in width between Utah Lake and adjacent development, measured from the settlement boundary line to the edge of a lot or development parcel of property. The buffer area may not be included within any yard or setback of a lot or other development parcel of property.
“Riparian Area” means an area adjacent to surface water bodies such as streams and lakes that is characterized by periodic inundation and hydrophilic (water-loving) vegetative types.
“Settlement Boundary” means the Utah Division of Forestry, Fire, and State Lands boundary between sovereign lands and adjoining property. Also referred to as the “lakeshore” in this ordinance.
“Wetland” means land that has been determined by the Army Corps of Engineers to be regulated or jurisdictional wetlands under the federal Clean Water Act.

17.55.050 Lake Buffer.
Within the Shoreline Protection Overlay Zone, all developments that abut on the sovereign lands of Utah Lake must provide a buffer, a minimum of fifty (50) feet in width, between the settlement boundary or compromise elevation, whichever is higher above sea level, and the property lines of the nearest lots and development parcels. No permanent structures are allowed in the buffer area except recreational, flood control, and lake-related facilities. Ownership and management of the buffer area shall be determined on a case-by-case basis, but all required buffer areas shall be open for public access.

17.55.060 Site Features Map Required.
Concurrent with the submission of any land use development application or building permit, the applicant shall prepare and submit a site features map. The purpose of the site features map is to identify and locate site features to facilitate creation of a site development design that mitigates impacts to the natural and cultural features of the development area, and reduces risks associated with flooding, high groundwater, unstable soils, wave, and lake ice action. The site features map shall identify and locate the following features in and immediately adjacent to the development area:
1. Property boundaries;
2. Compromise elevation and settlement boundary;
3. Streams, rivers, lakes, tributaries, wetlands, and other hydrologic features;
4. Riparian areas;
5. Known habitat of endangered, threatened, or State sensitive species;
6. Topographic contours at 5 feet or closer intervals;
7. Limits of all floodplains;
8. Water supply source protection areas;
9. General vegetation characteristics, including significant stands of trees;
10. General soil types;
11. Existing and planned public and recreational access and uses;
12. Cultural and historical resources;
13. Existing roads and structures; and,
14. Potential connections with existing trails and public open space areas.

17.55.070 Development Design Approach and Site Plan Standards.
1. Development on the subject parcel shall be configured so as to avoid undue impacts to site features identified in the site features map, including riparian areas, known habitat of threatened, endangered, and sensitive species, the 100-year floodplain, wetlands, public access locations, existing or planned trails and trail corridors, significant stands of trees or significant individual trees, cultural and historic resources, high groundwater areas, secondary stream corridors, and water supply protection areas.
2. Applicants shall demonstrate that their site plan is consistent with the following approach and principles for designing a development project in sensitive areas:
    a. Identify Site Features. Identify those areas of the development parcel containing or supporting important natural resources, features, and functions as described above.
    b. Locate Building Envelopes. To the maximum extent feasible, building envelopes shall be located to protect important site features. The location of building envelopes shall also reflect the design objectives identified herein.
    c. Align Streets and Trails. The minimum length and network of streets necessary to access each lot shall be identified with consideration given to conforming the street to the natural landscape. Proposed trails shall be identified where access to designated public trails and open space is appropriate, to provide for pedestrian circulation within the development, and to provide for pedestrian access to areas outside the development.
    d. Identify Lot Lines. Lot lines for building parcels shall be identified. The placement of the lot lines shall give consideration to the important site features, and shall conform to the natural features of the landscape to the greatest extent possible, e.g., lines of boundary trees, streams, habitat areas, etc. The delineation of lots shall also consider opportunity for future owners to reasonably expand the structures on the lot.
    e. Contiguous Open Spaces. To the extent practical, the boundaries of site features should be contiguous within the parcel and adjacent to existing undeveloped land on adjoining parcels to form a continuous, integrated natural system. Particular attention shall be paid to maintaining and expanding existing or planned natural resource areas and trail networks.
    f. Natural Corridors. Significant trees, boundary trees, wetlands, streams, and other important site features should be incorporated along the edges of individual lots or along a path or roadway, rather than transected by lot lines or a roadway.
    g. Additional Setbacks. The Planning Commission may require additional setbacks from the edge of the designated natural features depending on the type of natural resource and its characteristics.
    h. Fencing and Screening. The Planning Commission shall determine if fencing or other screening is necessary to protect the functions and values of the site features.

17.55.080 Phasing Plan.
1. When a development will not utilize the entire parcel and there is potential for future development of the parcel or any of the lots being created, the land use application shall include a phasing plan showing the potential future utilization and interim management plans for the balance of the parcel not being developed.
2. The phasing plan shall demonstrate that the current development proposal will not compromise important conservation values or the long term development of the parcel.
3. This phasing plan shall show the relationship of the proposed development area to the balance of the parcel and to adjacent land. This plan shall analyze the conservation and development potential of the remaining area of the parcel and shall show, in general terms, the potential street network, open space areas, and development areas in a manner that demonstrates that both the proposed development and the future development can occur so that it conforms to the requirements herein and preserves the significant natural resource values of the entire parcel.

17.55.090 Design Standards.
The following design standards are intended to improve the character and aesthetic qualities of developments in the Shoreline Protection Overlay Zone, and to minimize impacts on important natural and other site features. Variations from these standards may be granted by the Planning Commission provided that the overall intent of this section is achieved by the alternative design.
1. Lots/Building Envelopes. 
    a. The location and orientation of individual lots, building envelopes, and building sites shall be designed to maintain the natural topography and drainage patterns, to preserve important natural features in their natural condition, to minimize disturbance of natural vegetated cover, and to minimize grading, cut-and-fill, and soil removal to minimize negative impacts on the natural resources of the site as identified by the site features map and/or site inventory.
    b. All building construction must comply with floodplain regulations as adopted by the City.
    c. Building envelopes on individual or common lots should be set back as far as possible from significant site features, consistent with other design parameters of this section, to augment and protect the integrity of natural site features.
    d. Where practicable, multiple lots and/or buildings should be grouped into clusters, which should be located to minimize negative impacts on the natural resources of the site and conflicts between incompatible uses.
    e. Individual lot lines and building envelopes shall, to the extent possible, conform to the natural contours of the site and be delineated to minimize negative impacts on the natural resources of the site, as identified by the site features map and/or site inventory.

17.55.100 Ownership of Open Lands.
The ownership and responsibility for maintenance of the required buffer areas and other areas left undeveloped to protect natural resources and avoid hazards should be decided on a case-by-case basis. In general, areas planned to be open for use by the general public should be in public ownership, but other arrangements may be appropriate. Options for ownership and maintenance include:
1. Public Ownership. Lindon City may, but is not required to, accept any portion or portions of a buffer or open land, provided that:
    a. The land shall be freely accessible to the public;
    b. Lindon City agrees to and has access to maintain such lands;
    c. The land is in an acceptable condition to the City at the time of transfer with regard to size, shape, location, and improvement.
2. Undivided Ownership. Unless otherwise approved by Lindon City, the underlying fee ownership of the land may remain in single ownership and may be owned and maintained by one of the following entities: homeowners’ association, land trust, conservation organization, governmental entity, or private individual.
3. Owners’ Association. Land may be held in common ownership by a homeowners’ or other acceptable owners’ association, subject to all of the provisions for owners’ associations set forth in State regulations and Lindon City’s subdivision regulations. In addition, the following requirements shall be met:
    a. A description of the organization of the proposed association, including its bylaws, and all documents governing ownership, maintenance, and use restrictions for natural resource land, including restrictive covenants for the Subdivision, shall be submitted by the developer with the subdivision application.
    b. The proposed association shall be established and operating (with financial subsidization, if necessary) prior to or concurrent with the recording of the plat for the Subdivision.
    c. Membership in the association shall be mandatory for all purchasers of property within the Subdivision and their successors in title.
    d. The association shall be responsible for maintenance and insurance of the natural resource land.
    e. The bylaws of the association and restrictive covenants for the Subdivision shall confer legal authority on the association to place a lien on the real property of any member who falls delinquent in dues. Such dues shall be paid with the accrued interest before the lien may be lifted.
    f. Written notice of any proposed transfer of natural resource land by the association or the assumption of maintenance for the natural resource land must be given to all members of the association and to Lindon City no less than thirty (30) days prior to such event.
    g. The association shall have adequate staff to administer, maintain, and operate such natural resource land.
    h. At the discretion of the Lindon City, an applicant may be required to prepare a brochure detailing the location and use restrictions of the designated open space, and provided to all purchasers of property within the subdivision.

17.55.110 Maintenance of Open Lands.
In general, the responsibility for maintenance of required buffer areas and lands left open to protect natural resources and avoid hazards should lie with the owner(s) of the land. Maintenance plans for privately owned properties may be required by the City.

17.55.120 Trail Corridor.
1. The Utah Lake Master Plan identifies development and maintenance of the Utah Lake Trail as a high priority goal. The trail would provide a non-motorized route that circumnavigates Utah Lake, and provides access to lakeshore recreation facilities as well as connectivity among the communities that abut the lake.
2. Lindon City has identified the Utah Lake Trail as a component of its General Plan, and has identified a preferred alignment for the trail on its Parks and Trails Master Plan Map. The preferred location of the trail is as close to the lakeshore as possible, however the exact location of the Utah Lake trail through Lindon is flexible, and its ultimate location will depend on such factors as topography, natural features, the location of recreational features, and land ownership.

17.55.130 Trail construction, dedication, and standards.
1. The location of the Utah Lake Trail and responsibility for the construction of the trail will be determined as a part of the review process as applications for development are submitted to the City. In the alternative, Lindon City may independently decide to acquire land for construction and maintenance of the Utah Lake Trail in advance of receiving development applications.
2. Whether constructed by a developer or by the City, it is preferred that the Utah Lake Trail be in the ownership of the City as a public facility. Maintenance of the Utah Lake Trail shall be performed by Lindon City or pursuant to other contract or development agreement.
3. As development occurs in the vicinity of existing trail segments, the trail should be brought up to current standards.
4. Lindon City will work with Utah County and Mountainland Association of Governments (MAG) in coordinating trail design and construction standards consistent with other areas around the lake. (Ord. 2012-5, amended, 2012)

Chapter 17.56 SA–SENSITIVE AREA DISTRICT

Sections:
17.56.010    Purpose and intent.
17.56.020    General provisions.
17.56.030    Permitted uses.
17.56.040    Conditional uses.
17.56.050    Established sensitive area districts.
17.56.060    Preliminary determination by Development Review Committee (D.R.C.).
17.56.070    Requirement to submit a geotechnical report and environmental assessment (ea) or an environmental impact statement (EIS), as necessary.
17.56.080    Engineer qualifications.
17.56.090    Post-construction inspection and certification.
17.56.100    Restrictive covenant required.
17.56.110    Phased development.
17.56.120    Hillside development standards.
17.56.130    Shallow groundwater area development standards.

17.56.010 Purpose and intent.
1. The purpose of the Sensitive Areas (SA) district is to designate and describe those areas within the city that possess physical or environmental characteristics that require special public consideration of uses that might affect the structure of the land (sensitive areas); the management of surface or subsurface water; safety of future land occupants due to increased fire, earthquake, or storm hazards from the proposed development; or the uneconomic extension of public facilities and services. Of specific concern is development in flood-prone areas, earthquake zones, landslide areas, areas of steep slope or unstable soils, and other sensitive areas requiring careful assessment prior to alteration.
2. It is the intent of these regulations to permit a reasonable latitude in the use of property, while at the same time requiring design solutions which will avoid detrimental impacts on sensitive natural areas, as well as provide protection from adverse natural forces and hazards.
3. With the enactment of this chapter, it is the intent of the city council:
    a. To place upon landowners and the engineers, architects, geologists, biologists, hydrologists, developers and other professionals hired by the landowners the responsibilities, liabilities and expenses of evaluating and mitigating the reasonably foreseeable environmental and health impacts of a proposed development, assessing the condition of potentially unstable land and the impact of land conditions on the proposed development and adjacent properties, and determining restrictions that should be placed on the development to prevent and mitigate adverse impacts on the health and safety of the community, its residents, and the environmental stability of sensitive areas;
    b. To restrict the development of land to those uses that do not present unreasonable risks to persons or property because of geologic hazards; and
    c. To prevent fraud in land sales relating to the geologic condition of real property.
4. With the enactment of this chapter, it is the intent of the City Council to authorize a governmental function of regulation within the meaning of Section 63-30-3 and 63-30-10 (1), (3) and (4) of the Utah Code. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-116-1; Ord. 99-13, amended, 2000)

17.56.020 General provisions.
1. These provisions are intended to minimize floods, erosion, and other environmental hazards, to protest the natural scenic character of all areas and developments in the city, and to insure the efficient expenditure of public funds. To insure that the improvement of proposed sensitive lands areas shall reflect the best interests of Lindon City and its residents, all grading or other improvement of any land, including but not limited to land in approved subdivisions or other development plans shall conform to the development standards, guidelines, and criteria of this chapter. This chapter shall be interpreted to address the following concerns:
    a. Minimizing grading deviations from the natural contour of the land;
    b. Rounding off, in a natural looking manner, sharp angles at the tops and ends of cut and fill slopes; and
    c. Avoiding a “staircase” or “padding” effect.
2. Requiring the preservation of trees and other vegetation that stabilize steep hillsides, retain moisture, prevent erosion, or enhance a natural scenic view, and where necessary, requiring additional landscaping to enhance the safety, environmental and scenic characteristics of the hillside.
3. Requiring the immediate planting of vegetation wherever appropriate to stabilize cut and fill slopes, to conceal the raw soil from view and to minimize erosion.
4. Preserving natural drainage channels.
5. Encouraging retention of natural landmarks, prominent natural features, wildlife habitation, and open space.
6. Preserving and enhancing the visual and environmental quality by using natural vegetation and minimizing excavation and terracing.
7. Protecting the public from natural hazards of storm water run-off and erosion by requiring adequate drainage facilities.
8. Minimizing the threat of fire damage by establishing fire protection measures.
9. Establishing land use management policies and procedures that will encourage protection of natural elements while allowing a harmonious and satisfying residential environment.
10. Encouraging a consistent regard for the view of the foothills as well as view from the foothills.
11. Protect and indemnify Lindon City from hazards of, expenses associated with, and potential damage by shallow groundwater, unstable slopes, and other geologic conditions by requiring investigation prior to, and placing appropriate restrictions upon, development and construction and requiring all owners of property in shallow groundwater areas or in areas of other potentially hazardous geologic conditions to indemnify and hold the city harmless from all damages or injury resulting from flooding or any other damage resulting from shallow groundwater, slope instability, or other geologic condition.
12. Maintain the safety and efficiency of access by emergency vehicles, city services, and residents to developments and residences within the city by establishing appropriate restrictions on road construction, grades, and other development. (Ord. 99-13, amended, 2000)

17.56.030 Permitted uses.
The following uses are permitted in the SA district:
1. Tilling of the soil;
2. Raising of crops; and
3. Horticulture and gardening, excluding agricultural industries. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-116-2; Ord. 99-13, amended, 2000)

17.56.040 Conditional uses.
The SA district is an overlay district requiring additional review of proposed uses in the underlying districts. To this end, any use that would be a permitted use in a district not overlaid by a SA district, with the exception of those uses permitted in Section 17.56.030, shall be a conditional use in areas overlaid by the SA district. Conditional uses authorized in districts overlaid by the SA district remain conditional uses. (Ord. 111 §1, amended, 1985; Prior code §12-116-3; Ord. 99-13, amended, 2000; Ord. 99-9, adopted, 2000)

17.56.050 Established sensitive area districts.
The following Sensitive Area Districts have been designated, established, and created by the Lindon Planning Commission and City Council:
1. District 1. Sensitive Area District 1 shall include all property incorporated into Lindon City that is east of the Salt Lake Aqueduct, as shown on the attached Exhibit 1.
2. District 2. Sensitive Area District 2 shall include all property incorporated into Lindon City that is below elevation 4,650 feet, as shown on the attached Exhibit 2.
3. District 3. Sensitive Area District 3 shall include all property in the area commonly referred to as “the Hollow”, as bounded by the FEMA Flood Zone A as shown on the attached Exhibit 3.Exhibit 1
[IMAGE: <17.56.050_001.png>]Exhibit 2
[IMAGE: <17.56.050_002.jpg>]Exhibit 3
[IMAGE: <17.56.050_003.jpg>]
(Ord. 99-13, adopted, 2000)

17.56.060 Preliminary determination by Development Review Committee (D.R.C.).
All proposals to grade, fill, or excavate land or to erect any structure in a Sensitive Area District shall be referred to the Development Review Committee (D.R.C.). The D.R.C. shall make a preliminary determination of whether or not any of the concerns identified in Section 17.56.020 or any of the following unsafe physical conditions appear to exist in relation to the real property affected by the proposal:
1. shallow groundwater (water close to the surface);
2. surface water;
3. expansive soils;
4. collapsible soils;
5. proximity to an active or potential landslide area;
6. proximity to a primary or secondary fault;
7. soil evidencing previous liquefaction or a propensity for future liquefaction;
8. steep slopes; or
9. any other unsafe condition. (Ord. 99-13, adopted, 2000)

17.56.070 Requirement to submit a geotechnical report and environmental assessment (ea) or an environmental impact statement (EIS), as necessary.
1. If the D.R.C. determines that no concern identified in Section 17.56.020 and no unsafe physical condition described in Section 17.56.060 appears to exist in relation to the proposal and property it impacts, the development may proceed as proposed, subject to all other requirements of this code.
2. If a landowner or applicant for a proposed action or development is not already required by another section of this code to complete and provide a geotechnical report to the D.R.C., and the D.R.C. is unable to readily determine whether any of the concerns identified in Section 17.56.020 or the unsafe physical conditions described in Section 17.56.060 exist in relation to the subject property, the D.R.C. shall:
    a. require the landowner or applicant to submit such further information about the physical and environmental characteristics of the property that the D.R.C. determines is necessary to enable the D.R.C. to complete the preliminary determination described in Section 17.56.060;
    b. withhold completion of the determination described in Section 17.56.060 until the required information has been received; and
    c. after reviewing and considering the additional information about the physical and environmental characteristics of the property provided by the landowner or applicant, determine whether or not any of the concerns identified in Section 17.56.020 or any of the unsafe physical conditions described in Section 17.56.060 appear to exist in relation to the subject property.
3. If the D.R.C. determines that any of the concerns identified in Section 17.56.020 or any of the unsafe physical conditions described in Section 17.56.060 appear to exist in relation to the subject property, the applicant shall submit a geotechnical report as required by Chapter 17.57, Hillside Protection District, and shall comply with the remainder of this chapter.
4. Any geotechnical reports and other reports that may be required or received by the D.R.C. pursuant to this chapter shall consider and address all recommendations in any reports prepared by the Utah Geological Survey (UGS) in relation to the subject property. The geotechnical report shall indicate distances from fault lines and other geologic hazards within which building construction shall not be allowed. In no reports have been prepared by the UGS in relation to the subject property, the applicant shall consult with the appropriate UGS official, obtain comments addressing the geologic conditions affecting the area, and provide those comments to the D.R.C.
5. If, after completing the process described in Section 17.56.060 and reviewing any geotechnical reports and other information required by the D.R.C. or by this code, the D.R.C. determines that a proposed development poses a substantial risk in impacting soils, ground cover, or the environmental condition of the property or surrounding properties, the D.R.C. shall require the applicant to complete and submit an Environmental Assessment (EA) as contemplated by 40 C.F.R. Section 1051.4 (1991). The EA shall also consider and address the concerns identified in Section 17.56.020 and the unsafe physical conditions identified in Section 17.56.060.
6. If, after reviewing the EA, the D.R.C. determines that the proposed action or development is substantially likely to have a significant environmental impact on the property or on adjacent properties, or to be impacted by an unsafe geologic condition, the applicant shall complete an Environmental Impact Study (EIS) as contemplated by 43 U.S.C.A. Section 4332. The EIS required by this section shall, at a minimum, include a detailed statement on:
    a. The unsafe geologic conditions that may affect the property and the probability that those conditions will detrimentally impact the proposed development or surrounding properties within fifty (50) years from the date of the statement;
    b. The environmental impact of the proposed action, including a projected “worst case scenario” of the detrimental effects the proposed action or development may have on the safety and environmental stability of the property and adjacent properties;
    c. Any adverse environmental effects that cannot be avoided should the proposal be implemented;
    d. Alternative to the proposed action or development;
    e. The relationship between proposed short-term and long-term uses of the subject property and the maintenance and enhancement of long-term geologic and environmental stability;
    f. Any irreversible geologic and environmental consequences that are substantially likely to result from the proposed action or development; and
    g. The initial and ongoing infrastructure requirements and economic costs to residents of the proposed development and to the city of providing utility, emergency, and municipal services to the proposed development and its residents. (Ord. 99-13, adopted, 2000)

17.56.080 Engineer qualifications.
A geotechnical report (described in Section 17.56.070) shall be stamped and signed by a Licensed Professional Engineer registered in the State of Utah with experience in preparing and rendering geotechnical reports. (Ord. 99-13, adopted, 2000)

17.56.090 Post-construction inspection and certification.
For real property with respect to which any development has proceeded on the basis of a geotechnical report acknowledged by the D.R.C., no final inspection shall be completed, nor any certificate of occupancy issued, not any performance bond released, until a geotechnical engineer qualified by related experience and licensure in the State of Utah certifies that the completed improvements and structures conform to the descriptions and requirements contained in the geotechnical report. However, when necessary to address conditions discovered after the D.R.C. has acknowledged the geotechnical report, the improvements and structures may, with the written consent of the city engineer, deviate from the descriptions and requirements contained in the geotechnical report. (Ord. 99-13, adopted, 2000)

17.56.100 Restrictive covenant required.
1. If any geotechnical report, disclosure, or other information required to resolve issues regarding the subject property has been submitted to the D.R.C., no subdivision plat or other development plan shall be approved, and no building permit shall be issued for construction, until the owners of the subject real property have signed and delivered a restrictive covenant to the city, have included the restrictive covenant in any CCandRs affecting the property, and have obtained approval of the restrictive covenants from the D.R.C. The restrictive covenant shall be in a form suitable for recording and shall contain not less than the following:
    a. A complete description of the geotechnical conditions of the subject real property, including references to all relevant reports and studies;
    b. A description of all grading, filling, excavating of land, or erection of a structure human habitation, to be undertaken, approved in the geotechnical report acknowledged by the D.R.C., along with a detailed summary of all requirements and restrictions imposed thereon;
    c. A covenant and agreement enforceable by the city and any subsequent owner of the subject real property stating that only the grading, filling, or excavating of land or erection of a structure contemplated by and set forth in the acknowledged geotechnical report will be constructed or maintained unless and until a new proposal is submitted and further compliance with this chapter is completed.
2. No subdivision plat or other development plan shall be approved, and no building permit shall be issued for construction, until any statements required by subsection (1), and until a notice of interest regarding applicable ordinance restrictions, is duly recorded with the county recorder. (Ord. 99-13, adopted, 2000)

17.56.110 Phased development.
The phased development required by Section 17.12.220 shall also apply to development in sensitive area districts except:
1. The twenty-five (25) lot limit in Subsection 17.121.220(3) is reduced to fifteen (15) lots; and
2. The seventy percent (70%) on-site improvement completion requirement of Subsection 17.12.220(2) includes the completion of landscaping and revegetation, meaning a lot is not completed until all proposed structures are built and pass inspection and the lot is fully landscaped, reseeded, and revegetated to the satisfaction of the D.R.C. and in conformance with Chapter 17.57. (Ord. 99-13, adopted, 2000)

17.56.120 Hillside development standards.
1. Cuts and fills. 
    a. Fills shall be compacted to at least ninety-six percent (96%) of AASHTO (American Association of State Highway Officials) T99 density for those areas intended as structural foundations, including roadways.
    b. Borrowing for fill shall be prohibited unless the material is obtained from a cut permitted under an approved grading plan, or imported from outside the hillside area of Lindon City.
    c. Cut slopes shall be constructed to eliminate sharp angels of intersection with the existing terrain, shall be rounded and contoured as necessary to blend with existing topography to the maximum extent possible, and shall otherwise fully comply with Chapter 17.57. The city will not accept the dedication and maintenance of cut and fill slopes except those within the required street right-of-way. Where a cut or fill slope occurs between two (2) lots, the slope shall be made part of the downhill lot.
2. Streets and sidewalks. 
    a. Considering the increased snow fall at higher elevations, streets in Sensitive Area District No. 1 cannot exceed a ten percent (10%) grade, instead of the twelve percent (12%) grade permitted in other areas, and no section of road in a sensitive area district with a ten percent (10%) grade shall exceed the length permitted for roads of twelve percent (12%) grade in other areas.
    b. The width of the level graded section shall extend at least two (2) feet beyond the back of the sidewalk on each side of the street.
3. Drainage. 
    a. Required storm water run-off collection facilities shall be so designed as to divert surface water away from cut faces or sloping surfaces of a frill.
    b. Material from construction, including soil and other solid materials, shall not be deposited within a natural or manmade drainage course nor within irrigation channels.
4. Vegetation and revegetation. All development, excavation, or grading in sensitive areas shall fully comply with the grading and vegetation requirements of Chapter 17.56 governing Hillside Protection Districts and the revegetation requirements of Section 17.56.040(7).
5. Fire Protection. All development in sensitive areas shall fully comply with the fire protection requirements of Chapter 17.56 governing Hillside Protection Districts. (Ord. 2008-2, amended, 2008; Ord. 99-13, adopted, 2000)

17.56.130 Shallow groundwater area development standards.
Development in shallow groundwater areas shall be subject to the following standards:
1. Wetlands, as defined by either the Corps of Engineers or the Environmental Protection Agency, may not be included as part of any buildable subdivision or development lot.
2. Wetlands may not be included in area requirements for lots or for calculation of density.
3. The Planning Commission may require wetlands to be fenced if it finds the wetlands are detrimental to public health, safety, or welfare.
4. Drainage water from the proposed new development may not be placed upon nor pass through other properties, except:
    a. Where a pre-existing drainage system of adequate capacity is already in use, or
    b. Where a permanent drainage easement of a size sufficient to carry projected flows has been obtained and a statement from the owners of both the host and guest properties is executed on proper deeds duly recorded with the county recorder specifying the following:
        i. The city will held harmless from all damages or injuries resulting from water pollution and flooding from drainage crossing the property.
        ii. The property owner will allow the owner of the easement to enter onto the property to maintain the drainage facility on the easement.
        iii. The drainage channel can be placed in a pipe or culvert at such time as deemed appropriate by the owner of the easement.
5. Drainage from the proposed new development will not be placed in an irrigation ditch or irrigation canal originally constructed for irrigation purposes, except where a written easement running with the land has been recorded and the approval of, and signature by, all irrigation and canal companies whose ditches or canals cross the development areas or that may receive surface drainage is obtained These recorded instruments shall include the following:
    a. The city will be held harmless from all damage or injury resulting from flooding, water pollution, or high ground water from drainage in the ditch or canal;
    b The irrigation ditch or canal can be placed in a pipe or culvert when deemed necessary by the owner of the easement;
    c. The owner of property which is the subject of a development plan will provide, and record with the county recorder, a statement holding the city harmless from all damage within the project resulting from flooding or shallow groundwater;
    d. A disclosure statement will be placed upon all subdivision plats in the subject area, stating that the subdivision lot is in an area potentially subject to flooding or shallow groundwater problems; and
    e. Drainage easements will be granted to the city and drainage facilities will be installed as part of the development at developer's expense.
6. No building shall be constructed in a shallow groundwater area of the city where the building proposed to be built includes a basement, unless prior to the issuance of the building permit, the owner shall produce a statement which has been recorded on proper deeds with the County Recorder, and the obligations of which run with the land and bind future owners of the property, stating that the city will be held harmless from all damages or injury resulting from flooding or any other damage resulting from a shallow groundwater area.
7. A comprehensive drainage and grading plan may be required of the developer of any property within a shallow groundwater area. The plan addressing the following points shall be approved by the D.R.C. before final residential subdivision approval, or approval is given for any residential subdivision, commercial, or industrial development or building.
    a. Approval of, and signatures by, all irrigation and canal companies if their ditches or canals cross the development area, or if surface or subsurface drainage is to outfall into the ditch or canal.
    b. Quantities of run-off shall be determined for the complete development area by any engineering method acceptable to the D.R.C.
    c. At all outfall points from the development, quantities of run-off for a “ten-year” storm shall be determined and indicated on the plan in cubic feet per second.
    d. The capacity of any irrigation ditch, storm drain, or other channel shall be determined from the inlet point to the outfall point of the channel if it is to be used for runoffs. If there is a sufficient capacity to handle added flows, it will not be used.
    e. A topographic map shall be prepared indicating sufficient slopes in all areas to take surface drainage water into the designated street or storm drain. Water will not be allowed to pond any place other than a designated detention basin.
    f. A plan of all proposed curbs, gutters, and cross-gutters shall be submitted. Such plan shall indicate on each curb the proposed grade, directions gutter capacity of flow, and quantities of flow.
    g. No building permit shall be issued in any development until the required subsurface and storm drainage system has been constructed and is in operable condition.
    h. Accompanying the drainage and grading plan shall be a soil test provided by a Licensed Professional Engineer for all areas in which underground private and public utilities will be installed. The engineer's statement must indicate what remedial action must be taken to stabilize utility lines to assure that they will not shift, buckle, or lose alignment.
    i. The engineering plan shall include a cross-section acceptable to the D.R.C. of a proposed utility trench showing configuration and type of materials to be used in backfill and as a “bed” for utility lines.
    j. All water mains in shallow groundwater areas must be poly wrapped. areas must be poly wrapped. (Ord. 99-13, adopted, 2000)

Chapter 17.57 HP–HILLSIDE PROTECTION DISTRICT

Sections:
17.57.010    Purpose of provisions.
17.57.020    Overlay zone–Scope–Conflict resolution.
17.57.030    Applicability of provisions.
17.57.040    Slope and lot size specifications and other restrictions.
17.57.050    Prohibitions.
17.57.060    Building site requirements.
17.57.070    Plans and reports required.
17.57.080    Soils report.
17.57.090    Geology report.
17.57.100    Grading and drainage plan–Contents.
17.57.110    Fire protection report.
17.57.120    Vegetation plan.
17.57.130    Other reports and plans.
17.57.140    Vegetation preservation requirements.
17.57.150    Grading and drainage plan–Review and approval.
17.57.160    Building height.
17.57.165    Exterior building design.
17.57.170    Access to other properties.
17.57.180    Development proposal processing.
17.57.190    Lots of record.
17.57.200    Economic hardship relief provisions.
17.57.210    Bonds for improvements.
17.57.220    Application of hillside zone requirements to lots having an average slope in excess of twenty (20) percent.
17.57.230    Delegation of Responsibility.

17.57.010 Purpose of provisions.
1. The purpose of the Hillside protection zone is to promote health, safety and the general public welfare of the residents of the city, by establishing standards for development of certain hillsides located in the city to minimize soil and slope instability, erosion, downstream siltation, and to preserve the character of the hillsides.
2. The provisions herein are designed to accomplish the following:
    a. Encourage the location, design and development of building sites to provide maximum safety and human enjoyment while adapting the development to the natural terrain;
    b. Provide for safe circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic to public and private areas and minimize the scarring and erosion effects of cutting, filling and grading related to Hillside street construction;
    c. Prohibit activities and uses which would result in degradation of fragile soils and steep slopes;
    d. Encourage preservation of open space to preserve the natural terrain;
    e. Minimize flooding by protecting streams, drainage channels, absorption areas and floodplains from substantial alteration of the natural functions.

17.57.020 Overlay zone–Scope–Conflict resolution.
The Hillside protection zone shall be an overlay zone of the zone classifications set out in Section 17.40.010 of this title. Any permitted use in a district overlaid by the Hillside protection zone is a conditional use. Conditional uses authorized in districts overlaid by the Hillside protection zone remain conditional uses. In case of conflict between the provisions of the existing zoning classification, building code, subdivision ordinance and/or other city ordinance and the Hillside protection overlay zone, the most restrictive provision shall apply. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to expand a use, make less restrictive a use, or allow a use which is not otherwise permitted in the zoning district overlaid by the Hillside protection zone.

17.57.030 Applicability of provisions.
1. The maps showing those foothill areas which are included in the Hillside protection zone are attached to the ordinance codified in this chapter and are on file with the city planning commission. Such maps are a part of this title as if fully described and detailed herein.
2. The Hillside protection zone requirements shall also be applicable to residential development of all parcels and lots located in the city having an average slope in excess of twenty (20) percent, as defined in this chapter.
3. Request for exemption or relief. An applicant may submit a request to exempt a lot or parcel that would otherwise be subject to this Chapter under subsection 2 above or seek relief, in whole or in part, from specific provisions of this Chapter as follows.
    a. The applicant provides a statement containing the proposal and an explanation of the conditions unique to the lot or parcel which provide sufficient cause for the City to grant exception or relief.
    b. If seeking relief from specific provisions of this Chapter, the applicant identifies the specific provisions from which he or she is seeking relief, and the degree to which he or she is seeking relief for each.
    c. The applicant provides a site plan showing the following:
        i. Proposed improvements to the lot or parcel in sufficient detail to evaluate the proposal;
        ii. Pre-development contours with areas of 30% and 40% slope shown; and
        iii. Existing contours, if they differ from pre-development contours.
    d. The applicant provides a report prepared by a geotechnical engineer licensed in the State of Utah containing the following:
        i. The same site plan that was submitted by the applicant;
        ii. A detailed analysis and discussion of the possible impacts of the applicant’s proposal on slope stability, erosion, drainage, and other relevant engineering considerations (during construction, short term, and long term). If the applicant is seeking relief from specific provisions of this Chapter, the analysis and discussion shall address each point on which the applicant is seeking relief;
        iii. Specific measures recommended by the geotechnical engineer to mitigate the impacts of the proposal; and
        iv. The geotechnical engineer’s opinion as to the effects of the applicant’s proposal on the health, safety, and welfare of the general public and nearby residents, and on safety of property and improvements in the area.
4. Granting exemption or relief. The Planning Commission may grant the requested exemption or relief if:
    a. The City Engineer reviews the geotechnical engineer’s report and takes no exception to it; and
    b. The Planning Commission finds that granting the requested exemption(s) or relief will not be injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the general public or nearby residents, will not create an undue hazard to property and improvements, and will be consistent with the purposes of this Chapter identified in Section 17.57.010 above.
5. When an exemption is granted under this section, the City shall record a document describing the granted exemption with the Utah County Recorder’s Office to provide notice of the exemption to interested parties. (Ord. 2015-10, amended, 2015)

17.57.040 Slope and lot size specifications and other restrictions.
1. In keeping with the purpose set forth in Section 17.57.010, and after excluding all property having a slope greater than thirty (30) percent, lots within the Hillside protection zone shall comply with the following schedule:
+----------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+--------------------------+
|    Average Slope     |     Minimum Lot Size      | Maximum Residential |    Maximum Percentage    |
|                      |     Residential Lots      |    Lots Per Acre    |     of Lots that may     |
|                      |     (Unless existing      |  (Unless existing   | be covered by impervious |
|                      |   zone requires larger    |   zone requires a   |        materials         |
|                      |           lots)           |  smaller maximum)   |     (unless existing     |
|                      |                           |                     |     zone requires a      |
|                      |                           |                     |     smaller minimum)     |
+----------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+--------------------------+
| 0-20%                | See existing zone         | See existing zone   | See existing zone        |
+----------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+--------------------------+
| Greater than 20%-25% | 15,000 square feet        | 2.9                 | See existing zone        |
+----------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+--------------------------+
| Greater than 25%-30% | ½ acre                    | 2                   | See existing zone        |
+----------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+--------------------------+
| Over 30%             | Development not permitted | 2                   | See existing zone        |
+----------------------+---------------------------+---------------------+--------------------------+
Average slope is determined by the following:
S=.00229XIXL/A
S=Average slope in percent, .00229--a conversion factor, I=the contour interval (or vertical distance between adjacent contour lines of the map, in feet). The contour may not exceed ten (10) feet. L=the total length in feet of all the contour lines within the subject parcel, excluding the areas of slope greater than 30%, and A=the area in acres of the subject parcel, excluding the areas of slope greater than 30%. Average slope shall be determined on an individual lot basis and/or by areas of generally uniform slope which have a maximum size of five acres. Average slope shall be determined with the parcel in its natural condition, prior to any development. Cuts and/or fills cannot be utilized to alter the slope determined.
2. No development shall be permitted on property having an average slope in excess of 30%, as defined in this chapter.
3. Roads and other vehicular routes shall not cross property having a slope greater than thirty (30) percent unless, after review by the planning commission, it is determined that:
    a. Appropriate engineering measures can be taken to minimize the impact of the cuts and fills, consistent with the purpose of this chapter; and
    b. The environment and aesthetics of the area will not be significantly affected.
4. No parcel or lot shall have a cut in excess of ten (10) feet, at any location, and no parcel or lot shall have a fill in excess of ten (10) feet, at any location.
5. Where streets or roads, public or private, are proposed to cross slopes greater than ten (10) percent, the following additional standards shall apply:
    a. Streets and roads will be built with minimum environmental damage and within acceptable public safety parameters.
    b. Such streets and roads shall, to the maximum extent feasible, follow contour lines, preserve the natural character of the land, and be screened with trees or vegetation.
    c. Cutting and filling shall be held to a minimum and retaining walls employed to help provide planting areas conductive to revegetation. Revegetation plans will be required for all areas disturbed during road construction.
6. Use of retaining walls is encouraged to reduce the steepness of man-made slopes and provide planting pockets conducive to revegetation. The use, design, and construction of all retaining walls shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission based upon assessment of visual impact, compatibility with surrounding terrain and vegetation, and safety considerations.
7. In order to mitigate adverse environmental and visual effects, slopes exposed in new development shall be landscaped of revegetated in accord with an approval revegetation/landscaping plan. Topsoil from any disturbed portion shall be preserved and utilized in revegetation. Fill soil must be of a quality to support plant growth.

17.57.050 Prohibitions.
No development shall be allowed on or within fifty (50) feet slopes in excess of forty (40) percent, areas subject to landsliding, or other high-hazard geological areas as determined by a soils report or geology report produced pursuant to the requirements of this chapter.

17.57.060 Building site requirements.
1. Each lot or parcel of land shall contain a primary building site appropriate to accommodate the primary residential structure, which building site shall be outlined on the subdivision plat. The primary building site shall include a buildable area of sufficient size to allow not less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet of footprint for the residential structure, after allowing for all required setbacks, and other requirements.
2. Grading of the lot or parcel which is related to creation of the primary building site or construction of the structure shall not extend closer than twenty (20) feet from the lot or parcel boundary lines, nor more than thirty (30) feet, horizontally, in front, to the rear or to the side of the proposed structure unless a greater distance is approved by the planning commission upon a showing by the developer that a greater distance will not be contrary to the purpose of this chapter.
3. The primary building site shall have a natural or manmade slope of twenty (20) percent or less.
4. Building sites for accessory buildings or structures such as tennis courts, swimming pools, outbuildings, etc., shall be approved by the planning commission.
5. The driveway(s) to the building site shall have a maximum slope of twelve (12) percent and shall have direct access to a public street.

17.57.070 Plans and reports required.
The planning commission shall require the following reports and plans to be provided by the applicant. The planning commission may waive any reports and plans it determines are not necessary to determine whether the development meets the requirements of this chapter.

17.57.080 Soils report.
The soils report shall be prepared by a qualified soils engineer, and must contain at least the following information:
1. A slope analysis;
2. An estimate of the normal highest elevation of the seasonal high-water table;
3. The location and size of swamps, springs and seeps, which shall be shown on the site plan, and the reasons for the occurrence of these underground water sources. An analysis of the vegetative cover or other surface information may be used to show the presence of underground water;
4. A unified soil classification for the major horizons or layers of soil profile, or of the zone of the footing foundation;
5. Appropriate accepted soils engineering tests to determine bearing capacity, settlement potential, and shrink/ swell potential of the site soils;
6. Potential frost action, based on the depth to the water table and the Unified Soils Classification;
7. An analysis of the soil suitabilities, constraints and proposed methods of mitigating such constraints in implementing the proposed development plan;
8. A written statement by the person of firm preparing the soils report, identifying the means proposed to minimize hazard to life, property, adverse effects on the safety, use or stability of a public right-of-way or drainage channel, and adverse impact on the natural environment.

17.57.090 Geology report.
1. A geology report shall be prepared by a person or firm qualified by training and experience to have expert knowledge of the subject. A geologic map shall accompany the report. Mapping should reflect careful attention to the rock composition, structural elements, and surface and subsurface distribution of the earth materials exposed or inferred within both bedrock and surficial deposits. A clear distinction should be made between observed and inferred features and/or relationships.
2. The reports shall contain at least the following information:
    a. Location and size of subject area and its general setting with respect to major geographic and geologic features;
    b. Identification (including author and date) of the geologic mapping upon which the report is based;
    c. Topography and drainage in the subject area;
    d. Abundance, distribution and general nature of exposures of earth materials within the area;
    e. Nature and source of available subsurface information;
    f. Estimated depth to bedrock;
    g. Bedrock: igneous, sedimentary, metamorphic types;
    h. Structural features, including but not limited to stratification, stability, folds, zones of contortion or crushing, joints, fractures, shear zones, faults, and any other geological limitations;
    i. Conclusions and recommendations regarding the effect of geologic conditions on the proposed development, and recommendations covering the adequacy of sites to be developed;
    j. A written statement by the person or firm preparing the geology report identifying the means proposed to minimize hazard to life or property, adverse effects on the safety, use or stability of a public right-of-way or drainage channel, and adverse impact on the natural environment.

17.57.100 Grading and drainage plan–Contents.
1. A grading and drainage plan shall be prepared by a professional engineer registered in the state. The plan must be sufficient to determine the erosion-control measures necessary to prevent soil loss during construction and after project completion.
2. The plan shall include, at least, the following information:
    a. A map of the entire site, showing existing details and contours of the property and proposed contour modifications, using a minimum of ten-foot contour intervals at a scale of one inch equals one hundred (100) feet;
    b. Map(s) of area(s) to be graded, showing existing details and contours at five-foot intervals where terrain will not be modified, and proposed details and contours of two-foot intervals where terrain modifications is proposed, using a scale of one inch equals twenty (20) feet;
    c. An investigation of the effects of high-intensity rainstorm (one-hundred-year occurrence according to U.S. Department of Commerce Weather Bureau Frequency Curves), evaluating how the proposed drainage system will handle the predicted flows, including effects of drainage areas outside the development which drain through the subject area and the anticipated flow of the drainage leaving the development;
    d. The history, including frequency and duration, or prior flooding;
    e. The location of any existing buildings or structures on the development, and any existing buildings or structures on land of adjacent owners which are within one hundred (100) feet of the property, or which are on the land of adjacent owner and may be affected by the proposed development;
    f. The direction of proposed drainage flow and the approximate grade of all streets (not to be construed as a requirement for the final street design);
    g. Proposed plans and locations of all surface and subsurface drainage devices, walls, dams, sediment basins, storage reservoirs, and other protective devices, to be constructed with or as part of the proposed work, together with a map showing drainage areas and the proposed drainage network, including outfall lines and natural drainageways which may be affected by the proposed project. Including the estimated runoff of the areas served by the drainage plan;
    h. A description of the method to be used on obtaining fill for use on the site of acquisition of such fill;
    i. A description of methods of be employed in disposing of soil and other material which is removed from the site, including the location of the disposal site;
    j. A plan showing temporary erosion-control measures to prevent erosion during the course of construction;
    k. A schedule showing when each stage of the project will be completed, including the total area of soil surface which is to be disturbed during each stage and an estimate of starting and completion dates. The schedule shall be drawn to limit to the shortest possible period the time that soil is exposed and unprotected. In no event shall the existing natural vegetation or ground cover be destroyed, removed or disturbed more than fifteen (15) days prior to commencing grading for development as scheduled;
    l. A written statement by the person or firm preparing the grading and drainage plan, identifying any grading and drainage problems of the development and further stating an opinion as to the ability of the proposed plan to mitigate or eliminate such problems in a manner as to prevent hazard to life, hazard to property, adverse effects on the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, and adverse impact on the natural environment.

17.57.110 Fire protection report.
A fire report including but not limited to identification of potential fire hazards, mitigation measures, access for fire protection equipment, and existing and proposed fire flow capability. The fire protection report shall address, as appropriate, the State Forester's Wildfire Hazard and Residential Development Identification Classification and Regulation Report.

17.57.120 Vegetation plan.
The vegetation plan and report shall be prepared by a person or firm qualified by training and experience to have expect knowledge of the subject, and shall include at least the following:
1. A survey of existing trees, large shrubs and ground covers;
2. A plan of the proposed revegetation of the site, detailing existing vegetation to be preserved, new vegetation to be planted, and any modifications to existing vegetation;
3. A plan for the preservation of existing vegetation during construction activity;
4. A vegetation maintenance program, including initial and continuing maintenance necessary;
5. A written statement by the person or firm preparing the vegetation plan and report, identifying any vegetation problems, and further stating an opinion as to the ability of the proposed plan to mitigate or eliminate such problems in a manner as to prevent hazard to life or property, adverse effects on the safety, use or stability of a public way or drainage channel, and adverse impact on the natural environment.

17.57.130 Other reports and plans.
Other reports and plans shall be prepared as deemed necessary by the planning commission.

17.57.140 Vegetation preservation requirements.
1. Vegetation shall be removed only when absolutely necessary, i.e., for buildings, filled areas, roads, and firebreaks. Every efforts shall be made to conserve topsoil which is removed during construction for later use on areas requiring vegetation or landscaping, i.e., cut-and-fill slopes. Vegetation sufficient to stabilize the soil shall be established on all disturbed areas, including lots which may be subject to future grading, as each stage of grading is completed. Areas not contained within lot boundaries shall be protected with adapted fire-resistant species of perennial vegetative cover after all construction is completed. The new vegetation shall be equivalent to or exceed the amount and erosion-control characteristic of the original vegetation cover.
2. The property owner and contractor shall be fully responsible for any destruction of native vegetation proposed for retention under the approved vegetation plan, and shall be responsible for the replacement of destroyed vegetation, including vegetation destroyed by employees and subcontractors.

17.57.150 Grading and drainage plan–Review and approval.
The drainage and grading plans shall be approved by the city engineer prior to final approval by the planning commission. Approval by the city engineer shall be based upon official standards.
It is unlawful to excavate or grade any area within the Hillside protection zone prior to final approval of the grading and excavation plan by the planning commission.

17.57.160 Building height.
1. Single family residences constructed on hillsides should step down the hillside rather than regrading the hillside into a flat site. A simple box form will stand out from the natural, complex undulations of hillsides more than a building form that is broken into smaller elements. A building can be broken up by raising and lowering the roofline, varying the face of the building (not just single straight plan), adding balconies and overhangs, etc. These elements create shadow patterns that are similar to shadows cast by rocks, trees and cliffs on hillsides and tend to lessen the apparent size of the building.
2. To the maximum extent feasible, buildings shall be sited in locations that are sympathetic to existing contours rather than those that require a building solution that would dominate the site. Buildings shall be designed to follow natural contours rather than modifying the land to accept a building design not tailored to the site. (Ord. 2001-1, amended, 2001; Ord. 2000-5, amended, 2000)

17.57.165 Exterior building design.
Exterior building design standards shall be as follows:
1. Indigenous materials and colors shall be used in order to mimic natural textures.
2. To the maximum extent feasible, predominate tones on exterior walls shall tend toward neutral colors such as warm, earthy hues, dark green of forests, grays and gray-brown of the mountains, the tan of grasses, and similar colors. Bright, harshly contrasting color combinations shall be avoided.
3. The color of roof surfacing materials shall be either brown, gray, or another color that blends in with the surrounding landscape.
4. Wood roofing shingles shall not be allowed in the canyons or foothills because of their potential to ignite during wildfires. (Ord. 2000-5, adopted, 2000)

17.57.170 Access to other properties.
Safe, convenient and adequate access, approved by the planning commission, shall be provided to adjacent private and public lands for vehicles, pedestrians and essential service and maintenance equipment.

17.57.180 Development proposal processing.
1. Development proposals in the hillside protection zone shall be processed in a timely manner under established conditional use or subdivision procedures.
2. In order to fulfill the purpose of the hillside protection zone, described in Section 17.57.010, the planning commission shall determine whether the proposed development meets the requirements of this chapter, based on the required reports and other data available to it. The planning commission shall, when it deems necessary, request recommendations from other agencies such as the board of health, Utah State Forestry, U.S. Forest Service, and the U.S. Soil Conservation Service.
3. Any area which is determined to contain natural hazards to life, limb or property, including but not limited to soil hazards, geologic hazards or hydrologic hazards, shall not be approved for development unless the applicant demonstrates that such identified hazards or limitations can be overcome in such a manner as to minimize hazard to life, limb or property; adverse effects on the safety, use or stability of public way or drainage channel; and other adverse impacts on the natural environment.
4. The planning commission may set requirements it determines are necessary to overcome any natural hazards and to ensure that the purpose of this chapter are met. These requirements may include, but not be limited to, a revegetation program, a time schedule for completion of the development, flood-control and erosion-control improvements, location of structures, and phasing of development.

17.57.190 Lots of record.
The planning commission may waive any requirements of this chapter for lots of record, lots and plans of subdivisions which were approved by the planning commission prior to the enactment of the ordinance from which this section derives, if the planning commission finds that such waiver would not be injurious to the health, safety and the general public welfare of the inhabitants of the city and is consistent with the purpose of this chapter.

17.57.200 Economic hardship relief provisions.
1. Hardship relief petition. Any applicant for development, after a final decision on its development application is taken by the city council, may file a hardship relief petition with the city recorder seeking relief from all or part of the hillside protection overlay zone regulations on the basis that the denial of the application has created a substantial economic hardship to the extent of depriving the applicant of all reasonable use of its property.
2. Affected property interest. The hardship relief petition must provide information sufficient for the planning commission and the city council to determine that the petitioner possesses a protectable interest in property under Article I, Section 22 of the Constitution of Utah and/or the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution.
3. Economic hardship standard. For purpose of this ordinance, a substantial economic hardship shall be defined as a denial of all reasonable use of the property. Upon a finding that the denial of the application has resulted in a denial of all reasonable use of the property, the Lindon City Council may provide the petitioner with relief from all or part of the hillside protection overlay zone regulations.
4. Time for filing notice of petition and petition. No later than ten (10) calendar days from final action by the city council on any development application, the applicant shall file a notice of petition in writing with the city recorder. Within thirty (30) days of filing of a notice of petition, the applicant shall file a hardship relief petition with the city recorder.
5. Information to be submitted with hardship relief petition. 
    a. The hardship relief petition must be submitted on a form acceptable to the city, shall be signed by the applicant and verified, and must be accompanied at a minimum by the following information:
        i. Name of the petitioner;
        ii. Name and business address of the current owner of the property, form of ownership, whether sole proprietorship, for-profit or not-for-profit corporation, partnership, joint venture, limited liability company, or other, and if owned by a corporation, partnership, joint venture, or limited liability company, the name and address of all principal shareholders, members, or partners.
        iii. Price paid and other terms of purchase of the property, the date of purchase, and the name of the party from whom purchased, including the relationship, if any, between the petitioner and the party from whom the property was acquired;
        iv. Nature of the protectable interest claimed to be affected, such as, but not limited to, fee simple ownership, leasehold interest;
        v. Terms (including sale price) of any previous purchase or sale of a full or partial interest in the property in the five years prior to the date of application;
        vi. All appraisals of the property prepared for any purpose, including financing, offering for sale, or ad valorem taxation, within the five years prior to the date of application;
        vii. The assessed value of and ad valorem taxes on the property for the previous five years;
        viii. All information concerning current mortgages or other loans secured by the property, including name of the mortgagee or lender, current interest rate, remaining loan balance an term of the loan and other significant provisions, including but not limited to, rights of purchasers to assume the loan;
        ix. All listings of the property for sale or rent, price asked and offers received, if any, within the previous five years;
        x. All studies commissioned by the petitioner or agents of the petitioner within the previous five years concerning feasibility of development or utilization of the property;
        xi. For income producing property, itemized income and expense statements from the property for the previous five years;
        xii. Information from a title report or other source showing all recorded liens or encumbrances affecting the property as of the date of the petition;
        xiii. A specific description of the exact hillside protection zone regulations the application economic hardship to the extent of depriving the petitioner of all reasonable uses of its property, together with the factual basis for said assertion; and
        xiv. A specific description of the modifications from the hillside protection zone regulations which petitioner asserts are necessary, to the minimal extent necessary, to prevent the petitioner from sustaining a substantial economic hardship to the extent of depriving the petitioner of all reasonable use of its property, together with the factual basis for said assertion.
    b. The planning commission or the city council may request additional information reasonably necessary, in their opinion, to arrive at a conclusion concerning whether there has been a denial of all reasonable use constituting a substantial economic hardship.
6. Failure to submit information. In the event that any of the information required to be submitted by the petitioner is not reasonably available, the petitioner shall file with the petition a statement of the information that cannot be obtained and shall describe the reasons why such information is unavailable.
7. Hearing by the planning commission. Within thirty (30) days of the filing of a completed hardship relief petition, together with all required and requested supporting information and documentation required by the city council or the planning commission, the planning commission shall schedule a public hearing with notice consistent with the provision of Section 17.02.010 of the Lindon City Code. The public hearing shall be held on or before thirty (30) days from the date of notice, unless a reasonable extension of time is agreed to by both the planning commission and the petitioner. At the public hearing, the petitioner shall be entitled to testify and to call witnesses and present facts and evidence. The petitioner shall be entitled to cross examine witnesses. All witnesses shall be sworn and testify under oath.
8. Application of the economic hardship standard. In applying the economic hardship standard, the planning commission shall consider among other items the following information or evidence:
    a. Any estimates from contractors, architects, real estate analysts, qualified developers, or other competent and qualified real estate professionals concerning the feasibility, or lack of feasibility, of construction or development on the property as of the date of the petition, and in the reasonably near future;
    b. Any evidence or testimony of the market value of the property both considering and disregarding all or portions of the hillside protection zone requirements; and
    c. Any evidence or testimony deemed relevant by the planning commission.
9. Burden of proof. The petitioner shall have the burden of proving that the denial of the application creates a substantial economic hardship as defined herein.
10. Findings of the planning commission. The planning commission shall, on the basis of the evidence and testimony presented, make specific findings as part of its report and recommendations to the city council, which may including the following:
    a. Whether the petitioner has complied with the requirements for presenting the information to be submitted with a hardship relief petition;
    b. Whether the petitioner has a protectable interest in property;
    c. The market value of the property considering the hillside protection zone requirements;
    d. The market value of the property disregarding all or specific provisions of the hillside protection zone requirements;
    e. Whether it is feasible to undertake construction on or development of the property as of the date of the application, or in the reasonably near future thereafter;
    f. Whether, in the opinion of the planning commission, the denial of the application would create a substantial economic hardship as defined herein.
11. Report and recommendations of the planning commission. 
    a. The planning commission, based upon the evidence and findings, shall make a report and recommendation to the city council concerning the hardship relief petition.
    b. If the planning commission recommends that the city council approve the hardship relief petition, then the report of the planning commission shall discuss the type and extent of incentives necessary, in the opinion of the planning commission, to provide an appropriate increase in market value or other benefit or return to the petitioner sufficient to offset the substantial economic hardship. The types of incentives that the planning commission may consider include, but are not limited to, the following:
        i. Modification or waiver of specific requirements of the hillside protection zone requirements to the minimal extent necessary to offset the substantial economic hardship.
        ii. A waiver of permits fees;
        iii. Approval of development on some portions of the property within the hillside protection zone; and
        iv. Acquisition of all or a portion of the property at market value.
    c. The report and recommendation shall be submitted to the city council and mailed to the petitioner within thirty (30) days following conclusion of the public hearing.
12. City council review and consideration. Within sixty (60) days following receipt of the planning commission's report, the city council shall hold a public hearing and provide notice as provided in Section 17.02.010 of the Lindon City Code to review the report and recommendations of the planning commission. At the public hearing, the petitioner shall be entitled to testify and to call witnesses and present facts and evidence. The petitioner shall be entitled to cross examine witnesses. All witnesses shall be sworn and testify under oath. At the public hearing the city council may limit the testimony and evidence to new testimony and evidence not presented to the planning commission. The city council shall approve, in whole or in part, or disapprove the hardship relief petition. The city council may modify or waive the requirements of the hillside protection zone, or may adopted any incentive, to the extent reasonably necessary to offset any substantial economic hardship as defined herein and may condition such incentives upon approval of specific development plans. The city council may take such action without the necessity of resubmission of the petition to the planning commission.
13. Findings of the city council. The city council shall, on the basis of the report and recommendation of the planning commission and the evidence and testimony presented, make specific findings as part of its decision. The findings may adopt, change, or modify the findings of the planning commission.
14. Decisions of the city council. The decision of the city council shall be mailed to the petitioner within thirty (30) days following conclusion of the public hearing.
15. Time limits/transferral of incentives. Any modifications, waivers, or incentives adopted by the city council pursuant to this section may be transferred and utilized by successive owners of property or parties in interest, but in no case shall the incentives be valid after the expiration date of the development approval.
16. Decisions final. The decisions of the city council shall be final.

17.57.210 Bonds for improvements.
Bonds for improvements required under this chapter shall be deemed in the nature of public improvements and shall be subject to the bonding provisions of Chapter 17.38 of the Lindon City Code.

17.57.220 Application of hillside zone requirements to lots having an average slope in excess of twenty (20) percent.
All rules and regulations apply to the hillside protection zone district--HP, in Lindon, shall apply to the use of the land, building, and other structures situated on all other parcels and lots located in the city having an average slope in excess of twenty (20) percent as defined in Chapter 17.57. of the Lindon City Code.

17.57.230 Delegation of Responsibility.
The Planning Commission may delegate to City Staff or the City’s contract agents, any and all review, approval, waiver and other authority and responsibilities outlined in Chapter 17.57 of the Lindon City Code. (Ord. 2006-11, amended, 2006)

Chapter 17.58 DEDICATIONS OF SUBDIVISIONS

Sections:
17.58.010    Final plat approval conditions.
17.58.020    Improvements required.
17.58.030    Master plan preparation costs.
17.58.040    Public improvements on developed parcels.
17.58.050    Percentage of dedication or fee.
17.58.060    Considerations in determination of fee payment or construction required.
17.58.070    Finality of decision.
17.58.080    Fee–Use.
17.58.090    Fee–Computation.
17.58.100    Fee–Payment not to relieve developer of on-site improvement responsibilities.

17.58.010 Final plat approval conditions.
As a condition of approval of a final subdivision plat, for the subdivision the developer or property owner(s) shall dedicate land, pay a fee in lieu thereof, or provide off-site improvements in accordance with the city master plan for such required public improvements. The city shall retain the option to require either land, payment of a fee or construction of the required improvements. Proposed subdivisions which have not received approval of a preliminary plat as of the date of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall be subject to the provisions hereof. (Ord. 81 §1, amended, 1980)

17.58.020 Improvements required.
Improvements include, but are not expressly limited to, sidewalks, street paving and other improvements, traffic-control devices, flood control structures, bridges, parks and recreation facilities, public safety and fire fighting equipment, structures and facilities. (Ord. 81 §2, amended, 1980)

17.58.030 Master plan preparation costs.
The city council finds that the cost of preparation of the requirements set out in Sections 17.58.010 and 17.58.020 referred to master plan for public improvements shall be paid from fees collected pursuant to this chapter. (Ord. 81 §3, amended, 1980)

17.58.040 Public improvements on developed parcels.
The city council finds that developed parcels of land create a need for public improvements in excess of the need for such improvements generated by undeveloped parcels of land. (Ord. 81 §4, amended, 1980)

17.58.050 Percentage of dedication or fee.
A developer, builder or individual developing property shall be required to dedicate eight percent of the land area of the proposed development or subdivision, or pay a fee equal to the residential land value of the portion of the land area representing either percent of the proposed development. (Ord. 81 §5, amended, 1980)

17.58.060 Considerations in determination of fee payment or construction required.
Whether the city determines to accept dedication of land or elects to require payment of the fee or require construction of off-site improvements in lieu thereof, or some combination of the requirements set out in Sections 17.58.010 through 17.58.050, shall be determined by a consideration of the following:
1. Application of the city's master plan for public improvements;
2. Topography, geology, access and location of the land in the subdivision available for dedication;
3. Size and shape of the land available for dedication;
4. Feasibility of dedication;
5. Coordination of construction of such improvements necessitated by such development with other developments in the same general area. (Ord. 81 §6, amended, 1980)

17.58.070 Finality of decision.
The determination of the city as to whether land shall be dedicated, whether a fee shall be charged, or whether off-site improvements shall be constructed or a combination thereof, shall be final and conclusive. (Ord. 81 §7, amended, 1980)

17.58.080 Fee–Use.
Fees collected hereunder shall be used exclusively for construction of off-site improvements reasonably related to serving the needs of the subdivision or development and improvements required by such development. (Ord. 81 §8, amended, 1980)

17.58.090 Fee–Computation.
Where a fee is required to be paid in lieu of land dedication, the amount of such fee shall be based upon the average estimated fair market residential land value being subdivided or developed. The fair market value shall be as estimated by the city at the time of final plat submittal or, in the case of an individual building a home or other structure, building permit application. If the developer objects to he fair market value determination, the developer may request the city to obtain an appraisal of the property by a qualified real estate appraiser mutually agreed upon by the city and the developer, which appraisal will be considered by the city in determining the fair market value. All costs of such appraisal shall be borne by the developer. (Ord. 81 §9, amended, 1980)

17.58.100 Fee–Payment not to relieve developer of on-site improvement responsibilities.
Payment of the fee hereunder shall not relieve the developer of the responsibility to provide for required on-site improvements, including required retention of storm drainage waters generated by the development. (Ord. 81 §10, amended, 1980)

Chapter 17.60 NEIGHBORHOOD REDEVELOPMENT AGENCY

Sections:
17.60.010    Designated.
17.60.020    Powers generally.
17.60.030    Authority to accept financial and other assistance.
17.60.040    Authority to accept governmental aid.
17.60.050    Cooperation with other agencies.
17.60.060    Employment of staff– Compensation.

17.60.010 Designated.
Pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 19 of Title 11 of the Utah Code Annotated, 1953, as amended, the city council of the city designates itself as the redevelopment agency (the “agency”) for the city for the purpose of implementing the Utah Neighborhood Development Act, as amended (the “Act”). (Ord. 92 §1, amended, 1982)

17.60.020 Powers generally.
The agency shall be authorized to enter into contracts generally and shall have all powers necessary to transact the business and to exercise all the powers provided for in the Act. (Ord. 92 §2, amended, 1982)

17.60.030 Authority to accept financial and other assistance.
The agency shall have the right and power to accept financial and other assistance from any public or private source for the agency's activities, powers, and duties, and to expend any funds so received for any of the purposes authorized under the Act. (Ord. 92 §3, amended, 1982)

17.60.040 Authority to accept governmental aid.
The agency may borrow money or accept financial or other assistance from the state or the federal government for any redevelopment project within its area of operation and may comply with any conditions of such loan or grant. (Ord. 92 §4, amended, 1982)

17.60.050 Cooperation with other agencies.
The agency shall be authorized to cooperate with similar agencies of other communities for joint planning and joint development of any particular project with may be authorized by ordinances pursuant to Section 11-19-4 of the Act. (Ord. 92 §5, amended, 1982)

17.60.060 Employment of staff– Compensation.
The agency is authorized to employ an executive director, technical experts, consultants, and such other agents and employees, permanent and temporary, as it may require. The agency may also employ or retain its own legal counsel and legal staff. The agency is authorized to compensate the foregoing individuals from funds available to the agency. (Ord. 92 §6, amended, 1982)

Chapter 17.61 SEXUALLY ORIENTED BUSINESSES

Sections:
17.61.010    Purpose.
17.61.020    Definitions.
17.61.030    Permitted Locations and Restrictions.
17.61.040    Distance from other similar businesses.
17.61.050    Sign Restrictions.
17.61.060    Severability.

17.61.010 Purpose.
The purposes and objectives of this chapter are to establish uniform and reasonable regulations to prevent the concentration of sexually oriented businesses or their locations in areas deleterious to the community, to regulate the signs of such businesses, to control the adverse effects of such signs, and to prevent inappropriate exposure to the community. This ordinance by its terms is designed to prevent crime, protect the city's retail trade, maintain property values, and generally protect and preserve the quality of the city's neighborhoods, commercial districts, and the quality of urban life. This ordinance is not designed to suppress the expression of unpopular views. This chapter is to be construed as a regulation of time, place and manner of the operation of these businesses consistent with the limitations provided by the United States and Utah Constitutions. (Ord. 99-20, amended, 2000)

17.61.020 Definitions.
For purposes of this article, the following terms shall have the meanings defined in this section:
“Church” means a building which is used primarily for religious worship and related religious activities.
“Park” means a park, playground, swimming pool, golf course or athletic field within the City which is under the control, operation or management of the City's Public Works or Recreation Department.
“School” means an institution of learning or instruction primarily catering to minors, whether public or private, which is licensed as such a facility either by the City or the State. This definition shall include nursery schools, kindergartens, elementary schools, junior high schools, senior high schools, or any special institution of learning under the jurisdiction of the State Department of Education, but not including trade schools, charm schools, dancing schools, music schools or similar limited schools, nor public or private universities or colleges.
“Sexually oriented business” means any business for which a sexually oriented business license is required pursuant to Chapter 8.30 of the Lindon City Code. (Ord. 2006-3, amended, 2006; Ord. 2002-16, amended, 2002; Ord. 99-20, amended, 2000)

17.61.030 Permitted Locations and Restrictions.
1. Sexually oriented businesses shall only be permitted in areas zoned Heavy Industrial (HI) by the Lindon City Code. Within the HI zone a Sexually Oriented Business District has been identified as an area that is 600 feet from any other zone boundary, as such boundaries existed a the time of adoption of this section (see Sexually Oriented Business Map). All Buildings, parking areas and signage of a sexually oriented business shall be located within the HI zoned portions of the Sexually Oriented Business District. This district location as shown on the Sexually Oriented Business District Map shall be maintained regardless of any future changes to the HI zone boundary.
2. A sexually-oriented business is prohibited from locating within five hundred (500) feet of the following:
    a. A business licensed for the sale or consumption of alcohol.
    b. A park, church, or school - as defined in Section 17.61.020 of this chapter. (Ord. 2006-3, amended, 2006; Ord. 2002-16, amended, 2002; Ord. 2001-11, amended, 2001; Ord. 99-20, amended, 2000)

17.61.040 Distance from other similar businesses.
No sexually-oriented business shall be allowed within one thousand (1000) feet of any other sexually-oriented business, measuring a straight distance from the nearest property line of the one business to the nearest property line of the other business. (Ord. 99-20, amended, 2000)

17.61.050 Sign Restrictions.
Notwithstanding any contrary provision contained in Chapter 18, sexually-oriented business signs shall be limited as follows:
1. Off premise signs are prohibited.
2. No animation shall be permitted on or around any sexually-oriented business signs or on the exterior walls or roof of the premises;
3. No descriptive area or designs depicting any activity related to or implying the nature of the business shall be allowed on any sexually-oriented business sign. The sign shall contain alpha-numeric copy only;
4. Painted wall advertising shall not be allowed. (Ord. 99-20, amended, 2000)

17.61.060 Severability.
If any provision or clause of this chapter or the application to any person or circumstance is held to be unconstitutional or otherwise invalid by any court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect other sections, provisions, clauses or applications herein which can be implemented without the invalid provision, clause or application. To this end, the provisions and clauses of this chapter are declared to be severable. (Ord. 99-20, amended, 2000)

Chapter 17.62 FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION

Sections:
17.62.010    Statutory authorization.
17.62.020    Findings.
17.62.030    Purpose.
17.62.040    Definitions.
17.62.050    Flood loss reduction– Methods.
17.62.060    Applicability.
17.62.070    Flood hazard areas– Basis for establishment.
17.62.080    Compliance.
17.62.090    Abrogation and greater restrictions.
17.62.100    Interpretation.
17.62.110    Liability.
17.62.120    Permit–Establishment– Information required.
17.62.130    Building and zoning officer–Authority.
17.62.140    Building and zoning officer–Duties.
17.62.150    Permit–Review.
17.62.160    Use of other base flood data.
17.62.170    Information to be obtained and maintained.
17.62.180    Alteration of watercourses.
17.62.190    Interpretation of FHBM boundaries.
17.62.200    Standards–Generally.
17.62.210    Anchoring.
17.62.220    Construction materials and methods.
17.62.230    Utilities and equipment.
17.62.240    Subdivision proposals.
17.62.250    Encroachments.
17.62.260    Standards–Specifically.
17.62.270    Residential construction and non-residential construction.

17.62.010 Statutory authorization.
The Legislature of the State of Utah has, in Title 10, UCA, delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the city council of the city does ordain as set forth in this chapter. (Ord. 110 §1.1, amended, 1984)

17.62.020 Findings.
1. The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare.
2. These flood losses are caused by the cumulative effect of obstructions in areas of special flood hazards which increase flood heights and velocities, and when inadequately anchored, damage uses in other areas. Uses that are inadequately flood-proofed, elevated or otherwise protected from flood damage also contribute to the flood loss. (Ord. 110 §1.2, amended, 1984)

17.62.030 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare, and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed:
1. To protect human life and health;
2. To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects;
3. To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public;
4. To minimize prolonged business interruptions;
5. To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains; electric, telephone and sewer lines; streets; and bridges located in areas of special flood hazard;
6. To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the second use and development of areas of special flood hazard so as to minimize future flood blight areas;
7. To ensure that potential buyers are notified that property is in an area of special flood hazard; and
8. To ensure that those who occupy the areas of special flood hazard assume responsibility for their actions. (Ord. 110 §1.3, amended, 1984)

17.62.040 Definitions.
Unless specifically defined in this section, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application.
“Area of special flood hazard” means the land in the flood plain within a community subject to a one percent (1%) or greater chance of flooding in any given year.
“Base flood” means the flood having a one percent (1%) chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year.
“Development” means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations located within the areas of special flood hazard.
“Flood” or “flooding” means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: a. The overflow of inland or tidal waters; and/or surface waters from any source. b. The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source.
“Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)” means the official map issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency where the areas of special flood hazard have been designated Zone A.
“Lowest Floor” means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement). An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of the applicable non-elevation design requirements of this ordinance.
“Manufactured home” means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and is designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. For flood plain management purposes the term “manufactured home” also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles placed on a site for greater than 180 consecutive days. For insurance purposes the term “manufactured home” does not include park trailers, travel trailers, and other similar vehicles.
“Manufactured home park or subdivision” means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale.
“Structure” means a walled and roofed building or mobile home that is principally above ground.
Substantial Improvement. 
    a. “Substantial improvement” means any repair, reconstruction, or improvement of a structure, the cost of which equals or exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the market value of the structure either:
        i. Before the improvement or repair is started; or
        ii. If the structure has been damaged and is being restored, before the damage occurred. For the purposes of this definition, “substantial improvement” is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure.
    b. The term does not, however, include either:
        i. Any project for improvement of a structure to comply with existing state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions; or
        ii. Any alteration of a structure listed on the National Register of Historic Places or a state inventory of historic places. (Ord. 160 §12, amended, 1987)

17.62.050 Flood loss reduction– Methods.
In order to accomplish its purposes, this chapter includes methods and provisions for:
1. Restricting or prohibiting uses which are dangerous to health, safety, and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which result in damaging increases in erosion or in flood heights or velocities;
2. Requiring that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction;
3. Controlling the alteration of natural flood plains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which help accommodate or channel flood water;
4. Controlling filling, grading, dredging, and other development which may increase flood damage; and
5. Preventing or regulating the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood water or which may increase flood hazards in other areas. (Ord. 110 §1.4, amended, 1984)

17.62.060 Applicability.
This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazards within the jurisdiction of the city. (Ord. 110 §3.1, amended, 1984)

17.62.070 Flood hazard areas– Basis for establishment.
The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), Ord. 4902100005-C, dated February 19, 1986, are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter as if set out in full. The FIRM is on file at 383 West 300 North Lakeview Road, Lindon, Utah. (Ord. 160 §12, amended, 1987)

17.62.080 Compliance.
No structure or land shall hereafter be constructed, located, extended, converted, or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. (Ord. 110 §3.3, amended, 1984)

17.62.090 Abrogation and greater restrictions.
This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another ordinance, easement, covenant, or deed restriction conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. (Ord. 110 §3.4, amended, 1984)

17.62.100 Interpretation.
In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be:
1. Considered as minimum requirements;
2. Liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and
3. Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. (Ord. 110 §3.5, amended, 1984)

17.62.110 Liability.
The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur on rare occasions. Flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural cause. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazards or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city, any officer or employee thereof, or the Federal Emergency Management Agency, for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. (Ord. 160 §12, amended, 1987)

17.62.120 Permit–Establishment– Information required.
A development permit shall be obtained before construction or development begins within any area of special flood hazard established in Section 17.62.070.
Application for a development permit shall be made on forms furnished by the building and zoning officer and may include, but not be limited to: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the nature, location, dimensions, and elevations of the area in question; existing or proposed structures, fill, storage of materials, drainage facilities; and the location of the foregoing. Specifically, the following information is required:
1. Elevation in relation to mean sea level, of the lowest floor (including basement) of all structures;
2. Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any structure has been flood-proofed;
3. Certification by a registered professional engineer or architect that the flood-proofing methods for any nonresidential structure meet the flood-proofing criteria in Section 17.62.280; and
4. Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development. (Ord. 110 §4.1, amended, 1984)

17.62.130 Building and zoning officer–Authority.
The building and zoning officer is appointed to administer and implement this chapter by granting or denying development permit applications in accordance with its provisions. (Ord. 110 §4.2, amended, 1984)

17.62.140 Building and zoning officer–Duties.
Duties of the building and zoning officer shall include, but not be limited to, those provisions set out in Sections 17.62.150 through 17.62.190. (Ord. 110 §4.3, amended, 1984)

17.62.150 Permit–Review.
The building and zoning officer shall:
1. Review all development permits to determine that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied;
2. Review all development permits to determine that all necessary permits have been obtained from those federal, state or local governmental agencies from which prior approval is required;
3. Review all development permits to determine if the proposed development adversely affects the flood-carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard. For the purposes of this chapter, “adversely affects” means damage to adjacent properties because of rises in flood stages attributed to physical changes of the channel and the adjacent overbank areas.
    a. If it is determined that there is no adverse effect and the development is not a building, then the permit shall be granted without further consideration.
    b. If it is determined that there is an adverse effect, then technical justification (i.e., a registered professional engineer) for the proposed development shall be required.
    c. If the proposed development is a building, then the provisions of this chapter shall apply. (Ord. 110 §4.3-1, amended, 1984)

17.62.160 Use of other base flood data.
When the base flood elevation data has not been provided in accordance with Section 17.62.070, Flood hazard areas--Basis for establishment, the building and zoning officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer Section 17.62.260, Standards--Specifically. (Ord. 110 §4.3-2, amended, 1984)

17.62.170 Information to be obtained and maintained.
The building and zoning officer shall:
1. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean sea level) of the lowest floor (including basement) of all new or substantially improved structures, and whether or not the structure contains a basement;
2. For all new or substantially improved flood-proofed structures:
    a. Obtain and record the actual elevation (in relation to mean seal level) to which the structure has been flood-proofed.
    b. Maintain the flood-proofing certifications required in Section 17.62.120 C;
3. Maintain for public inspection all records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. 160 §12, amended, 1987)

17.62.180 Alteration of watercourses.
The building and zoning officer shall:
1. Notify adjacent communities and the Utah Division of Water Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse, and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency;
2. Require that maintenance is provided within the altered or relocated portion of such watercourse so that the flood-carrying capacity is not diminished. (Ord. 160 §12, amended, 1987)

17.62.190 Interpretation of FHBM boundaries.
The building and zoning officer shall make interpretations where needed, as to the exact location of the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazards (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). (Ord. 160 §12, amended, 1987)

17.62.200 Standards–Generally.
In all areas of special flood hazards, the standards set out in Sections 17.62.210 through 17.62.280 are required. (Ord. 110 §5.1, amended, 1984)

17.62.210 Anchoring.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure.
2. All manufactured homes to be placed within Zone A on Lindon City's FIRM shall be installed using methods and practices which minimize flood damage. For the purposes of this requirement, manufactured homes must be elevated and anchored to resist flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not to be limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This requirement is in addition to applicable State and local anchoring requirements for resisting wind forces. (Ord. 160 §12, amended, 1987)

17.62.220 Construction materials and methods.
1. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage.
2. All new construction and substantial improvements shall be constructed using methods and practices that minimize flood damage. (Ord. 110 §5.1-2, amended, 1984)

17.62.230 Utilities and equipment.
1. All new and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood-waters into the system;
2. New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood-waters into the systems and discharge from the systems into flood-waters;
3. On-site waste disposal systems shall be located to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and
4. Electrical, heating, ventilation, plumbing, and air-conditioning equipment and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. (Ord. 149 §1.3, amended, 1986)

17.62.240 Subdivision proposals.
1. All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage;
2. All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage;
3. All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood damage; and
4. Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and other proposed development which contain at least fifty lots or five acres (whichever is less). (Ord. 110 §5.1-4, amended, 1984)

17.62.250 Encroachments.
Any proposed development shall be analyzed to determine effects on the flood-carrying capacity of the area of special flood hazard as set forth in Section 17.62.150C, Permit --Review. (Ord. 110 §5.1-5, amended, 1984)

17.62.260 Standards–Specifically.
In all areas of special flood hazards where base flood elevation data has been provided as set forth in Section 17.62.160, Use of other base flood data, the standards set out in Sections 17.62.270 and 17.62.280 are required. (Ord. 110 §5.2, amended, 1984)

17.62.270 Residential construction and non-residential construction.
The Lindon City Building and Zoning Officer shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and flood-way data available from a Federal, State, or other source as criteria for requiring within Zone A the following:
1. New construction and substantial improvements of any residential structure shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation.
2. New construction and substantial improvement of any nonresidential structure shall either have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to or above the base flood elevation; or, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, shall:
    a. Be flood proofed so that below the base flood elevation the structure is watertight with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water;
    b. Have structural components capable of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and effects of buoyancy; and
    c. Be certified by a registered professional engineer or architect that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this paragraph.
3. Encroachments, including fill, new construction, substantial improvements, and other development shall be prohibited in any flood-way unless a technical evaluation demonstrates that the encroachments will not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. (Ord. 149 §1.4, amended, 1986)

Chapter 17.64 RECREATIONAL VEHICLES

Sections:
17.64.010    Definition.
17.64.020    Prohibited–Exceptions.

17.64.010 Definition.
Recreational Vehicle. As found in the State of Utah Administrative Rule 392-301 or as periodically amended.
The term “habitation” means the act of using a recreational vehicle as a primary dwelling as evidenced by sleeping, eating, and spending discretionary time there. (Ord. 2019-4 §1, amended, 2019; Ord. 2007-12, amended, 2007; Ord. 22 §1(5), amended, 1970)

17.64.020 Prohibited–Exceptions.
It is unlawful to place any recreational vehicle, mobile home or trailer on any lot in the city and use the same for human habitation for more than two (2) weeks within a six (6) month time frame. Such cases apply only to residential areas, and only when the trailer is located off of the public street and placed on property with an existing dwelling. No habitation of a recreational vehicle is permitted in nonresidential areas except in an approved mobile home park or R.V. park. No permit shall be required for an unoccupied recreational vehicle, except as may be required by other ordinances or laws and the removal of wheels from the recreational vehicle or the placing of the same upon a permanent foundation shall not exempt such trailer house from the requirements of this chapter. (Ord. 2019-4 §1, amended, 2019; Ord. 2007-12, amended, 2007; Ord. 22 §12, amended, 1970)

Chapter 17.66 DELIVERY OF IRRIGATION WATER STOCK

Sections:
17.66.005    Purpose.
17.66.010    Transfer of Water.
17.66.020    Subdivision recordation and approval required.

17.66.005 Purpose.
The purpose of this ordinance is to require the submittal of water stock (water shares) so that Lindon City can provide and ensure an adequate public water supply (both culinary and secondary water while maintaining and developing adequate distribution of systems to serve the needs of the City for present and future generations. Water submittal requirements described in this ordinance are consistent with goals and guidelines found in the Public Facilities Element of the Lindon City General Plan. At the direction of the City Council, implementation of this ordinance and acceptance of water stock may be handled administratively.

17.66.010 Transfer of Water.
No subdivision of land or building permit shall be approved or issued, where such subdivision or permit is for residential, commercial, or industrial use where the supply of water is to be from the City water system, unless and until the subdivider shall first deliver to the City irrigation water stock as listed in the Lindon City Fee Schedule and further described in LCC Section 17.32.270.
Applicants desiring building permits for parcels that have existing culinary water service that has previously served a residential, commercial, industrial building shall not be required to turn in water share for the property unless connection to the pressure irrigation system is desired. If connection to the pressure irrigation system is desired then water shares shall be submitted to the City. Vacant parcels with culinary water service connections that have not been utilized for previous residential, commercial or industrial structures shall be required to turn in water shares at the time a building permit is issued for the property.
The City Council shall have the authority to require the transfer of more water than required herein when a proposed land use will have a water intensive use which proposes to consume large quantities of water uncharacteristic of the area. Said water stock shall be held in trust by Lindon City for present and future water demands. Lindon City may use the water for any purpose in any area of the City which it deems appropriate so long as water from other sources is made available to the land so subdivided. Upon delivery of the water stock provided for above, the subdivider, or building permit applicant, as the case may be, shall have no further interest of any kind or nature in and to said water stock.
In the event the subdivider or building permit applicant is unable to obtain the requisite water stock for transfer to Lindon City and demonstrates said inability to obtain said water stock to the satisfaction of Lindon City, the subdivider shall then be allowed by Lindon City to pay to the City in cash the equivalent cost of the water shares of said water stock required to be delivered to the City, as set forth above. This money shall be placed by Lindon City in a fund to develop water within the City limits of Lindon City. (Ord. 2007-8, amended, 2007; Ord. 2003-16, amended, 2003; Ord. 2003-7, amended, 2003; Ord. 2002-15, amended, 2002; Ord. 161 §3, amended, 1988)

17.66.020 Subdivision recordation and approval required.
No person shall record a subdivision in the office of the county recorder until such subdivision has been approved by the city, and no person shall erect or construct a building within the limits of the city without first having obtained a building permit from the city. (Ord. 2 §2, amended, 1957)

Chapter 17.68 REIMBURSEMENT FEES

Sections:
17.68.010    Definitions.
17.68.020    Application for Reimbursement Permitted.
17.68.030    Time for Making Application.
17.68.040    Contents of Reimbursement Application.
17.68.050    Notice to Other Property Owners.
17.68.060    Other Required Information.
17.68.070    Hearing and Decision on Application.
17.68.080    Basis for Decision on Application.
17.68.090    Assessment of Fees.
17.68.100    Interest on Assessments and Fee.
17.68.110    Payment of Fees.
17.68.120    Payment of Cost to Lindon City.
17.68.130    Adjustments in Reimbursements and Fees.
17.68.140    Reimbursement Agreement.
17.68.150    Recoupment of costs by the city for improvements.

17.68.010 Definitions.
As used in this chapter, the following words have the following meanings:
“Developer” means any person or entity which makes application for a building permit, subdivision plat approval, or similar construction or improvement approval.
“Public Improvements” means all construction work which is for the benefit of the city, residents of the city, or the general public. It includes, but is not limited to, water lines, sewage disposal lines and structures, storm sewers, debris basins, water tanks, holding ponds, street grading and surfacing, curbs and gutters, street drainage and drainage structures, sidewalks, irrigation systems, monuments, street trees, fire hydrants, secondary water system lines, and related public improvements. Land dedication shall not be considered a “public improvement.” (Ord. 2003-2, amended, 2003; Ord. 10-82, amended, 1992)

17.68.020 Application for Reimbursement Permitted.
Any Developer of real property within the limits of Lindon City may make application, with the associated fee, to the City Council for reimbursement from neighboring and/or adjacent properties of a portion of the cost of constructing public improvements required by the Lindon City Code. Applications for reimbursement agreements should only be submitted after every effort has been made by the applicant to negotiate with neighboring and/or adjacent property owners regarding reimbursement of costs associated with the applicable development. (Ord. 2003-2, amended, 2003; Ord. 10-82, amended, 1992)

17.68.030 Time for Making Application.
Applications for reimbursement under this chapter shall be made in writing and submitted to the city council within ninety (90) days after official acceptance of constructed public improvements by the public works director or other authorized city representative. The application shall be accompanied with a nonrefundable application review fee in such sum as shall be established by the city. (Ord. 2016-19 §1, amended, 2016; Ord. 2003-2, amended, 2003; Ord. 10-82, amended, 1992)

17.68.040 Contents of Reimbursement Application.
Applications for reimbursement under this chapter shall contain the following information:
1. the name, address, and daytime telephone number of the Developer;
2. a specific list of all Public Improvements which the Developer proposes to construct or install on the Developer's property or on surrounding properties, for which the Developer seeks partial reimbursement;
3. the expected actual cost to the Developer of constructing such Public Improvements;
4. the basis for calculating the expected actual cost of constructing such Public Improvements;
5. the names of all owners of properties, other than those owned by the Developer, which Developer asserts will benefit directly from the installation or construction of the Public Improvements by the Developer;
6. the legal description of all properties which Developer asserts will benefit directly from the installation or construction of the Public Improvements by the Developer; the value of the benefit to be conferred on each; the basis for calculating the benefit to be conferred on each other property owner; and
7. a statement as to the amount of reimbursement the Developer believes he/she is entitled to receive from each other property owner (Ord. 2003-2, amended, 2003; Ord. 10-82, amended, 1992)

17.68.050 Notice to Other Property Owners.
The City shall mail a copy of the application required under Section 17.68.040. Said copies shall be mailed within 10 days after items required under 17.68.040 have been reviewed and the application is deemed complete and correct by the City Engineer. Each copy of the reimbursement application sent to other property owners shall be accompanied by a letter which shall:
1. contain a statement notifying the other property owners that they are entitled to submit information or documents relevant to determining the Developer's reimbursement amount, if any, to the City offices within thirty (30) days after receipt;
2. state the name and address of the City offices where information and documents may be sent; and
3. state the amount of reimbursement each individual property owner will be required to pay if the application is approved as submitted. (Ord. 2008-1, amended, 2008; Ord. 2003-2, amended, 2003; Ord. 10-82, amended, 1992)

17.68.060 Other Required Information.
Any developer seeking reimbursement under this chapter shall also provide the City Council with any other information requested by the City Council and helpful to the City Council in determining the reasonableness of the proposed reimbursement request. (Ord. 2003-2, amended, 2003; Ord. 10-82, amended, 1992)

17.68.070 Hearing and Decision on Application.
Within ninety (90) days after the reimbursement application is deemed complete and correct by the City Engineer, the City Council shall hold a public hearing on the application, after giving ten (10) days prior notice to all affected property owners. After the public meeting is held, and after making its decision on the application, the City Council shall send notice of its decision regarding the reimbursement application to the Developer and all property owners affected. The decision may grant the reimbursement requested in whole or in part, or may deny reimbursement. (Ord. 2008-1, amended, 2008; Ord. 2003-2, amended, 2003; Ord. 10-82, amended, 1992)

17.68.080 Basis for Decision on Application.
In deciding whether to grant or deny reimbursement, the City Council shall consider the reasonableness of the reimbursement and corresponding fees which will be imposed on other property owners. In determining the reasonableness of such reimbursement and fees, the City Council shall evaluate each of the following factors:
1. the cost of existing portions of the capital facilities;
2. the manner of financing existing capital facilities (such as user charges, special assessments, bonded indebtedness, general taxes, or federal grants);
3. the relative extent to which the properties to be developed and the other properties in the municipality have already contributed to the cost of existing capital facilities (by such means as user charges, special assessments, or payment from the proceeds of general taxes);
4. the relative extent to which the properties to be developed and the other properties in the municipality will contribute to the cost of existing capital facilities in the future;
5. the extent to which the properties to be developed are entitled to a credit because the City is requiring their developers or owners (by contractual arrangement or otherwise) to provide common facilities (inside or outside the proposed development) that have been provided by the municipality and financed through general taxation or other means (apart from user charges) in other parts of the municipality;
6. extraordinary costs, if any, in servicing the properties to be developed;
7. the time-price differential inherent in fair comparisons of amounts paid at different times; and
8. such other factors as may impact on the reasonableness of the proposed reimbursement. (Ord. 2003-2, amended, 2003; Ord. 10-82, amended, 1992)

17.68.090 Assessment of Fees.
Upon final determination of a reimbursement request which grants reimbursement, fees equal to the amount, in the aggregate, of the reimbursement granted, shall be assessed by the City Council against the other properties which benefit from the proposed construction according to the respective benefit which each such property derives from the proposed construction in accordance with the reasonableness requirements of Section 17.68.080. (Ord. 2003-2, amended, 2003; Ord. 10-82, amended, 1992)

17.68.100 Interest on Assessments and Fee.
Any final assessment of fees may include a requirement for the payment of interest on the principal amount of the fee to compensate the Developer for the time value of money given current and expected levels of inflation or deflation. However, in including such a requirement, the City Council may consider the probable deterioration in the public improvements over time which may reduce the value of the public improvements to the assessed property. The City Council may reduce, or eliminate any requirement for the payment of interest, as compensation for expected deterioration in the public improvements over time or as reasonableness, determined under Section 17.68.080, requires. Normally interest is offset by the depreciation of improvements. (Ord. 2003-2, amended, 2003; Ord. 10-82, amended, 1992)

17.68.110 Payment of Fees.
Fees assessed under Section 17.68.090 shall be payable to the City at such time as the owner of the property against which the fee has been assessed makes application with the City for a building permit, subdivision plat approval, or similar construction approval (whichever happens first); and the owner of the property against which the fee has been assessed, plans to make use of or commences to utilize improvements installed, and paid for by the reimbursement applicant. Payment of fees shall be required as a condition of approval on any development application. (Ord. 2003-2, amended, 2003; Ord. 10-82, amended, 1992)

17.68.120 Payment of Cost to Lindon City.
The Developer shall pay all expenses, attorney’s fees, City overhead costs, and related expenses incurred by the City in assisting in the evaluation of the fees and application, and/or resolving any disputes over the validity of assessments or reimbursement amounts. This fee, less the amount of the reimbursement agreement application fee, shall be paid to Lindon City before the reimbursement agreement is signed, executed, and recorded. (Ord. 2003-2, amended, 2003; Ord. 10-82, amended, 1992)

17.68.130 Adjustments in Reimbursements and Fees.
Reimbursements awarded or fees assessed may be adjusted at any time by the City Council for any of the following reasons:
1. Developer's failure to adequately document its actual costs and expenses incurred in constructing the Public Improvements which will benefit other property owners;
2. Fraudulent misrepresentation or non-disclosure of relevant facts known to the Developer at the time of application for reimbursement or thereafter;
3. Developer's failure to complete the required Public Improvements;
4. A subsequent and substantial change in circumstances which reasonably justifies modification of the original reimbursement or fees. (Ord. 2003-2, amended, 2003; Ord. 10-82, amended, 1992)

17.68.140 Reimbursement Agreement.
Any Developer who has applied for and been granted reimbursement under this chapter shall execute a reimbursement agreement with the City. (Ord. 2003-2, amended, 2003; Ord. 10-82, amended, 1992)

17.68.150 Recoupment of costs by the city for improvements.
The City shall be entitled to collect from new development, prior to the issuance of any permit or approval, the cost of any improvements for which the City has paid for and constructed, that would constitute a project improvement to the development activity. The project improvements shall include any improvement constructed and paid for by Lindon City that specifically benefits the development activity by providing improvements that are required to be installed by the developer or property owner prior to development. The costs shall be calculated by the City Engineer based on the City’s costs of design and construction. The City shall then, by resolution of the City Council, require that those costs be paid by the development. The City may withhold the issuance of a permit for final approval, until such time as the costs are paid. (Ord. 2003-13, amended, 2003)

Chapter 17.70 RESIDENTIAL CARE FACILITIES

Sections:
17.70.010    Repealed.
17.70.020    General definitions.
17.70.030    Residential care facilities.
17.70.040    Transitional victim homes (safe houses).
17.70.050    Procedure for review and approval.
17.70.060    Reasonable accommodation.
17.70.070    Appeal.
17.70.080    Severability.

17.70.010 Repealed and replaced by Chapter 17.72.
(Ord. 2004-2, amended, 2004)

17.70.020 General definitions.
1. For the purposes of this chapter, certain terms and words are defined and are used in this title in that defined context. Any words in this title not defined in this chapter shall be as defined in Webster’s Collegiate Dictionary.
2. As used in this section, the following words shall be defined as follows:
    “Disability” means a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one (1) or more of a person’s major life activities, including a person having a record of such a problem or being regarded as having such an impairment.
        a. “Disabled” or “disability” does not mean an impairment or limitation caused by the current use of a controlled substance or alcohol.
        b. “Disabled” or “disability” also does not mean an impairment or limitation resulting from or related to kleptomania, pyromania, or any sexually related addiction or disorder, including, but not limited to, sex and pornography addictions, pedophilia, exhibitionism, voyeurism, or any other sexual behavior disorder.
    “DRC” means the development review committee.
    “Elderly” means a person who is sixty (60) years or older, who desires to live with other elderly persons in a group setting, but who is capable of living independently.
    “Reasonable accommodation” means a change in any rule, policy, practice, or service necessary to afford a person with a disability an equal opportunity to use and enjoy a dwelling.
    “Resident” means persons living at and receiving the benefit of services and facilities provided by a residential care facility, excluding staff and care providers.
    “Residential care facility” means a residential care facility for elderly persons, a residential treatment facility for persons with a disability, a residential transition and treatment facility, and a transitional victim home.
    “Residential care facility business license” means a business license issued pursuant to Chapter 5.42.
    “Residential facility for elderly persons” means a residential facility in which more than four (4), but not more than eight (8), unrelated elderly individuals reside in a family-type arrangement or in a care facility arrangement and have live-in (or twenty-four (24) hour) care providers who are paid to assist and care for the residents.
    “Residential facility for elderly persons” shall not include any of the following:
        a. A facility where persons being treated for alcoholism or drug abuse are placed;
        b. A facility where placement is not on a strictly voluntary basis or where placement is part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional institution;
        c. A facility which is a healthcare facility as defined by UTAH CODE ANN. 26-21-2, as amended.
    “Residential facility for persons with a disability” means a residential facility in which more than four (4), but no more than eight (8), unrelated individuals, exclusive of staff, who have a disability reside and:
        a. Where treatment services for disabilities are provided to residents such as counseling, therapy, group support and rehabilitation therapies; and
        b. Is licensed or certified by the Department of Human Services under Utah Code Annotated Title 62A, Chapter 5, Licensure of Programs and Facilities; or
        c. Is licensed by the Department of Health under the applicable state code and regulations.
        d. “Residential facility for persons with a disability” shall not include any of the following:
            i. A facility where placement is not on a strictly voluntary basis or where placement is part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional institution;
            ii. A facility which is a healthcare facility as defined by UTAH CODE ANN. 26-21-2, as amended.
    “Residential transition and treatment facility” means a residential facility that provides a living environment for more than four (4), but not more than eight (8), unrelated individuals, exclusive of staff, and:
        a. Is established or maintained with the intent of providing structured peer support to residents with disabilities in an effort to assist residents in acquiring and strengthening social and behavioral skills necessary to transition into successful independent living; and
        b. Is licensed or certified by the Department of Human Services under Utah Code Annotated Title 62A, Chapter 5, Licensure of Programs and Facilities; or
        c. Is licensed by the Department of Health under Utah Code Annotated Title 26, Chapter 21, the Health Care Facility Licensing and Inspection Act;
        d. A “transition and treatment facility” shall not include any of the following:
            i. A facility where placement is not on a strictly voluntary basis or where placement is part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional institution;
            ii. A facility which is a healthcare facility as defined by UTAH CODE ANN. 26-21-2, as amended.
    A “transitional victim home” means a residential support facility for up to eight (8) individuals or four (4) families (parent with children) at any given time, and said facility is licensed by the state of Utah as a residential support facility, which provides twenty-four (24) hour care and peer support to victims of abuse or crime and which arranges for or provides the necessities of life and protective services to residents who are temporarily displaced due to abuse, crime, or other emergency.
    Treatment is not a necessary component of a transitional victim home, but may be provided if the facility and providers are properly licensed by the state. (Ord. 2018-2 § 2, amended, 2018)

17.70.030 Residential care facilities.
1. A residential care facility shall be a permitted use in all residential, commercial, and mixed commercial zones.
2. A residential care facility requires site plan approved by the planning director, which shall be given after consultation with the DRC to ensure the proposed facility complies with the provisions of this chapter.
3. Prior to approval of the site plan, the owner/operator of a residential care facility shall obtain a residential care facilities business license from Lindon City pursuant to the requirements of Chapter 5.42.
4. The facility shall meet all applicable building codes, safety codes, zoning regulations, and health ordinances applicable to single-family dwelling or similar dwellings; except as may be modified by the provisions of this chapter.
5. For facilities located in residential zones, the structure shall be capable of use as a residential care facility, which includes being fully handicap accessible, without structural or landscaping alterations that would change the residential character of the structure.
6. A site plan must be submitted showing any alteration of the structure or landscaping. Any alterations to the structure or landscaping must be approved by building department, if necessary, before a site plan is approved.
7. No residential care facility shall exceed eight (8) residents, excluding live-in staff.
8. Occupancy of the structure shall be such that each resident is provided adequate personal space. A residential care facility shall ensure that each bedroom space in the facility has a floor area, exclusive of closet space, of at least sixty (60) square feet per occupant in a multiple occupant bedroom and eighty (80) square feet in a single occupant bedroom. Storage space shall not be counted. Live-in staff shall have a separate living space with a private bathroom.
9. The facility shall provide a space to serve as an administrative office for records, secretarial work and bookkeeping.
10. The facility shall meet the standard parking requirements for the zone in which it is located. However, a minimum of three (3) off-street parking spaces shall be provided at the facility even if the standard parking requirements for the zone in which the facility is constructed would require fewer spaces for another use in that zone.
11. No portion of the facility’s front and side yard setbacks shall be used to provide parking spaces as required by this section. Any use of the yard as parking space shall not change the residential character of the property.
12. In residential zones, no residential care facility shall be established or maintained within such a distance of another residential care facility so that the proximity of such facilities would create a clustering of residential facilities that would disrupt or affect the residential nature of the area.
13. The facility shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws, included laws related to access. (Ord. 2018-2 § 2, amended, 2018)

17.70.040 Transitional victim homes (safe houses).
A transitional victim home is subject to requirements of Section 17.70.030; however, documents provided pursuant to this chapter, or pursuant to Chapter 5.42, shall be deemed protected records relating to the safety and security of the proposed facility and may not be disclosed or provided pursuant to a request under the Utah Governmental Records Access and Management Act (GRAMA). (Ord. 2018-2 § 2, amended, 2018)

17.70.050 Procedure for review and approval.
1. An application for a new facility provided for in this chapter shall include a site plan and all necessary documentation showing compliance with the applicable subsection under which the application is being submitted.
2. If the application meets all requirements of this chapter, the planning director shall mail notice to owners of record within three hundred feet (300') of the subject property. This notice shall summarize the nature of the application, give the location of the residential care facility, list the approval criteria with an indication that the city intends to issue the approval, and inform the property owners that they may request that residential care facility application be reviewed by the city administrator if they feel that the application does not meet the approval criteria.
    a. Any interested party requesting review by the city administrator shall submit a written request to the city administrator within fourteen (14) days after the date of the notice received and shall state how the application does not meet the requirements. If no written request for review is received by the city within fourteen (14) days after the date of the notice, the permit for the residential care facility shall be issued.
    b. A request for review shall set forth the basis for the review, specifically identifying those areas of the city code which are not met by the application.
    c. Upon receipt of a written request for review, the city administrator shall set an informal hearing as soon as practically possible (but not later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the request) in which the applicant and the party requesting the review may present evidence on the application’s compliance with this chapter. The city administrator shall then approve, continue, or deny the application.
        i. The city administrator may appoint a review officer, other than the planning director, to hear the request for review.
        ii. The party seeking the review has the burden of proving the application fails to meet the requirements of the city code.
        iii. The review of factual matters shall be on the record and shall be limited to reviewing documents and information presented to the planning director.
        iv. If a request for review fails to set forth the information required under this subsection, the request may be denied summarily without a hearing.
    d. Notices under this section shall not be required for transitional victim homes.
3. Where, after consultation with the DRC, it is determined that the information provided by the applicant is insufficient to show compliance with the requirements of this chapter, the application shall be denied.
4. Written notice of the decision on application shall be provided to the applicant and to any interested party who has requested notice. (Ord. 2018-2 § 2, amended, 2018)

17.70.060 Reasonable accommodation.
1. An applicant who desires to request a reasonable accommodation from any of the requirements of this chapter based on the Utah Fair Housing Act, the Fair Housing Amendments Act of 1988 (42 USC Section 3601 et seq.), and Section 504 of the Federal Rehabilitation Act of 1973 et seq., may make such a request to the planning director. A request for reasonable accommodation shall be in writing and shall be delivered to the planning director either in person or by certified U.S. mail.
2. A request for reasonable accommodation shall include the following:
    a. The name, mailing address and phone number of the applicant;
    b. The nature of the action for which reasonable accommodation is being sought;
    c. The physical address of the property where the applicant requests the reasonable accommodation;
    d. The exact statement of the ordinance or policy from which the applicant needs a reasonable accommodation;
    e. The proposed reasonable accommodation;
    f. A statement explaining why a reasonable accommodation is necessary;
    g. Provide evidence demonstrating the accommodation is reasonable and does not negate or negatively impact the legitimate purposes of existing zoning regulations, notwithstanding the benefit that the accommodation would provide to a person with a disability;
    h. Provide evidence that absent the accommodation, one (1) or more persons with a disability would be denied an equal opportunity to enjoy housing of their choice; and
    i. Provide evidence that the requested accommodation will achieve equal results between persons with a disability and nondisabled persons.
3. An informal hearing shall be held no later than thirty (30) business days following the planning director’s receipt of the applicant’s request for reasonable accommodation.
4. Within fourteen (14) business days of the informal hearing, the planning director shall make written findings and issue a decision.
5. If it is determined that a reasonable accommodation must be provided, the planning director shall include the accommodations to be made in the notice required under Section 17.70.050(2). (Ord. 2018-2 § 2, amended, 2018)

17.70.070 Appeal.
1. An interested party may appeal the decision of the planning director to the city administrator.
2. Notice of an appeal shall be filed with the city administrator within fourteen (14) days of the planning director’s decision.
3. The notice of appeal shall identify the appellant and set forth the grounds for the appeal.
    a. If a notice fails to state the grounds for the appeal, the appeal may be summarily denied.
    b. An appellant must present every theory of relief it is claiming to preserve that theory for review in the district court.
4. The city administrator may hear the appeal or may appoint an appeals officer to hear the appeal.
5. Upon receipt of an appeal, the city administrator or appeal officer shall set an informal hearing as soon as practically possible (but not later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the request) in which the appellant and interested the parties may address the planning director’s decision.
6. The appellant has the burden of proving the planning director’s decision was made in error.
7. The city administrator or appeal officer’s review of factual matters shall be on the record and shall be limited to reviewing documents and information presented to the planning director.
8. Any decision by the city administrator or appeal officer on an appeal of a residential care facility shall:
    a. Be issued in writing within fourteen (14) days of the meeting at which the appeal was heard;
    b. Set forth the findings of the city administrator or designated appeal officer; and
    c. Be delivered in person or by first-class mail to the applicant and/or appellant.
9. A party adversely affected by the decision of the city administrator or appeal officer may file a petition for review of the decision with the district court within thirty (30) days after the decision is final.
10. A party wishing to challenge the decision of the city administrator or review officer, on a request for review under Section 17.70.050(2), does not need to file an appeal of that decision, but may file a petition for review with the district court within thirty (30) days after the decision on the request for review is final. (Ord. 2018-2 § 2, renumbered, 2018; Ord. 2007-11, repealed and replaced, 2007. Formerly 17.70.120)

17.70.080 Severability.
If any provision of this chapter is declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction the remainder of this chapter shall not be affected. (Ord. 2018-2 § 2, amended, 2018)

Chapter 17.72 CARE FACILITIES OVERLAY

Sections:
17.72.010    Definitions.
17.72.020    Location and Zoning of Care Facility.
17.72.030    Care Facilities – Specific Requirements.
17.72.040    Small Facilities – Specific Requirements.
17.72.050    Large Facilities – Specific Requirements.
17.72.060    Application and Submittal Requirements.
17.72.070    Denial of application for a care facility – Appeal.

17.72.010 Definitions.
“Care Facility” means assisted living centers, rest homes, nursing homes, convalescent facilities, retirement centers, and other facilities of this type and nature. For the purposes of this section, Lindon City shall classify the facilities as follows;
    a. Small facility shall provide care for more than eight (8), up to sixteen (16) qualifying residents.
    b. Large facility shall provide care for more than sixteen (16) qualifying residents, but not more than ninety (90) qualifying residents. A large facility may also accommodate up to fifteen (15) non-qualifying residents. A non-qualifying resident must reside in the same room as the qualifying resident to whom he or she is related.
“Non-qualifying resident” means an individual who is not a qualifying resident as defined in this chapter, but is a spouse or immediate relative of a qualifying resident.
“Qualifying resident” means an elderly individual, or an individual who is a member of a protected class as defined by the Federal Fair Housing Act and the American with Disabilities Act, who requires assistance with daily living activities.
For the purposes of this section all assisted living centers, rest homes, nursing homes, elderly group care facilities, convalescent facilities, and other facilities of this type and nature, shall be referred to as “Care Facilities” or “facility.”
This section shall not apply to residential care facilities as regulated in Chapter 17.70. This section shall also not apply to a family member caring for other family members where there is a relationship of child, sibling, parent, grandparent, aunt, uncle, niece, or nephew. (Ord. 2018-2 § 4, amended, 2018; Ord. 2014-19, amended, 2014; Ord. 2007-11, amended, 2007; Ord. 2004-2, amended, 2004)

17.72.020 Location and Zoning of Care Facility.
Care facilities shall only be considered by conditional use permit in the MC and CG zones. (Ord. 2007-11, amended, 2007; Ord. 2004-2, amended, 2004)

17.72.030 Care Facilities – Specific Requirements.
1. No person currently being treated for alcoholism or drug addiction shall be placed in a care facility or a residential facility for elderly persons.
2. Placement in a care facility shall be on a strictly voluntary basis and may not be part of, or in lieu of, confinement, rehabilitation, or treatment in a correctional facility.
3. Facilities shall not accept any resident that would pose a direct threat to the health and safety of others in the facility or community.
4. Facilities shall comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including laws related to access. (Ord. 2007-11, amended, 2007; Ord. 2004-2, amended, 2004)

17.72.040 Small Facilities – Specific Requirements.
1. Facility Separation Requirement. Small facilities shall not be within one-thousand five-hundred (1500) feet of any other approved small or large care facility, group home for the elderly, group home for persons with a disability, or juvenile group home, or transitional home as defined by the Lindon City Code.
2. Conformity. The facility shall conform to all applicable building, fire, health and safety codes and requirements for facilities of this type.
3. Lot Size Requirement. Lot size shall be according to the zone in which the facility is proposed.
4. Use of Existing Homes. In the event an existing residential home is to be used as a care facility, the existing structure shall comply with health, safety, and fire protection as required by state regulations and the Lindon City Code. A site plan must be submitted showing any alteration of the structure or landscaping. Any alterations must be approved by the Planning Commission before a conditional use permit is approved.
5. Landscaping. A minimum of thirty (30) percent of the lot shall be maintained in permanent landscaped open space, with site obscuring fencing along the side and back yards that is constructed in a manner consistent with a residential character of the structure. Such fencing shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the Lindon City Code. The Planning Commission shall approve the style and design of any fencing before a use permit is issued. A chainlink fence with slats shall not be considered site obscuring for the purposes of this section.
6. Parking. The facility shall provide one off-street parking stall per three beds plus one per employee. The facility shall at a minimum provide three off-street parking spaces. No portion of the care facility’s open space shall be used to provide parking spaces as required by this section without prior approval of the Planning Commission. If at such time parking is deemed insufficient by the Lindon City Planning Commission and/or City Council, the facility operators may be required to increase the number of parking stalls on their site or reduce the number of residents in the facility.
7. Occupancy and Facility Size. Occupancy of the structure shall be such that each resident is provided adequate personal space. A residential facility shall ensure that each bedroom space in the facility has a floor area, exclusive of closet space, of at least seventy-four (74) square feet for the initial occupant and an additional fifty (50) square feet for each additional occupant of this space. In no case shall a small facility be larger than six thousand-three hundred (6,300) square feet or be more than one building.
8. Lighting. All outside lighting shall be arranged and shielded as to prevent any glare or reflection, any nuisance, inconvenience or hazardous interference of any kind on adjoining streets or property. (Ord. 2007-11, amended, 2007; Ord. 2004-2, amended, 2004)

17.72.050 Large Facilities – Specific Requirements.
1. Facility Separation Requirement. Large facilities shall not be within one-thousand five-hundred (1500) feet of any other approved small or large care facility, group home for the elderly, group home for persons with a disability, juvenile group home, or transitional/treatment group home as defined by the Lindon City Code.
2. Lot Size Requirement. Lot size shall be according to the zone where proposed.
3. Project Site and Design Requirements. Large facilities shall be subject to the architectural, site plan, height and setback requirements of the commercial zone were proposed.
4. Landscaping. A minimum of thirty (30) percent of the lot shall be maintained in permanent landscaped open space.
5. Parking. Off-street parking shall be provided to accommodate staff and one (1) visitor per three (3) residents. If at such time parking is deemed insufficient by the Lindon City Planning Commission and/or City Council, facility operators may be required to increase the number of parking stalls on their site or reduce the number of residents in their facility.
6. Facility Size. Large facilities shall provide a minimum of four-hundred (400) square feet of floor area per resident.
7. Architectural Design. The architectural design of care centers shall comply with architectural design guidelines as established in the respective commercial zone where the facility is proposed. (Ord. 2007-11, amended, 2007; Ord. 2004-2, amended, 2004)

17.72.060 Application and Submittal Requirements.
1. The Lindon City Council shall be the final review authority for all care facility applications. The City Council shall not render a decision on care facility application until the Planning Commission has reviewed the application and provided a recommendation to the City Council.
2. Applications for approval of small or large care facilities shall be subject to Chapter 17.12 - Document Submission and Review, Chapter 17.20 - Conditional Use Permits and all other applicable sections of the Lindon City Code.
3. Noticing. The City shall contact all property owners within seven hundred fifty (750) feet of the proposed project. All property owners shall be notified and informed of the proposal by US Mail, noticed and postmarked ten (10) days prior to the Planning Commission meeting. The notice shall include time, date, and place of the Planning Commission meeting. In addition, this notice shall include a site plan, vicinity map, building elevations, and a general summary of what is being requested.
4. Upon receipt of approval of the Planning Commission, the operator of the small or large care facility shall be eligible to secure an annual permit from the city. Said permit shall be valid for one calendar year, and shall be renewed annually subject to;
    a. the receipt of a renewal application that shall include the information and certifications required under section 17.72 above; and
    b. at least ten (10) days before the Planning Commission hears the renewal application, the city shall provide written notification, either in person or by first class mail, to all citizens living within or owning property within three hundred (300) feet of the proposed site of the care facility.
    c. a finding by the Planning Commission that during the preceding year the care facility had been operated in compliance with the terms of section 17.72, and any other conditions of approval.
5. A permit to operate a Care Facility shall be:
    a. non-transferable; and
    b. shall terminate if at any time it is demonstrated to the Planning Commission, or City Council, that;
        i. The structure is devoted to a use other than as a care facility; or
        ii. The structure fails to comply with the requirements of this section; or
        iii. The program has failed to operate in accordance with the requirements of section 17.72, other applicable ordinance requirements, or conditions of approval. (Ord. 2007-11, amended, 2007; Ord. 2004-2, amended, 2004)

17.72.070 Denial of application for a care facility – Appeal.
Upon issuing a decision on application for a care facility, the applicant or an interested party shall have thirty (30) days to appeal the decision of the City Council to the appropriate appellate board or court. (Ord. 2007-11, amended, 2007; Ord. 2004-2, amended, 2004)

Chapter 17.73 TREE CARE ORDINANCE

Sections:
17.73.010    Purpose.
17.73.020    Definitions.
17.73.030    Creation and Establishment of the City Tree Advisory Board.
17.73.040    Tree Maintenance and Protection.
17.73.050    Heritage Trees.
17.73.060    Planting and Replacement of Trees on Public Property.
17.73.070    Enforcement.

17.73.010 Purpose.
It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the beautification of Lindon City and protect the public health, safety, and general welfare by regulating the placement, maintenance and removal of trees within Lindon City. Trees are recognized as a valid asset to provide a more healthful and beautiful environment in which to live, providing oxygen, shade, aesthetics, and a priceless psychological counterpoint to the urban setting. Trees are also economically beneficial in attracting new industry and residents by enhancing the value and marketability of property and promoting the stability of desirable neighborhoods.

17.73.020 Definitions.
For the purposes of this Chapter, the following terms, words and their derivations shall have the following meanings given herein:
“Hazard tree” means A single tree which has been deemed by both the Parks Superintendent and the Public Works Director as having potential to cause physical damage or harm to human life, existing structures or utilities.
“Heritage tree” means a tree characterized by one or more of the following:having historical significance, being part of a historical site or being of a rare or unusual species/
“Protected tree” means any tree located on public property with the City of Lindon.
“Protective measures” means any steps taken to safeguard the appearance, health, condition, or continued viability of a protected tree. Typical examples are: physical structures limiting access to a protected tree, pruning to allow access to a site, supplemental watering or fertilization, washing of canopy to remove dust or other residues, berms or grading to prevent erosion or silting in a protected root zone, signage indicating protected status of trees or other methods as deemed necessary at the time of permitting.
“Public property” means any right-of-way, park, or other ground owned by the City of Lindon.
“Replacement tree(s)” means trees required to be planted as compensation for the removal of viable, non-hazard trees.
“Tree maintenance” means measures performed to promote the desirable growth and health of a tree such as, but not limited to, watering, fertilizing, mulching, weeding, pest management, pruning and physical protection.
“Tree topping” means the severe cutting back within the tree’s crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree.

17.73.030 Creation and Establishment of the City Tree Advisory Board.
The City shall create and establish a Tree Advisory Board which shall consist of at least five (5) members, who shall be appointed by the Mayor with the advice and consent of the City Council. The members shall come from different interest groups including homeowners, tree professionals, and City government.
1. Term of Office. 
    a. The terms of the appointed members of the Tree Advisory Board shall be four (4) years, or until their respective successors shall have been appointed, except that the terms of appointment shall be such that the terms of one to three (1 to 3) members shall expire each year.
    b. The Tree Advisory Board existing at the time of passage of the ordinance codified in this chapter shall continue to serve, and the terms of its members shall be fixed by the governing body in such a manner as to comply with the above provisions for staggering terms of service.
    c. Members of the committee shall serve without compensation.
2. Duties and Responsibilities. The Tree Advisory Board shall hold quarterly meetings on the third Thursday of January, April, July and October and at other times as needed. A quorum, representing a majority of committee members, is necessary to conduct any official business of the committee. Under the direction of the City Council, the Tree Advisory Board shall, at a minimum, be responsible for the following activities:
    a. Recommend the types and species for specific areas of the City, such as along State Street, 700 North or in parks and other public places.
    b. Recommend ideas to increase public awareness and public support for tree preservation.
    c. Encourage the preservation of trees by developers and landowners.
    d. Create an inventory of Heritage trees within City limits and promote protection of those trees.
    e. Recommend specific guidelines for tree maintenance, placement and general pruning standards, for both public and private areas.
    f. Plan and coordinate an annual Arbor Day observance.
    g. Seek funds for the purpose of increasing tree inventory and other tree related projects.
3. Meetings. 
    a. The Tree Advisory Board shall elect one of its members to be the chairperson. The chairperson shall conduct all meetings and shall serve for one year. Elections for chairperson shall be held annually at the first January meeting of the year. A chairperson may serve consecutive terms.
    b. Board business and discussion shall be conducted in open public meetings.
    c. The board may adopt by-laws, rules, or procedures for the transaction of its business.
    d. When voting on an item, each member of the board shall have one vote. At least three votes for an item are required for an item to be approved by the Board.

17.73.040 Tree Maintenance and Protection.
1. The City of Lindon shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain and remove trees, plants and shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, or other public utilities or improvements, as may be necessary to insure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds.
2. No person shall engage in the pruning or topping of trees on any public property without the authorization of the Park Superintendent.
3. It shall be unlawful for any person, business or other entity, without first obtaining a permit from the City, to remove, cause to be removed, relocate, alter, damage or destroy any tree on public property, including public rights-of-way.
4. City departments shall seek the counsel and recommendations of the Superintendent of Parks and the Chairperson of the Tree Advisory Board prior to the removal or major alteration of any tree on public property or right-of-way unless the tree poses immediate danger to the public.
5. No new curb cuts, which shall endanger protected trees, shall be allowed without the express permission of the Superintendent of Parks.
6. Protective measures may be prescribed by the City to safeguard the health, appearance, condition and viability of protected trees. Any deviation from the measures prescribed by the City to protect said trees shall constitute a violation of this Title.
7. All trees shall be appropriately pruned or trimmed to satisfy the clear view area requirements of LCC section 17.04.290.
8. Appeals of any requirements in this section regarding tree maintenance and protection shall be made to the City Administrator. The City Administrator shall have final authority on any appeal or unresolved matter between the Superintendent of Parks and the Tree Advisory Board.

17.73.050 Heritage Trees.
A heritage tree is one having historical significance or being part of a historical site or a rare or unusual species. Private property owners shall recommend or nominate Heritage Trees on a voluntary basis. The Tree Advisory Board then has the duty of approving nominations and inventorying approved Heritage Trees. In no case shall the City nominate and inventory a Heritage Tree on private property without voluntary consent of the owner of the tree. Heritage Trees are to be protected. Removal or damage to such trees is prohibited without authorization by the Tree Advisory Board. Lindon City does not assume responsibility for the maintenance of Heritage Trees on private property.

17.73.060 Planting and Replacement of Trees on Public Property.
Written authorization from the Superintendent of Parks shall be required prior to planting or replacing any tree located on property owned and maintained by Lindon City. The written authorization shall address concerns including, but not limited to:
1. The species, optimum planting season and location of each tree.
2. The impact of the tree on public and private utility facilities.
3. Any additional conditions or protective measures deemed necessary.

17.73.070 Enforcement.
The Superintendent of Parks shall have power to enforce all regulations within the city’s tree ordinance as they apply to trees on public property within the City. Any person found in violation of any provision of this chapter shall be guilty of a Class C misdemeanor and shall be required to pay for or replace any damaged tree with a similar age and species of tree. Each tree on which a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. (Ord. 2005-11, amended, 2005)

Chapter 17.74 WIND ENERGY CONVERSION SYSTEMS (WECS)

Sections:
17.74.100    Purpose.
17.74.200    General Regulations.
17.74.300    Additional Standards.

17.74.100 Purpose.
Lindon City recognizes the increased demand for alternative energy generating systems and the need/desire for more inexpensive power and self-reliance that wind energy conversion systems (WECS) may provide. The purpose of these supplemental regulations is to protect the community’s interest in properly sitting WECS in a manner consistent with sound land use planning, while also allowing property owners to meet their power generating objectives.

17.74.200 General Regulations.
1. Pole mounted WECS shall be permitted in all zones upon issuance of a building permit and compliance with all applicable regulations. No more than two (2) WECS shall be permitted per parcel.
2. WECS producing less than five hundred (500) watts of electricity, not exceeding twenty-four (24) volts; not connected to the power grid/source for the property; and with an overall height less than twenty (20) feet (excluding roof mounted WECS), including the blade at its highest point, shall be exempt from this ordinance and does not require a building permit.

17.74.300 Additional Standards.
No building permit shall be granted for a WECS unless the City determines that the proposed use meets all of the following criteria and any other applicable requirements. The City reserves the right to inspect any WECS to ensure Ordinance compliance.
1. Building Permit and Inspections. 
    a. A building permit shall be required for all WECS.
    b. The owner shall submit two (2) complete sets of detailed plans and specifications for the WECS, including a site plan, a electrical design including standard drawings of the wind turbine structure, including the tower, base, and footings, completed by a registered professional engineer licensed to do such work in the state of Utah whose seal shall be affixed to all such drawings and plans.
    c. The owner shall submit all other information as requested by the Building Department and/or Chief Building Official.
    d. Utility Notification. No WECS shall be installed and connected to the power grid until evidence has been given that the utility company has been informed of the customer’s intent to install an interconnected customer-owned turbine. All WECS connected to the utility grid shall meet all applicable codes and standards, including Electrical Service Requirements (ESRs).
    e. All engineering and electrical wiring/connections shall conform to the applicable provisions of the International Building Code and National Electric Code and shall be inspected by the City.
    f. Permanent power source shall be concealed from public view and comply with all applicable provisions of the National Electric Code.
2. Setbacks. 
    a. The minimum setback distance for all WECS, including building mounted WECS, shall be no less than twenty feet (20') from all property lines, measured from the blade radius tip of the WECS. The blade radius may not encroach into any setbacks.
    b. The minimum setback distance between overhead utility lines, any other WECS, and above-ground generation facilities shall be no less than the height of the wind tower plus the rotor radius.
    c. WECS may not be located within the front or street side setback.
3. Height. 
    a. All WECSs are subject to the zone height limit. WECS height is measured to the tip of the rotor blade. However, for every foot that a WECS is set back from the 20' minimum setback, the height of the WECS may increase one additional foot above the zone height limit. Each additional foot of height is earned when the WECS is set back from all property lines by an additional foot (see figure 17.74 A).
        i. The maximum height of the WECS shall not exceed fifty-five (55) feet.
    b. Roof mounted WECS shall be required to meet existing building regulations and may not exceed fifty-five feet (55') in height (measured from the average building grade to the WECS blade at its highest point (see figure 17.74 B).
    c. The minimum distance between the ground or above any outdoor surface intended for human use (such as a balcony or roof garden located directly below the WECS) and any part of the rotor blade system shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet.Figure 17.74 A. Pole-Mounted wind Turbine
[IMAGE: <17.74.300_001.png>]Figure 17.74 B. Building-Mounted wind Turbine
[IMAGE: <17.74.300_002.png>]
4. Safety Measures. 
    a. There shall be sufficient safety measures to prevent the tower from becoming a climbing hazard, such as yard fencing, fencing around structure, or non-climbing pole design.
    b. No WECS shall be permitted that lack an automatic braking, governing, or feathering system to prevent uncontrolled rotation, over speeding, and excessive pressure on the tower structure, rotor blades, and turbine components.
    c. Procedures for emergency shutdown of power generation units shall be established and posted prominently within three (3) feet of the meter panel.
    d. If an alternative energy facility is not functional or operational or maintained for a period of one (1) year, the owner upon notification shall either immediately dismantle the WECS or repair it.
5. Sound. 
    a. All WECS shall be located with relation to property lines so that the level of the noise produced during any WECS operation shall not exceed sixty (60) decibels, measured at the boundaries of all the closest parcels that are owned by a non-site owner or at any point past the property line.
6. Visual Appearance. 
    a. A WECS must be non-reflective in color limited to galvanized metal, white or gray, and its design must conform to all applicable industry standards. The appearance of the turbine, tower, and any ancillary facility must be maintained throughout the life of the WECS.
    b. A WECS may not include artificial lighting, except as necessary for reasonable safety and security, including as required by the FAA or other authority.
    c. A WECS may not be used to display any advertising, except for identification as required by turbine manufacturer. (Ord. 2010-2, amended, 2010)

Chapter 17.75 SENIOR HOUSING FACILITY OVERLAY

Sections:
17.75.005    Purpose.
17.75.010    Definitions.
17.75.015    Permitted Uses.
17.75.020    Location and Zoning of Senior Housing Facility.
17.75.030    Senior Housing Facility– Specific Requirements and Conditions of Approval.
17.75.040    Maintenance of premises.
17.75.060    Application and Submittal Requirements.

17.75.005 Purpose.
1. The Senior Housing Facility overlay provides standards for development which recognizes and accommodates the varied housing and lifestyle needs and desires of seniors age 55 and older. It promotes independence and a high quality of life to meet the physical and social needs of seniors by encouraging specialized design features, and convenient access to community and civic centers, support services, mass transit stations and stops, recreational facilities, and shopping centers.
2. This section shall not apply to the “Care Facilities” Overlay Zone. Each overlay zone is separate and independent from the other and may not be used conjunctively.
3. This overlay is not for non-age restricted residential housing of any type including, but not limited to, apartments, condominiums, townhomes, single-family homes, twin homes, triplexes, fourplexes, etc.

17.75.010 Definitions.
“Senior housing facility” as used in this chapter shall mean residential housing for persons age 55 and older in a multi-unit development under a single ownership that consists of apartment or independent living facilities and which are located within the MC and CG zones.

17.75.015 Permitted Uses.
1. Permitted Uses. Any use permitted in the underlying zone.
2. Conditional Uses. Senior Housing Facilities as defined in this chapter along with any permitted conditional use in the underlying zone.

17.75.020 Location and Zoning of Senior Housing Facility.
1. This division includes a map (current Lindon City Zoning Map) which defines the boundaries of the Senior Housing Facility Overlay Zone. This overlay is site specific and does not apply to the entire City.
2. Applications to amend the overlay area on the zoning map must include a sketch/concept plan and building elevations/renderings showing the project proposal for the site in question. Any expansion of this overlay area may only be permitted after recommendation from the Planning Commission and approval by the City Council. Senior Housing shall only be considered by conditional use permit if located entirely within approved overlays within the MC and CG zones. If the project changes significantly beyond the concept plan, after an expansion of the overlay is approved, the Planning Commission may refuse to grant or may revoke a conditional use permit. Significant changes include, but are not limited to, changes in density, parking ratios, landscaped open space, building height, mass, and location.

17.75.030 Senior Housing Facility– Specific Requirements and Conditions of Approval.
1. Except as otherwise listed in this chapter, Senior Housing Facilities shall comply with all applicable ordinances and policies required by Lindon City Code for development in the underlying zone, as well as other state and federal laws, including laws related to access.
2. Conformity. The facility shall conform to all applicable building, fire, health and safety codes and requirements for facilities of this type.
3. Project Acreage Requirement. Project acreage shall be a minimum of 2.5 acres for senior housing but not larger than 5 acres.
4. Lot Setbacks. 
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------+
| Front Setback                           | 40 feet                    |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------+
| Side or rear yard setback when adjacent | 20 feet                    |
| to a non-residential zone               |                            |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------+
| Side or rear yard setback when adjacent | 40 feet                    |
| to a residential use or a residential   |                            |
| zone                                    |                            |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------+
| Street-side yard setback (corner lot)   | Local street = 30 feet     |
| determined by type of adjacent street   | Collector street = 40 feet |
|                                         | Arterial street = 40 feet  |
+-----------------------------------------+----------------------------+
For flag lots, setback distances shall be measured from the end of the drive, or “pole,” portion of the lot.
5. Landscaping. 
    a. Except as otherwise listed in this chapter, and regardless of the underlying zone, landscaping requirements shall be the same as those found in LCC 17.48.030, Landscaping within the general commercial zones.
    b. Open Space. A minimum of thirty percent (30%) of each project shall be maintained in permanent landscaped open space.
6. Fencing. Seven foot (7') high, site obscuring fencing shall be installed along the perimeter of the property, regardless of whether it abuts existing residential or commercial properties or uses. The fence shall be constructed and maintained by the owner of the senior housing facility. Installation of fencing should not limit pedestrian access to vehicular access points. Such fencing will be constructed in a manner consistent with a residential character of the senior housing structure. The Planning Commission shall approve the style and design of any fencing before a conditional use permit is issued. Any exceptions to fence height, material, location and timing of installation shall be approved by the Planning Commission. A chain link fence with slats shall not be considered site obscuring for the purposes of this section.
7. Parking. 
    a. The facility shall provide off street parking at a ratio of 1.10 parking stalls per dwelling unit or greater. All other parking standards as required in LCC 17.18 shall apply.
    b. No portion of the senior housing facility’s open space shall be used to provide parking spaces as required by this section without prior approval of the Planning Commission.
    c. Projects are encouraged to provide covered parking and adequate ADA stalls to accommodate the residents and guests of the facility.
8. Density. The Senior Housing Facility Overlay may have a maximum density of 30 dwelling units per acre if full-time on-site management is present and one (1) indoor and one (1) outdoor common area/recreation space is provided within the facility. If full-time onsite management is not present or the two common area/recreation spaces are not provided, the maximum density shall be 15 dwelling units per acre.
9. Maximum Building Height. The maximum primary building height shall be the same as found within the underlying zone. Accessory buildings shall not exceed twenty feet (20') in height.
10. Occupancy Restrictions. The units are restricted to three (3) persons as the maximum number of occupants with a maximum unit size of three (3) bedrooms, with the following restrictions:
    a. In one (1) bedroom units, the maximum number of occupants shall be two (2) persons;
    b. The units are intended for, and to be occupied by, at least one person fifty five (55) years of age or older per unit with all occupants being at least 18 years of age;
        i. A unit may be occupied by the surviving spouse of a household, regardless of age, if the fifty five (55) years of age or older qualifying person has passed away, provided the surviving spouse was a resident of the unit at the time of that qualifying person's death;
        ii. Dependents of the deceased qualifying person may continue to reside in the unit if a surviving spouse of the qualifying person is remaining in the unit under the circumstances outlined in (8)(a)(i). Otherwise, dependents shall have a 90 day transition period during which they are able to remain in the unit following the qualifying person’s death.
    c. A deed restriction shall be recorded on the property indicating the occupancy restrictions in paragraphs 9 above.
11. Minimum dwelling unit size shall be 700 square feet.
12. Lighting. All outside lighting shall be arranged and shielded as to prevent glare, nuisance, inconvenience or hazardous interference on adjoining streets or property. Street lights shall be installed on all public roads according to standards established in the Land Development Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings manual.
13. RV Storage. A senior housing facility may provide recreational vehicle and/or boat storage areas for up to 20% percent of dwelling units within the development. Storage areas shall be fenced from neighboring properties by a minimum seven-foot (7') solid masonry wall. RVs, motor homes, trailers and boats must be stored in these designated locations on the property and shall not be used as a residence.
14. Accessory Buildings and Facilities. Allowable accessory buildings and facilities include free standing club facilities for member use; garage structures, carports, and sheds; pools and hot tubs/spas; recreation facilities such as game rooms, fitness facilities, basketball courts, tennis courts, and similar structures. A minimum separation distance of ten feet (10') shall be maintained between all buildings.
15. Architectural Design. The architectural design of a senior housing facility shall comply with architectural design guidelines as established in the underlying zone where the facility is proposed. Also, design should reflect the residential nature of the building use.
16. Facilities shall not knowingly accept any resident that would pose a direct threat to the health and safety of others in the facility or community.
17. Unified Ownership. Senior housing development projects within the zone shall be under a single ownership, with respect to each development. Individual dwelling units may not be developed or converted to condominiums and may not be sold separately from the rest of the development. (Ord. 2015-29, amended, 2015)

17.75.040 Maintenance of premises.
1. No excessive or offensive noise, dust, odor, smoke, or light, shall be emitted which is discernible beyond the site or parcel boundary lines in question, except that which emanates from the movement of motor vehicles. Premises shall be maintained in such a manner so as to avoid unreasonable interference with adjacent uses and to avoid public nuisances.
2. No person shall store junk, unlicensed and/or inoperable vehicles, partially or completely dismantled vehicles, or salvaged materials outside a building.
3. All solid waste storage facilities shall be enclosed with a masonry wall and constructed as per adopted City standards. The minimum access width to a solid waste storage facility shall be fifteen (15) feet.
4. No trash, rubbish, or weeds shall be allowed to accumulate on any lot in the Senior Housing Overlay zone. The space around buildings and structures in these zones shall be kept free from refuse, debris, and weeds. All waste shall be concealed from view from adjacent property.
5. The architecture, appearance, and aesthetics of all buildings, structures, and edifices shall be maintained to reasonable upkeep and maintenance standards.
6. Landscaping shall be maintained in a living, growing, and reasonable condition

17.75.060 Application and Submittal Requirements.
1. The Lindon City Council shall be the final land use authority for all Senior Housing Facility applications. The City Council shall not render a decision on an application until the Planning Commission has reviewed the application and provided a recommendation to the City Council.
2. Application for approval shall be subject to sections 17.12—Document Submission and Review, 17.20—Conditional Use Permits and all other applicable sections of the Lindon City Code. (Ord. 2013-5, amended, 2013)

Chapter 17.76 PLANNED RESIDENTIAL DEVELOPMENT OVERLAY (PRD OVERLAY) ZONE

Sections:
17.76.010    Purpose.
17.76.020    Applicability.
17.76.030    Permitted Uses, Building Types, and Densities.
17.76.040    Site Plan and Final Plat.
17.76.050    Form and Contents of the Site Plan and Amended Site Plan.
17.76.060    Site Plan Review and Approval for PRDs.
17.76.070    Final Plat and Improvement Drawings.
17.76.080    Building Permits.
17.76.090    Completion of Improvements.
17.76.100    Completion and Maintenance of Site.
17.76.110    Development Standards and Requirements.

17.76.010 Purpose.
1. The Planned Residential Development Overlay Zone promotes the following purposes:
    a. Create diverse and quality housing options in Lindon City.
    b. Effectively develop unique commercial lots and parcels that do not naturally accommodate traditional commercial development patterns.
2. The purposes of the PRD Overlay are accomplished by:
    a. Allowing densities higher than a typical residential development;
    b. Establishing standards for landscaping, building and site design, public safety, parking, aesthetics, traffic circulation, fencing, lighting, and other similar site improvements; and
    c. Requiring standards that enable PRDs to fit into the surrounding development.

17.76.020 Applicability.
1. The PRD Overlay Zone may be applied to any lot or parcel in the General Commercial (CG) Zone after application and approval of a zone map amendment by the City Council after recommendation from the Planning Commission.
2. An application to apply the PRD Overlay Zone shall include a concept site plan, building elevations, and renderings showing the proposed project for the subject site. Any concept plan presented to the Planning Commission and City Council for approval shall first be reviewed by the Development Review Committee to ensure the proposal is technically feasible. When the City Council approves a zone map amendment applying the PRD Overlay Zone, the amendment shall be accompanied by an approved concept site plan, including elevations and renderings, for each site included in the amendment. If a subsequently submitted site plan application proposes significant changes to the approved concept plan, the Planning Commission may deny the site plan application for noncompliance with the Lindon City Code. Significant changes include, but are not limited to, changes in density, parking ratios, landscaped open space, building height, mass, or location.

17.76.030 Permitted Uses, Building Types, and Densities.
1. Permitted Uses. In addition to uses permitted or conditionally permitted in the underlying zone, a Planned Residential Development (PRD) is a conditionally permitted use in the PRD Overlay Zone and is not permitted in any other zone.
2. PRDs may include twin homes, condominiums, and townhouses.
3. Accessory apartments are not permitted in the PRD Overlay Zone.

17.76.040 Site Plan and Final Plat.
1. Site Plan. 
    a. Anyone desiring to develop a Planned Residential Development (PRD) in the PRD Overlay Zone shall first submit a Land Use Application for site plan approval. The applicant shall provide all requirements of the site plan to the City before the City considers the application submitted and before action is taken. The application for a site plan shall include all necessary fees and documentation required by this Chapter.
    b. The Development Review Committee shall review the site plan and give its recommendations to the Planning Commission.
    c. The Planning Commission is the land use authority for all PRD site plans.
2. Final Plat. 
    a. The site plan must be approved by the Planning Commission before the final plat can be approved.
    b. The developer shall submit a Land Use Application for final plat approval of all or part of the PRD together with all required fees. The final plat shall be prepared by the developer's surveyor and engineer.
    c. The Development Review Committee shall review the final plat and give their recommendations to the Planning Director.
    d. The Planning Director is the final approving authority for final plats and shall approve the application request if it meets the requirements of the approved site plan and all applicable City ordinances.
    e. Failure to submit a final plat within two (2) years of the date of approval of the site plan shall terminate all proceedings and render approval of the site plan null and void. The final plat shall expire and be void one (1) year after approval by the City, unless the Office of the Utah County Recorder has recorded the plat.

17.76.050 Form and Contents of the Site Plan and Amended Site Plan.
The applicant shall submit the site plan for a PRD to the Planning Department according to site plan submittal requirements outlined in the Lindon City Land Development Policies, Standard Specifications and Drawings Manual (Development Manual). At that time the applicant shall pay a fee in an amount established by Resolution of the City Council. No development, construction, revisions, or additions shall take place on the site until the Planning Commission has approved the site plan, the site plan is considered finalized by the City Engineer, and the developer has obtained the appropriate permits. Applicants for amended site plans for PRDs shall follow the same procedures, pay the same fees, and be bound by the same development standards and requirements as applicants for site plans for PRDs. The Planning Director or designee has the authority to make minor amendments to the site plan where such amendments are in compliance with the ordinance and the site plan is not materially altered.

17.76.060 Site Plan Review and Approval for PRDs.
1. The procedure for site plan approval shall be as follows:
    a. Development Review Committee. The Planning Department shall forward the proposed site plan to the Development Review Committee for initial review. The Development Review Committee shall review the site plan while considering whether it complies with the Lindon General Plan and all City ordinances, resolutions, and policies. The site plan shall comply with the Lindon General Plan and all City ordinances, resolutions, and policies before the Planning Commission can review the application.
    b. Planning Commission. The Planning Commission shall review the site plan and be the land use authority for all site plans for PRDs. The Planning Commission shall consider whether the proposed site plan complies with City ordinances, resolutions, policies, Lindon City Commercial Design Guidelines, and the General Plan when reviewing a site plan for a PRD.
2. The applicant shall not amend or change any approved site plan without first following the procedure for approval of site plans.
3. The Planning Commission may impose conditions on the site plan to mitigate dangerous hazards where there is substantiated evidence that a real safety hazard exists.

17.76.070 Final Plat and Improvement Drawings.
1. The form and contents of the final plat and improvement drawings (where applicable) shall contain all of the requirements of the Lindon City Development Manual. The final plat shall also contain the following information:
    a. A designation of common areas, limited common areas, and private ownership areas.
    b. For condominiums, three dimensional drawings of buildings and building elevations. In the case where the PRD is a condominium project, the developer shall submit a written statement by an attorney who is licensed to practice in Utah. This written statement shall be the attorney's opinion that the condominium declaration, the subdivision plat and the other supporting documentation comply in all respects with the Utah Condominium Ownership Act (UCA Sec. 57-8-1, et seq.) as well as all applicable federal, state and local laws and ordinances and that when the office of the Utah County Recorder has recorded the condominium declaration and final plat, the proposed project will be a validly existing and lawful condominium project in all respects.
    c. Plat restrictions, lot restrictions, and other information required by the Planning Commission or City Council.
2. PRD site plans may be built in phases as long as each phase of a PRD complies with all of the requirements of this ordinance. A phase of a PRD may not be less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
3. The Planning Director shall approve the final plat of the PRD provided he/she finds that:
    a. The applicant has redrawn the site plan to incorporate all the requirements as approved by the Planning Commission and has submitted the corrected site plan with the final plat.
    b. The applicant has incorporated all of the improvements and conditions of the approved site plan into the final plat.
    c. The City Engineer has marked the construction drawings of the PRD as finalized.
4. The City shall record the final plat after it obtains all of the required signatures and after it receives all of the required bonds, fees, and documents.

17.76.080 Building Permits.
The City shall not issue a building permit for any project until the final plat has been recorded by the City.

17.76.090 Completion of Improvements.
The developer must complete all of the improvements required by the approved site plan for the final plat in accordance with the requirements outlined in Lindon City Code 17.38 Bonds for Completion of Improvements to Real Property.

17.76.100 Completion and Maintenance of Site.
Every PRD shall conform to the approved site plan. The applicant or any other person or entity shall not add any structures or make any improvements or changes to a PRD that did not appear on the approved site plan. The applicant and subsequent owners and applicable associations shall maintain all improvements shown on the site plan in a neat and attractive manner. Failure to complete or maintain a PRD in accordance with this Chapter and with the approved site plan is a violation of the terms of this Chapter. The City may initiate criminal and/or civil legal proceeding against any person, firm, entity or corporation, whether acting as principal, agent, property owner, lessee, lessor, tenant, landlord, employee, employer or otherwise, for failure to complete or maintain a PRD in accordance with this Chapter and with the approved site plan.

17.76.110 Development Standards and Requirements.
The City requires the following development standards for all PRDs.
1. Compliance with Lindon City Code. A proposed PRD shall comply with the requirements of this Chapter and with all applicable Lindon City Code provisions and with conditions imposed by the Land Use Authority.
2. Density. A PRD may be developed at a maximum density of ten (10) dwelling units per gross acre.
3. Height. No lot or parcel of land in a PRD approved pursuant to the PRD Overlay Zone shall have a building or structure used for dwelling which exceeds a maximum average height of thirty-five (35) feet, measuring the four (4) corners of the structure from finished grade to the highest point of the roof structure. The Planning Director and Chief Building Official shall be responsible for designating and identifying the four corners of a structure. No dwelling shall be erected to a height less than one (1) story above grade.
4. Minimum Area. The minimum area required for any PRD shall be twenty thousand (20,000) square feet.
5. Maximum Area. The maximum allowable size for any PRD shall be one (1) acre with no more than ten (10) units.
6. Setbacks. The following setbacks for primary structures shall apply in the PRD zone:
    a. Front Setback. 30 feet
    b. Rear Setback. 30 feet
    c. Side Setbacks. 10 feet
    d. All primary structures within the PRD Overlay zone shall be set back at least ten (10) feet from any other primary structure.
7. Utilities. Compliance with the Development Manual and applicable Lindon City Code provisions regarding utility connections to residential units is required. The public sewer system and the public water supply shall serve all dwellings. All utilities shall be underground. The developer shall individually meter natural gas and electricity for each individual dwelling. No water or sewer lines shall be located under covered parking areas.
8. Fences.
    a. Perimeter Fences. The Planning Commission may require a perimeter fence, and may specify the height and construction materials used for the fence, around the development if the Commission finds that the fencing is necessary to mitigate reasonably anticipated detrimental impacts the development may create. Fencing may also be required to buffer the surrounding residential neighborhoods from the PRD and to buffer the PRD from surrounding commercial and manufacturing uses. Any fence erected around or within the development shall comply with Lindon City Code section 17.04.310, involving fencing standards. Any perimeter fencing shall have a consistent design throughout the project and shall consist of the same construction materials.
    b. Patio/Limited Common Area Fences. A patio or limited common area adjacent to the rear of a dwelling unit may be enclosed with a six-foot (6') high maximum fence.
9. Landscaping. 
    a. All land within a PRD not covered by buildings, driveways, sidewalks, structures, and patios shall be designated as common area and shall be permanently landscaped with trees, shrubs, lawn, or ground cover and maintained in accordance with good landscaping practice. All required setback areas adjacent to public streets shall be landscaped. All landscaping shall have a permanent underground sprinkling system.
    b. At least forty percent (40%) of the net acreage (area of the development less public and private streets) of the entire development shall remain permanently landscaped.
10. Lighting Plan. All PRDs shall include a lighting plan. The lighting plan shall be designed to:
    a. discourage crime;
    b. enhance the safety of the residents and guests of the PRD;
    c. prevent glare onto adjacent properties; and enhance the appearance and design of the project.
11. All PRD homeowners’ associations and apartment owners are required to control and meter all outside lighting shown on the lighting plan except for front and back door lighting. The lighting plan shall designate which lighting shall be commonly metered to the association or owner.
12. Parking. There shall be a minimum of two (2) parking spaces provided for each dwelling, one of which shall be covered. Required off-street parking spaces shall not be permitted within the front yard or street-side yard setbacks. There shall also be a minimum of one half (½) parking space for each dwelling for guest parking within the development. Guest parking shall be located on the same lot or parcel of the dwellings served. All parking spaces shall measure at least nine (9) feet by eighteen feet (18'). Developers shall pave with asphalt and/or concrete all parking spaces, parking areas, and driveways and provide proper drainage. Drainage shall not be channeled or caused to flow across pedestrian walk ways. The architecture of all covered parking structures shall be the same as the architecture of the main structures within the PRD.
    a. Direct access to each parking space shall be from a private driveway and not from a public street unless otherwise granted by the Planning Commission based on the following guidelines:
        i. Topography or other development constraints on the project area are such that a private drive is impractical to serve the project.
        ii. Traffic volumes, safety, and visibility on the public roadway will not create a dangerous situation for direct parking stall access.
        iii. No more than six (6) units shall directly access any public roadway.
13. Irrigation Systems. 
    a. Where an existing irrigation system consisting of open ditches is located on or adjacent to or within one hundred (100) feet of a proposed subdivision, complete plans for relocation or covering or other safety precautions shall be submitted with an application for preliminary approval of a plat.
    b. All pressure irrigation systems in or within one hundred (100) feet of a proposed subdivision shall be identified and otherwise color-coded as to pipe and valve color to meet state standards and regulations.
14. Storage Areas and Solid Waste Receptacles. All outside storage areas and all solid waste receptacles which are not located within a building, shall be enclosed on at least three sides with the same materials as used on the exterior of the main structures within the PRD. Central waste receptacles shall only be permitted within a trash enclosure which meets standards found in the Development Manual. Trash enclosures shall be located in the side or rear of the dwelling units and must be accessible for garbage trucks. All individual garbage containers shall have the ability to be serviced from a public street.
15. Exterior Finishing Materials. The dwellings in a PRD shall comply with the Lindon City Commercial Design Guidelines. The Planning Commission shall have the authority to determine compliance with the Design Guidelines.
16. Roof Pitch. All structures shall have a minimum roof pitch of five (5) rise to twelve (12) run.
17. Homeowner's Association. The applicant shall establish a home owners association for every PRD containing common or limited common property, with more than one owner for the purpose of maintaining the PRD. The homeowner's association, the individual property owners, and tenants shall maintain the PRD in accordance with the approved site plan.
18. Existing Homes. No PRD shall include an existing single-family dwelling. If a single-family dwelling exists on the property where a PRD is proposed, the applicant shall plat separately a lot containing the home. The plat shall comply with the requirements of the Lindon City Development Manual.

Chapter 17.78 RECREATIONAL VEHICLE PARKS

Sections:
17.78.010    General provisions.
17.78.020    Application and plan.
17.78.030    Code compliance.
17.78.040    Property development standards.
17.78.050    Recreation areas.
17.78.060    On-site common facilities.
17.78.070    Utilities.
17.78.080    Park management.
17.78.090    Business license.
17.78.100    Length of occupancy.
17.78.110    Recreational vehicle rental.

17.78.010 General provisions.
The recreational vehicle park ordinance is established to provide minimum site and management regulations which are designed to facilitate the development of safe and sanitary accommodations for temporary occupancy. (Ord. 2019-4 §2, adopted, 2019)

17.78.020 Application and plan.
Each recreational vehicle park shall submit a complete application upon forms provided by the city, which, at a minimum, shall include:
1. A description of the proposed use;
2. A dimensioned site plan and supporting materials;
3. Size and character of each service and recreation building and other structures associated with and facilities to be used by the recreational vehicle park occupants;
4. Identified open space areas for use by the park occupants;
5. Proposed landscape planting plan, including type and location of plant material;
6. Location of existing and proposed utility lines and easements, water and sewer lines, fire hydrants and other improvements;
7. The topography represented by contours shown at no greater intervals than two feet (2') when required by the city engineer;
8. Vehicle and pedestrian site circulation plan and roadway widths;
9. Location and amount of off-street parking;
10. Trash receptacles;
11. Signs and lighting; and
12. Proposed fencing, screening, and landscaping to separate the use from adjoining property and uses. (Ord. 2019-4 §2, adopted, 2019)

17.78.030 Code compliance.
Recreational vehicle parks shall meet the requirements of Lindon City Code and Utah State Code and administrative rules and definitions as found in Utah Administrative Rule 392-301 or as periodically amended.
“Recreational pad sites” are defined as independent and dependent for determining which pad sites shall have full hook-up utility services and shall be identified as part of the conditional use permit. All camping and overnight stays shall be conducted within a pad site area. (Ord. 2019-4 §2, adopted, 2019)

17.78.040 Property development standards.
The following development standards shall apply to recreational vehicle parks:
1. Minimum Size. Each recreational vehicle park shall be a minimum of three (3) acres.
2. Recreational Vehicle Pad Site Identification. Each pad site shall be plainly marked and numbered for identification and shall meet all requirements of this chapter.
3. Recreational Vehicle Pad Site Areas. Each pad site area shall not be less than one thousand (1,000) square feet.
4. Pad Site Width and Length. Each pad site shall have a minimum width of at least twenty-five feet (25') and a minimum length of at least forty feet (40'). Recreational vehicles shall be separated from each other and from other structures by at least ten feet (10'). Any accessory uses such as attached awnings or steps shall, for the purposes of this separation requirement, be considered to be part of the recreational vehicle.
5. Pad Site Frontage. Each pad site shall abut directly upon a park roadway. Alignment and gradient shall be properly adapted to topography.
6. Setback. All pad sites shall be located at least thirty feet (30') back from the right-of-way line of any public street and the resulting setback space must be landscaped with lawn and trees or shrubs.
7. Recreational Vehicle Density. Not more than one (1) recreational vehicle shall be placed on a pad site.
8. Site Coverage. Recreational vehicles and accessory structures shall not cover more than seventy-five percent (75%) of a recreational vehicle park.
9. Off-Street Parking. 
    a. Each recreational vehicle park shall have a paved area for automobile parking which may be a part of or a continuation of a pad upon which the recreational vehicle will park. Said parking space shall have unencumbered dimensions of not less than nine feet (9') in width and eighteen feet (18') in length.
    b. Each recreational vehicle park shall provide sufficient parking and maneuvering space so that the parking, loading, or maneuvering of recreational vehicles incidental to parking shall not necessitate the use of any public street, sidewalk, right-of-way, or any private grounds not part of the recreational vehicle parking area.
    c. There shall be provided guest parking in each recreational vehicle park at the ratio of one (1) parking space for each five (5) pad sites within the park. The guest spaces shall be in addition to the on-site pad spaces.
10. Walls and Fences. Walls and fences on individual recreational vehicle sites shall not exceed two feet (2') in height.
11. Recreational Vehicle Park Site Circulation. Recreational vehicle parks shall provide adequate traffic circulation within the park which meets the following standards:
    a. Internal park roadways shall be at least twenty-six feet (26') in width. Parking shall not be allowed on park roadways;
    b. Internal park roads shall be constructed and paved to engineering standards.
12. Access. Access to all recreational vehicle parks shall be from a dedicated and approved public street at an approved point or points. Pad sites shall not have direct access from a public street.
13. Landscaping and Lighting. The following landscaping provisions shall apply to all recreational vehicle parks:
    a. All open areas except driveways, parking areas, pad sites, or walking ways shall be landscaped and maintained in accordance with a landscaping plan to be approved with the issuance of a conditional use permit.
    b. Trees shall be planted along the street frontages and entryway.
    c. At least one (1) tree shall be planted on each pad site. The land use authority may take into account existing trees on the site even though they may not match with each pad site. Where appropriate the land use authority may waive the requirement of one (1) tree per pad site when existing trees provide sufficient coverage and are considered an amenity of the park.
    d. Lighting will be evaluated as part of the conditional use permit to mitigate potential issues of criminal behavior.
14. Security. A gate shall be installed at the entrance of the park. The gate shall be closed during nonbusiness hours. (Ord. 2019-4 §2, adopted, 2019)

17.78.050 Recreation areas.
A central recreation area shall be established in all recreational vehicle parks, which shall be easily accessible from all recreational vehicle sites. The size of such recreation areas shall be not less than ten percent (10%) of the gross site area of all recreational vehicle spaces, or three thousand (3,000) square feet, whichever is greater. The recreational area shall be set aside and developed for recreation. (Ord. 2019-4 §2, adopted, 2019)

17.78.060 On-site common facilities.
1. Recreational Vehicle Park Office. Every recreational vehicle park shall include a permanent building for office use. Daily hours of operation will be established and set forth in the conditional use permit.
2. On-Site Management. Each recreational vehicle park shall have full-time on-site management. On-site operators/managers may occupy a portion of the park office as living quarters or management may occupy a designated recreational vehicle. Signage shall be installed clearly identifying the management residence.
3. Laundry Rooms. Recreational vehicle parks may provide laundry room facilities. Laundry drying lines shall not be permitted on any pad sites.
4. Restrooms and Shower Facilities. Restrooms, including toilets, shall be provided within a recreational vehicle park, in accordance with Utah State Code and Administrative Rule 392-301, to conveniently and adequately serve the recreational vehicle sites within said park. A recreational vehicle park may provide interior shower facilities or outdoor shower/rinse off areas within the park.
5. Disposal and Water Stations. All recreational vehicle parks shall provide a sanitary dump station to receive the discharge of wastewater from any holding tank or similar device installed in any recreational vehicle, and also a source of potable water for filling recreational vehicle water tanks. (Ord. 2019-4 §2, adopted, 2019)

17.78.070 Utilities.
All utility distribution facilities, including television antenna service lines serving individual pad sites, shall be placed underground. The owner or operator is responsible for complying with the requirements of this section, and shall make the necessary arrangements with each of the serving utilities for installation of said facilities. Transformers, terminal boxes, meter cabinets, pedestals, concealed ducts, and other necessary appurtenances to such underground facilities may be placed above ground. Natural gas hookups shall not be provided upon individual pad sites.
All independent pad sites must be served by a water system, a sanitary sewer disposal system, electricity, and solid waste disposal facilities approved by Lindon City, the health department, and other applicable agencies. Any electrical installation in an RV park shall comply with Utah Code Title 15A. As part of the conditional use permit, the planning commission may designate dependent pad sites for recreational vehicles or tents which do not have provided utility services. Where the planning commission approves such pad sites, the recreational vehicle park shall provide the services to the extent required by Utah Administrative Rule 392-301 and the health department. (Ord. 2019-4 §2, adopted, 2019)

17.78.080 Park management.
1. Storage. There shall be no open storage of personal belongings within a recreational vehicle park, nor shall there be an accessory building, shed, or cabinet placed upon or erected upon an individual recreational vehicle site for the storage of materials or personal belongings.
2. Skirting. Recreational vehicles may use a temporary flexible skirting that is easily removable. The operator of the recreational vehicle park may use hard-sided skirting for park model recreational vehicles as long as the skirting is well maintained and not damaged. Hard-sided skirting that becomes damaged or worn must be removed until new skirting is installed.
3. Extra Vehicles. In addition to a self-propelled recreational vehicles or travel trailers and necessary tow vehicles, the occupants of a recreational vehicle pad site may have only one (1) other vehicle, which is owned by said occupants or otherwise associated therewith, located within the pad site. The recreational vehicle parks shall designate areas for additional parking to accommodate other associated vehicles, recreational vehicles, or trailers.
4. Removal of Wheels. There shall be no removal of axles, wheels or tires from a recreational vehicle located within a recreational vehicle park, except for emergency, temporary removal to accomplish repairs.
5. Mail Boxes. There shall be no separate mail boxes, separate street address designations, or other similar accessories which would give the appearance of “permanence” to occupants of a recreational vehicle park.
6. Disclosure. The owners or operators of any recreational vehicle park in the city that is regulated by these provisions shall provide a copy of the standards set forth in this section to all occupants.
7. Maintenance. All recreational vehicle parks shall be maintained in an orderly and sanitary condition, free at all times from debris, trash and deleterious objects and structures. Landscaping shall be maintained as approved on the site plan.
8. Camping in Designated Areas Only. Recreational vehicles used for overnight camping use shall be parked on recreational vehicle pad sites only as designated on the approved site plan.
9. Eating and Cooking Facilities. Each recreational vehicle pad site shall be equipped with a picnic table and benches or equivalent, and an outdoor cooking facility which meets the approval of the fire department.
10. Management Plan. As part of the conditional use permit application, an applicant shall provide the city a park management plan describing mitigating management practices and plans for operation of the park. (Ord. 2019-4 §2, adopted, 2019)

17.78.090 Business license.
Prerequisite to the occupancy of any recreational vehicle park an annual license shall be obtained, which shall be issued only after inspection by the city and compliance with the conditional use permit. It shall be unlawful to operate a recreational vehicle park without first obtaining a license, and said license shall not be renewed or revoked upon failure of the owner and/or operator to maintain the park in accordance with the standards and requirements as set forth in this chapter and the conditional use permit. (Ord. 2019-4 §2, adopted, 2019)

17.78.100 Length of occupancy.
No pad site located within a recreational vehicle park established under the provisions of this chapter shall be occupied by any individual, family, or group of individuals within a recreational vehicle for a period exceeding fourteen (14) continuous days. There shall be a waiting period of seven (7) days between the last day an occupant leaves the recreational vehicle park and rents a new pad site in the same recreational vehicle park. All recreational vehicles within a recreational vehicle park shall display current license plates/tags. No temporary or permanent rooms shall be attached to recreational vehicles nor shall any permanent structure be constructed on a recreational vehicle pad site. (Ord. 2019-4 §2, adopted, 2019)

17.78.110 Recreational vehicle rental.
As part of the conditional use permit, park model recreational vehicles designated by the park owner or operator, as defined by Utah State Code and Administrative Rule 392 or as periodically amended, may be rented within licensed recreational vehicle parks only and meet the following requirements:
1. Only the park operator may own and temporarily rent park model recreational vehicles that meet the length of occupancy requirements of this chapter;
2. Be built to recreational vehicle standards and maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. The exterior of the recreational vehicle will be maintained with the same appearance and condition as originally manufactured;
3. Have at a minimum kitchen, bathroom, and sleeping space;
4. Be capable of being removed for transportation at any time without the need of additional repair or maintenance. Such recreational vehicles will be no larger than allowed by Utah State law for movement on public highways and continually be highway legal. Recreational vehicles shall be registered and licensed with the state of Utah;
5. Be towable by a bumper hitch, frame-towing hitch connection. Such recreational vehicles are designed not to move under their own power;
6. Shall not be placed on a permanent foundation;
7. Shall meet all requirements of this chapter; and
8. A data plate or permanent label is attached to the structure that includes:
    a. Name of the manufacturer;
    b. Serial number or vehicle identification number (VIN) of the unit;
    c. Date of manufacture; and
    d. A statement that the unit is designed and manufactured to NFPA 1192 or ANSI A119.5 standards; and when:
        i. It has been certified by the Recreational Vehicle Industry Association; or
        ii. It has been inspected by a qualified third-party inspection company and certified to be in compliance with the standards in NFPA 1192 or ANSI A119.5. (Ord. 2019-4 §2, adopted, 2019)

Title 18 SIGNS

Chapters:
18.01        Administration
18.02        General Requirements
18.03        Definitions and Regulations
18.04        Billboard Advertising
18.05        Non-Conforming Signs

Chapter 18.01 ADMINISTRATION

Sections:
18.01.010    Purpose and scope.
18.01.020    Title.
18.01.030    Interpretation.
18.01.040    Appeals.
18.01.050    Enforcement.
18.01.060    Validity.
18.01.070    Amendments.

18.01.010 Purpose and scope.
The City Council of Lindon City finds and declares that the provisions set forth in this title shall:
1. Reduce potential hazards to motorists and pedestrians by providing adequate signage in order to identify a business or facility while eliminating excessive, obtrusive, and confusing sign displays and excessive illumination.
2. Encourage sign owners to integrate signs with buildings and sites through use of similar building materials and moderate sign proportions.
3. Preserve and improve the aesthetic appearance of the City as a place in which to live and work by reducing or prohibiting signage that is overbearing, creates visual clutter or excessive illumination, or is not consistent with the design guidelines of Lindon City.
4. Allow each business to clearly identify itself and the goods and services which it offers.
5. Safeguard and enhance property values by allowing for aesthetically pleasing signage that will help to promote economic development and attract quality businesses to the City.
6. Protect public and private investment in buildings and open space.
7. Preserve freedom of speech.
8. Promote public health, safety, community standards, public morals and the general welfare of the citizens of Lindon City.

18.01.020 Title.
The ordinance contained in this title shall be known as the “Sign Code of Lindon City.”

18.01.030 Interpretation.
1. The provisions of this title shall be plenary. Signs not specifically allowed herein shall be prohibited.
2. Nothing contained in this title shall prevent the erection, location, or construction of signs on private property where such erection, location, or construction of signs is required by law.
3. Nothing in this title shall prevent anyone from engaging in non-commercial speech as guaranteed by the First Amendment to the United States Constitution.

18.01.040 Appeals.
Any person who has been ordered by the City to alter or remove any sign, or any person whose application for a sign permit has been refused, may appeal to the Board of Adjustment by filing a written appeal with the Lindon City Planning Department within ten (10) calendar days of the receipt of the order or refusal of the City. The applicant shall also pay a fee for such appeal as set forth by resolution of the City Council. Any appeal shall be solely for the purpose of reviewing the interpretation given the terms of the title by the City, and not to vary the terms in any way. Upon filing of the appeal, the City shall take no further action with regard to the removal of the sign involved until the Board of Adjustments makes a final decision on the appeal. However, if the City finds that the sign presents an immediate or serious danger to the public, the City shall proceed immediately to have the sign altered or removed.

18.01.050 Enforcement.
It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any of the provisions of this title. Any person, firm or corporation, whether as principal, agent, employee, or otherwise, violating or causing the violation of the provisions of this title shall be guilty of an infraction and upon conviction thereof shall be punished by a fine of not more than seven hundred fifty dollars ($750.00). Each and every day a violation occurs shall constitute a separate offense. The person responsible for any illegal sign as established by this ordinance shall be liable for the cost incurred in the removal and abatement thereof and the City is authorized to effect the collection of said cost. Any sign that would have been illegal under any ordinance or regulation existing prior to the enactment of this sign ordinance shall not be grand-fathered in under this ordinance. The City's failure to take appropriate action against violations of this title shall not be a waiver of any of the rights of the City as set forth in this title.

18.01.060 Validity.
If any provision of this title shall be held invalid, the same shall not affect the validity of this title as a whole or any provision thereof, other than the part held to be invalid.

18.01.070 Amendments.
All proposed amendments to this title shall be submitted first to the Planning Commission for its recommendation and then to the City Council. (Ord. 2005-12, amended, 2005; Ord. 2002-21, repealed and replaced, 2002)

Chapter 18.02 GENERAL REQUIREMENTS

Sections:
18.02.010    Permits.
18.02.020    Maintenance.
18.02.030    Signs used with conditional use permits.
18.02.040    Prohibited sign locations.
18.02.050    Prohibited signs.
18.02.060    Confiscation of signs.
18.02.070    Abandoned signs.
18.02.080    Unsafe or dangerous signs.
18.02.090    Lighting.

18.02.010 Permits.
1. Permits required. Except as provided in this title it shall be unlawful for any person to erect, alter or relocate a sign within Lindon City without first obtaining a sign permit from the City.
2. Permission of Property Owner. No person shall erect, construct or maintain any sign upon any property without the consent of the owner, or person entitled to possession of the property or their authorized representative.
3. Application. Application for a permit shall be made to the City upon a form provided by the City and shall contain such information as may be required to assure compliance with all appropriate laws and ordinances of the City, including but not limited to the following information:
    a. A site plan drawn to scale indicating the location of the proposed signage, existing signage, existing and future buildings, property lines, streets, sidewalks, landscaped areas, parking areas, and driveways.
    b. A drawing to scale indicating the proposed sign dimensions, construction specifications, electrical components and wiring, method of attachment, and character of structural members to which attachment will be made.
    c. An elevation drawing of existing or future buildings that will display the attached signage.
    d. Any other reasonably related information deemed necessary by the City.
4. Permit Issuance Term. 
    a. The City shall issue a permit for the erection, alteration or relocation of a sign within the City when an application has been properly made, the appropriate fees have been paid, and the proposed sign complies with all appropriate laws of the City.
    b. Every permit issued by the City under the provisions of this title shall expire and become null and void if the work authorized by such permit is not commenced within sixty (60) days from the date of such permit, or if the work authorized by such permit is suspended or abandoned prior to completing the sign for a period of one hundred twenty (120) days or more at any time after the work is commenced. Before such work can be commenced or resumed a new permit shall be obtained and the new fee paid. The new fee shall be one-half (½) the amount required for the original permit provided no changes have been made in the original plans and specifications and that such suspension or abandonment has not exceeded one year.
    c. The City may in writing suspend or revoke a permit issued under provisions of this title whenever the permit is issued on the basis of a material omission or misstatement of fact or in violation of any ordinance.
    d. No permit for a sign issued by the City shall be deemed to constitute permission or authorization to maintain a public or private nuisance nor shall any permit issued hereunder constitute a defense in an action to abate a nuisance.
    e. The City may issue temporary sign permits for the display of temporary on- site signs. Temporary sign permits shall describe the terms, limitations and conditions of the temporary sign.
    f. Sign permits for new or additional signs shall not be issued for a specific occupancy if such occupancy displays unlawful or legal nonconforming signs. A sign permit may be issued for a specific occupancy provided the terms of the permit specify modification or removal of nonconforming signs resulting in conformity with this title.
    g. Signs for which a permit has been issued shall not be erected, installed, maintained, or displayed except in complete conformance with all terms, requirements, and stipulations specified by the permit.
5. Sign inspections. All signs requiring a permit shall have the following inspections unless waived by the Chief Building Official:
    a. Footing inspections on all freestanding signs.
    b. Electrical inspections on all illuminated or electrical signs.
    c. Expansion inspections where evidence shall be provided to show that the existing sign can structurally support an increase in size and weight to the sign.
    d. Final inspections which shall cover the sign location, structural members and placement of the insignia.
6. Fees. Fees required by this title shall be paid in an amount set by the City Council.

18.02.020 Maintenance.
All signs shall be kept in good repair, maintained in a safe and attractive condition by the owner, and displayed so as to conform to the conditions required by the sign permit. Signs in disrepair which have not been repaired for sixty consecutive days shall be removed from the building or premises by the owner, the person having control of the premises or the person receiving benefit of such sign.

18.02.030 Signs used with conditional use permits.
Any person desiring to erect any sign in conjunction with a conditional use shall submit a sign permit application to the Lindon City Planning Department. In reviewing the application, the Planning Director shall consider the character of the surrounding parcels and the conditions of the conditional use permit. The director shall approve, approve with conditions, or deny the application. Appeals of the Director's decision of this title shall be made to the Planning Commission.

18.02.040 Prohibited sign locations.
No person shall erect or maintain a sign on or overhanging public property or a public right-of- way, nor shall any sign extend over an adjoining property line; provided, however, that governmental signs, and signs erected by a public utility company and approved by the City which are necessary for public safety are exempt from this section. The City may erect banners which overhang public property or a public right-of-way as provided in Section 18.03.030. No person shall erect any sign so as to interfere with or restrict access to windows, fire escapes, or required exits. No person shall erect any sign which constitutes a safety hazard as determined by the City.

18.02.050 Prohibited signs.
The following signs are prohibited in the City:
1. A-frame signs.
2. Abandoned signs.
3. Flashing Signs.
4. Off-premise signs, except those expressly permitted in this title.
5. Portable signs, except those expressly permitted in this title.
6. Projecting signs.
7. Reader board signs.
8. Rotating signs.
9. Roof signs.
10. Temporary signs, except those expressly permitted in this title. (Ord. 2013-4, amended, 2013)

18.02.060 Confiscation of signs.
The City shall immediately confiscate any sign located on public property in violation of City ordinances. Confiscated signs shall be stored at a location determined by the Public Works Director for a period of sixty days, during which time the owner or person having charge, control or benefit of the confiscated sign may redeem the sign after payment of enforcement costs to the City in an amount determined by the City Council. Payment of costs to the City shall be made to the Planning Department which shall issue a release notice for redemption of the sign upon payment of costs. Lindon City shall be held harmless for any damages incurred to signs as a result of their confiscation. In addition to enforcement costs, sign owners and persons having charge, control and/or benefit of any sign erected in violation of this title shall be liable for any damages caused to public property, public facilities or public utilities by reason of the placement, attachment and/or removal of such unlawful signs. Signs not redeemed within sixty days shall be destroyed.

18.02.070 Abandoned signs.
Abandoned signs shall be removed from any building or premise by the owner or person having control of the premises or the abandoned sign.

18.02.080 Unsafe or dangerous signs.
If an unsafe or dangerous sign as determined by the Chief Building Official is not repaired or made safe within five working days after the City has given written notice by registered mail to repair or make the sign safe, the Chief Building Official shall at once abate the sign according to the procedures in the Uniform Code for the Abatement of Dangerous Buildings.

18.02.090 Lighting.
1. General Lighting Standards. The following requirements shall apply to exterior lighting of any residential, commercial, industrial, or professional development. These requirements are applicable to parking lighting, sign lighting, architectural lighting, safety lighting, and landscaping lighting.
    a. Lighting shall be stationary. No lighting shall blink, flash, or be of unusually high intensity or brightness so as to be distracting to motorists or other properties within the vicinity.
    b. Lighting shall be shielded or recessed so that direct glare and reflections are contained within the boundaries of the parcel.
    c. Light poles shall not be used to display signs of any kind unless approved by the Planning Commission.
    d. Neon lights, strings or lines of LED lighting, other electrically activated gas tubing or similar lighting placed around the perimeter of a sign, along a building elevation as building accents, or within a window (where such lighting is intended to be visible from the exterior of the building) is prohibited. Neon tubing may only be allowed to illuminate or outline wording, copy, or logos within a sign face.
2. Signage illumination Limits. As recommended by the Outdoor Advertising Association of America (OAAA) and the International Sign Association (ISA), the following criteria shall be used to determine proper illumination limits for all signs regulated within the T-zone (Travel Influence District) established by LCC 17.52:
    a. The illumination of, or light produced by, any sign shall not increase nighttime ambient light levels by more than 0.3 footcandles as measured by an illuminance meter (footcandle meter) placed five (5) feet above the ground and perpendicular to the sign face at a distance determined by the following formula:
    [IMAGE: <18.02.090_001.png>]
    b. At the distance determined by the formula in 2(a) above, illuminance levels shall be measured with the sign lighting turned on, and again with the sign lighting turned off. The difference between the illumination measurements taken at the appropriate distance shall not exceed 0.3 footcandles. For digital signs (Electronic Changeable Copy signs) the difference between the on and off illuminance levels shall be measured while displaying:
        i. a solid white screen image (for a full color-capable display), and the sign lighting turned off; or
        ii. a solid screen image (for a single-color display), and the sign lighting turned off.
3. Upon receiving reasonable written notice from Lindon City, all sign owners shall cooperate with the City in order to test signage illumination limits. (Ord. 2005-12, amended, 2005; Ord. 2002-21, amended, 2002)

Chapter 18.03 DEFINITIONS AND REGULATIONS

Sections:
18.03.010    Construction of terms.
18.03.020    Definitions.
18.03.030    Specific regulations by sign type.

18.03.010 Construction of terms.
Words in the present tense include the future and the future includes the present; the singular number includes the plural and the plural the singular. The words “lot”, “plot”, “tract” and “parcel” shall be considered synonymous when the context so requires. The term “erect” means “construct”, “alter”, “move”, “reconstruct”, “modify”, “expand:, “extend”, “rebuild”, “convert”. The words “shall” and “must” are always mandatory. The term “City” shall mean Lindon City. The term “City Attorney” shall mean the City Attorney of Lindon City.

18.03.020 Definitions.
Any type of sign not defined or listed in this ordinance is prohibited, except for those types of signs specifically identified in the Lindon City Commercial Design Guidelines which may be permitted by the Planning Commission if the signs are part of a pedestrian oriented commercial development consistent with the Design Guidelines.
“A-frame sign” means any sign composed of two (2) sign faces mounted or attached back to back or a sign structure built in such a manner as to form a basically triangular vertical cross section through the faces or structure.
“Abandoned sign” means any sign or structure, excluding billboard signs, which no longer identifies or advertises a bona fide business, lessor, service, owner, product, or activity and has not done so for one-hundred and twenty (120) consecutive days.
“Area of a sign” shall be computed by enclosing the entire area within a geometric shape of the smallest size sufficient to cover the entire area of the sign and then computing the area of the geometric shape. Where a sign has more than two (2) faces, the area of the third face and all additional faces shall be included in determining the area of the sign. The area of all legal signs in existence at the time of the enactment of this title shall be included in the computation of the total area of signs permitted by this title.
“Awning sign” means any sign that is part of or attached to an awning, canopy or other fabric, plastic, metal or similar structural protective cover over a door, entrance or window.
“Back-lit awning sign” means any awning which is made from fiberglass, plastic, or other translucent material that allows for illumination of the entire awning when lighting is placed behind or underneath it.
“Balloon sign” means any sign that is any lighter- than-air or gas-filled balloon attached by means of a rope or tether to a definite or fixed location. Displays designed to inflate - or move by use of a fan or blower - shall also be considered a balloon sign.
“Banner sign” means any sign made of fabric or any non-rigid material with no enclosing framework. Banner signs are most commonly seen attached or hung vertically, horizontally, or diagonally on (or between) buildings, fences, posts, poles, etc. and can be seen in a wide variety of shapes and sizes.
“Billboard” means any sign erected for the purpose of advertising or promoting a product, event, person, or subject not entirely related to the premises on which the sign is located. For the purpose of this definition, bus benches shall not be defined at a billboard.
“Building face or wall” means all window, door, and wall area of a building in one plane or elevation.
“Changeable Copy sign - Electronic” means any sign whose informational content, display or copy can be changed or altered by electronic means - such as an LED sign, flat-panel digital screen, video projection or other similar electronic method.
“Changeable Copy sign – Manual” means any sign whose informational content, display or copy can be changed or altered by manual means. (Commonly seen as a sign with a white background and removable black lettering. Also can be referred to as a “marquee sign”).
“Changeable Copy sign – Mechanical” means any sign whose informational content, display or copy can be changed or altered by mechanical mechanisms, gears or other similar method.
“Commercial Complex” means a group of two (2) or more businesses in one (1) or more freestanding building(s) and which is contained on one (1) parcel of record or which is approved as a part of an overall site plan or commercial subdivision. For the purposes of this title, planned commercial developments and commercial condominium projects are considered commercial complexes.
“Clear Vision Areas” means a triangular area established at the intersection or two (2) streets or at the intersection of a street and a driveway. Such a triangle shall have legs of forty feet (40') along the right-of-way and/or the driveway.
“Commercial condominium project”. See “Commercial complex.”
“Copy” means the wording or display on a sign face.
“Directional sign” means any sign used to direct traffic flow into or out of a parking lot through a City approved drive approach.
“Flags” means any fabric, banner, or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns, or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision, or charitable organization.
“Flashing sign” means any sign which has a flashing light source, such as a strobe light, or “rapidly” blinking LED lights.
“Frontage” means the width of the parcel of land which faces upon a dedicated street. The frontage definition for the “Monument Sign Table” shall mean the street frontage from which the sign is designed to be read from.
“Garage or Yard sale sign” means any sign used to advertise an event commonly known as a “Garage or Yard sale”.
“Government sign” means any sign erected by or for the United States or any subdivision or agency thereof, or the State of Utah or any political subdivision or agency thereof.
“Grade (ground level)” means the average elevation of the ground level at the point that a sign emerges from the ground. For signs located on a bermed surface, grade shall mean the average elevation of the ground level at the base of the berm.
“Height of sign” means the vertical distance measured from the grade to the highest point of the sign or sign structure.
“Holiday sign” means any sign such as Christmas decorations or those used for a recognized national, state, or local holiday and installed for a limited period of time.
“Home Occupation sign” means a sign used to identify a home occupation in a residential dwelling unit.
“Incidental sign” means a sign, generally informational, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the property on which it is located, such as “no parking,” “loading only,” “telephone,” “welcome home,” “happy birthday,” “it's a girl/boy,” and other similar messages. A sign with a commercial message shall not be considered incidental.
“Interior property line” means a property line other than one having frontage along a dedicated street or a private street.
“Interior sign” means any sign placed within the interior of a building and which is not intended to be visible from a public street.
“LED Signs”. (LED stands for “Light Emitting Diode”). LED signs typically produce a high intensity light by having many individual LED bulbs placed together in a series and are commonly seen displaying changing copy or messages that flash, scroll, or move across the sign. Many LED signs are bright red, yellow, or auburn and are considered a type of electronic “Changeable Copy’ sign.
“Low profile sign” means a low profile sign is considered the same as a monument sign by this ordinance.
“Marquee sign” means a sign attached to any permanent roof-like structure projecting beyond a building or wall of the building, as to a theater or hotel, often bearing a changeable copy sign.
“Monument sign” means any on-premise sign which is mounted directly to the ground having no visible uprights or freestanding holes with a foundation or pedestal that is as wide or wider than the actual sign with a maximum height and area as indicated by the Monument Sign Table.
“Name plate” means any sign identifying the name, occupation, profession, and/or address of any occupant of the premises.
“Nonconforming sign” means any sign which was lawfully erected but which currently fails to conform to all of the requirements of this title.
“Off-premises sign” means any sign advertising merchandise, services, or businesses other than those available on the premises of the sign's location.
“On-premises sign” means any sign advertising merchandise, services, or businesses available on the premises of the sign’s location.
“Pennant sign” means any sign made of lightweight plastic, fabric, or other material whether or not containing a message of any kind, suspended from rope, wire, or string, usually in series, designed to move in the wind.
“Pole Sign” means any on-premise sign which is supported by one or more uprights, poles, or braces fastened to a foundation or embedded in the ground and not attached to any building. Pole signs typically have a sign face that is larger than the foundation or support structure of the sign.
“Political sign” means any sign used in behalf of candidates for public office or measures on election ballots solely for the purpose of a local, regional, or national election.
“Portable sign” means any sign that is not permanently attached to the ground or other permanent structure, or a sign designed to be transported, including, but not limited to, signs designed to be transported by means of wheels; signs converted to A-frame or T- frame; umbrellas used for advertising; signs attached to or painted on vehicles parked and visible from the public right- of- way, unless said vehicle is used in normal day-to-day operations; and, any banner type sign not attached parallel to a building wall.
“Projecting sign” means any sign attached to a building structure and extending in whole or in part more than twenty-four inches (24") beyond the wall to which it is attached.
“Reader board sign” means any portable sign with changeable copy designed to be moved from one site to another and used for occasional promotional events.
“Real estate sign” means any sign relating to the sale, lease, or other disposition of real property.
“Roof sign” means any sign erected and constructed wholly on and over the roof of a building, supported by the roof structure, and extending vertically above the highest portion of the roof.
“Roof sign (integral)” means any sign erected or constructed as an integral or essentially integral part of a normal roof structure of any design, such that no part of the sign extends vertically above the highest portion of the roof and that no part of the sign is separated from the rest of the roof. Roof signs (integral) do not include painted signs on roofs.
“Rotating sign” means any sign or portion of a sign which moves in a revolving or similar manner.
“Sign” means any device, fixture, placard, or structure that uses color, form, graphics, illumination, symbols, or writing to advertise, announce, identify, promote or communicate information of any kind to the public.
“Special purpose sign” means any sign pertaining to events of a civic, political, philanthropic, educational or religious organization.
“Statue signs” means any three-dimensional likeness of a character, logo, trademark, animal, product, etc. that is intended to be used as a promotional display or advertisement for a business.
“Temporary sign” means any sign constructed for temporary use.
“Wall sign” means any sign erected parallel with and attached to or painted on an exterior wall or fascia of a building.
“Window sign” means any sign installed upon a window for the purpose of being viewed from the outside of the premises, but not including displayed merchandise.
“Yard sale sign”. See “Garage sale sign.”
“Youth activity sponsor sign” means any sign attached to an athletic facility fence which identifies and advertises the sponsors of youth teams or programs.
“Zone” means any land use regulatory zone as found in Title 17 of the Lindon City Code. (Ord. 2013-4, amended, 2013; Ord. 2007-3, amended, 2007)

18.03.030 Specific regulations by sign type.
General regulations for all signs. 
    1. All mounting structures, sign casings, poles, monument bases, foundations for a sign or other materials used in housing a sign shall be constructed with subdued, earth- tone colors. For monument and pole signs, the use of natural materials such as wood or stone is strongly encouraged in the design of the sign frames and bases. This shall not be construed to mean that the City regulates the colors or copy of a sign face, but only the housing materials on which the sign is positioned.
    2. The total combined signage for any face of a building shall not exceed 12% coverage of the building face. This includes signage on windows, wall signs, roof signs, etc. No building shall be deemed to have more than four (4) building faces.
A-Frame Signs.  A-Frame signs are prohibited in all zones.
Awning Signs. 
    1. Awning signs require a sign permit from the city.
    2. The sign area of the awning shall be included as part of the wall sign area calculation and shall include the entire area within any type of perimeter or border that may enclose the outer limits of any writing, representation, emblem, figure, or character (see example below).
    [IMAGE: <18.03.030_001.png>]
    3. The structure of the awning sign shall not project more than 36 inches from the wall to which it is attached.
    4. Any awning sign projecting into the public right of way shall obtain an additional easement agreement subject to approval by Lindon City.
    5. Primary signage, which for the purposes of this section shall mean a commercial or non-commercial entity's name or logo,
        a. shall not be wider than 80% of the total width of the primary surface of the awning and,
        b. shall not exceed more than 50% of the primary surface area of the awning.
    6. Only one (1) awning shall be used for primary signage and said awning must be over a main entrance or over a door, entrance or window with primary street frontage.
    7. Secondary signage, meaning any commercial or non-commercial message,
        a. shall not be wider than 90% of the total width of the secondary surface, such as a valance or side elevation of an awning and,
        b. shall not exceed more than 80% of the secondary surface area, such as a valance or side elevation of an awning and,
        c. shall not exceed twelve (12) inches in height.
    8. Primary and secondary surfaces are displayed graphically below:
    [IMAGE: <18.03.030_002.png>]
    9. Awning and sign material should be high quality, colorfast and sunfade resistant.
    10. Awning signs are permitted in all non-residential zones. (Ord. 2013-4, amended, 2013)
Abandoned Signs.  Abandoned signs are prohibited in all zones.
Balloon Signs. 
    1. Balloon signs do not require a permit.
    2. Balloon signs shall:
        a. Be placed no closer than ten (10') feet from the public right-of-way or property line;
        b. Not be placed in a clear vision area; and
        c. Not obstruct the vision of any motorist from seeing any traffic or traffic control devices.
    3. The time limit for businesses to display balloon signs, temporary banner signs, and pennant signs is limited to a total display time, for any or all combinations of these sign types to 75 days per calendar year. (For example: a banner sign for 25 days and a balloon sign for 50 days would use the 75 day limit per year.)
    4. No more than two balloon signs per business shall be permitted at the same time.
    5. Balloon signs are permitted in the CG, LI, MC. PC-1 and HI zones.
Banner Signs. 
    1. Banner signs that are attached to a building through use of screws, bolts, nails or other fasteners are considered “anchored” banner signs and do not require a sign permit.
    2. “Anchored banner signs as described above shall:
        a. Be permitted for use by any business or entity for no longer than twelve (12) months;
        b. After twelve months the “anchored” banner sign must be removed a/or replaced with a permanent sign meeting Lindon City requirements. “Anchored’ banner signs are not permitted for long-term, permanent use. Real estate signs on banners must also conform to this time limit and shall meet the size limitation standards found under the “Real Estate Signs” section of this ordinance. b. Be anchored approximately every 18” or less long the perimeter of the banner.
        c. Be maintained in a neat and attractive condition. The City will ask that frayed or torn signs be removed.
        d. Be attached to any wall of a building.
        e. Not exceed ten percent (10%) of the wall area to which the sign is attached or ten percent (10%) of the wall dedicated to an individual unit within a commercial complex.
        f. Not extend above the roofline.
        g. Not be used on the same building or unit within a complex which has an Integral Roof Sign.
        h. Not project more than twenty-four inches (24”) from the face of the part of the building to which it is attached.
    3. “Temporary” banner signs used for promotional events or other limited advertising purposes (not the primary signage for a business do not require a sign permit.
    4. “Temporary” banner signs as described above shall:
        a. Be attached parallel to a wall of the main building of the business or along a fence on the same lot as the business;
        b. Not exceed 10 percent (10%) of the wall area to which the sign is attached or no larger than thirty-two (32) square feet if placed on a fence;
        c. Not be used on the same wall as an existing “wall sign” or other banner sign unless the combined area of all signs is less than ten percent (10%) of the wall area to which the signs are attached;
        d. Not be attached to, or between telephones poles, utility poles, public or private light poles, trees, vehicles, or any other apparatus other than a building wall or fence;
        e. Not be placed on the roof of any building;
        f. Be maintained in a neat and attractive condition; and
        g. The time limit for businesses to display balloon signs, temporary banner signs, and pennant signs are limited to a total display time, for any or all combinations of these sign types, to 75 days in any calendar year. (For example: a banner sign for 25 days and a balloon sign for 50 days would use the 75 day limit per year.)
    5. No more than five banner signs per business shall be permitted at the same time.
    6. Banner signs are permitted in the CG, MC, PC-1 & 2, R&B, LI, and HI zones.
    7. Upright banners mounted on utility poles, light poles, or other flexible or rigid poles or posts or any other apparatus (other than a building wall or fence) are prohibited. See examples of these types of banners shown in the photos below:
    [IMAGE: <18.03.030_003.jpg>]
    [IMAGE: <18.03.030_005.jpg>]
    [IMAGE: <18.03.030_004.jpg>]
(Ord. 2007-3, adopted, 2007; Ord. 2006-1, adopted, 2006)
Changeable Copy Signs – Electronic or Mechanical. 
    1. Electronic Changeable Copy signs (such as LED’s or flat-panel digital technologies) and mechanically changeable copy signs are only permitted in the T-zone along the I-15 freeway corridor.
    2. On-premise Electronic Changeable Copy signs shall not exceed fifty six (56) square feet in display area and shall be no larger than four and one-half feet (4.5') tall or wider than fourteen feet (14') long. On-premise Electronic Changeable Copy signs may be utilized as a wall sign, pole sign, or monument sign only. The coverage and size limitations for wall, pole or monument signs shall also apply to any proposed on-premise Electronic Changeable Copy sign.
    3. Off-premise Electronic Changeable Copy and Mechanically Changeable Copy signs shall only be permitted upon billboards approved by Lindon City (See LCC 18.04) and shall not exceed six hundred seventy five (675) square feet in display area.
    4. All off-premise Electronic Changeable Copy and Mechanically Changeable Copy signs are permitted for stationary messages only. The interval between message changes shall not be more frequent than at least eight seconds and the actual message rotation process shall be accomplished in three seconds or less by method of fading between messages or immediate change between messages. No flashing, scrolling video or other movement of sign message (copy) is permitted.
    5. A four hundred foot (400') lineal separation distance (measured on the same side of the freeway - not a radius) is required between each on-premise Electronically Changeable Copy Sign. This may prohibit some businesses from being able to obtain a permit for this type of signage if a proposed sign is less than 400' from an existing on-premise Electronically Changeable Copy Sign.
    6. A five hundred foot (500') lineal separation distance (measured on the same side of the freeway–not a radius) is required between each off-premise Electronic Changeable Copy Sign.
    7. All Electronic Changeable Copy and Mechanically Changeable Copy signs shall conform to lighting standards found within LCC 18.02.090
Changeable Copy Signs - Manual. 
    1. Manually Changeable Copy signs require a sign permit from the City.
    2. Manually Changeable Copy signs shall:
        a. Only be used in connection with monument signs, or wall signs; and
        b. Not have dimensions which exceed the requirements of the ordinance for monument, or wall signs.
    3. Manually Changeable Copy signs are permitted in the CG, MC, PC-1, R&B, T-zone, and LI zones.
Directional Signs. 
    1. Directional signs require a sign permit from the City.
    2. Only one (1) Directional sign is allowed for each City approved drive approach.
    3.  Directional signs shall meet the following requirements:
        a. In the regional commercial, heavy industrial and light industrial zones, a maximum of three feet (3') in height and twelve (12) square feet in area. The maximum letter height is nine inches (9") per sign face.
        b. In all other commercial land use districts, a maximum of three feet (3') in height and six (6) square feet in area.
    4. Directional signs are permitted in all zones.
Flag Signs. 
    1. Except as noted in #9 below, no sign permit is required for Flags.
    2. Flags shall be kept in good repair (no frayed or torn edges, or excessive fading), or shall be required to be removed replaced.
    3. All flag poles must be set back at least half the distance in fee of the flag pole height from any property line. (Setback = flagpole height /2).
    4. A maximum of three (3) permanent flag poles may be permitted per lot.
    5. A single flag pole, or “primary” flag pole if more than one, shall only display national, state, municipal, or other governmental flags. “Secondary” poles may fly flags that have business logos or names (not advertisements), but such flags shall not exceed 3’x5’ in size.
    6. Flags and flag poles are permitted in all zones, and shall not exceed the maximum building height or the specific zone in which they are located except as specified in criteria number 7 and 8 below.
    7. Except for number 8 below, in non- residential zones, one flag pole may be permitted to exceed the maximum building height of the zone if the following criteria are met:
        a. The flag pole will only be used to display the U.S. flag.
        b. A structure must be existing or approved for the lot.
        c. The flag pole will not exceed the structures height by more than ten feet (10').
        d. Regardless of any future changes to zone height limits, no flag pole shall exceed sixty feet (60') in height.
    8. Along the freeway in the T-Zone, flag poles up to 100’ tall may be permitted with a separation distance of ¾ mile radius between any other flag pole that exceeds the height limit imposed under number 1 through 7 above.
    9. Flags in the T-zone that exceed the height limit as described in #7 above must obtain a sign permit. (Ord. 2007-3, adopted, 2007; Ord. 2006-1, adopted, 2006)
Flashing Signs. 
    1. Flashing Signs are prohibited in all zones within the City.
Garage Sale Signs. 
    1. No permit is required for Garage Sale signs.
    2. Garage Sale signs shall:
        a. Not exceed five (5) square feet in area;
        b. Not be posted in public right-of-ways or on utility poles;
        c. Be allowed on private property with the property owner's permission;
        d. Not be posted more than forty-eight (48) hours before the beginning of the garage sale; and
        e. Be removed within twenty-four (24) hours after the completion of the garage sale.
    3. Failure to post or remove garage sale signs as set forth in this title may result in a citation being issued for each sign violation.
    4. Garage Sale signs are permitted in all residential zones.
Government Signs. 
    1. No permit is required for Government signs.
    2. Government signs are permitted in all zones.
Holiday Signs. 
    1. No permit is required for Holiday signs.
    2. Holiday signs shall:
        a. Only be used with a national, state, or local holiday; and
        b. Be removed within fifteen (15) days of the holiday.
    3. Holiday signs are permitted in all zones.
Home Occupation Signs. 
    1. Not more than one sign is permitted for home occupations.
    2. Sign shall not be larger than two and one-half (2.5) square feet.
    3. Sign must be attached to the main dwelling unit.
    4. Sign shall be aesthetically pleasing and made of similar materials and colors as the building to which it is attached.
    5. Signs for home occupations shall not be directly lit.
Incidental Signs. 
    1. No permit is required for Incidental signs.
    2. Incidental signs are permitted in all zones.
Interior Signs. 
    1. No permit is required for Interior signs. (An electrical permit may be required when installing an illuminated interior sign)
    2. Interior signs are permitted in all zones.
Marquee Signs. 
    1. Marquee signs require a sign permit from the City.
    2. Marquee signs shall only be allowed over a building entrance.
    3. The structure of the marquee shall not extend more than six (6) feet from the wall/building to which it is attached and have a clearance of at least eight (8) feet above the sidewalk.
    4. Any marquee sign projecting into the public right of way shall obtain an additional easement agreement subject to approval by Lindon City.
    5. The vertical face height of the marquee shall not exceed three (3) feet.
    6. The sign:
        a. shall not be wider than 80% of the total width of the surface of the marquee and,
        b. shall not exceed more than 50% of the surface area of the marquee.
    7. The marquee sign area calculation shall be included as part of the wall sign area calculation.
    8. Marquee signs are permitted in all non-residential zones. (Ord. 2013-4, amended, 2013)
Monument signs. 
    1. Monument signs require a sign permit from the City.
    2. Be mounted directly to the ground with the entire base covered (no poles visible beneath base of sign). The base shall be as wide or wider than the sign face;
    3. Not exceed six feet (6') in height and thirty six (36') square feet in area unless otherwise specified on the “Monument Sign Table” as calculated by length of lineal street frontage or acreage of the property.
    4. On corner lots, only the street frontage of the “principle” or most traveled roadway adjacent to the lot shall be counted towards the street frontage allowed for obtaining a monument sign. For corner lots that have streets with similar traffic use, the side on which the sign will face shall be used to determine street frontage. The length of street frontage on lots with rounded property corners shall be measured from the point of intersection if both property lines on either side of the corner were continued in a straight line as shown in the following examples:
    [IMAGE: <18.03.030_006.png>]
    [IMAGE: <18.03.030_007.png>]
    5. Be set back from the back of walk at least 2 feet (or back of curb at least 8 feet if no sidewalk exists), but in no case shall the sign be constructed beyond the parcel line of the subject property, with the exception of the following:
        i. One off-site monument sign is permitted to be located in the CG, MC, LI, HI, R&B, PC-1 and PC-2 zones when a lot does not have a principle access onto a dedicated public roadway and is accessed through another property by means of an easement, driveway, or lane. The off-site monument sign is permitted at the intersection of the public roadway and the easement, driveway, or lane that accesses pedestrians. At the time of building permit, the sign owner must submit to the City a written easement from the owner of the property for which the sign will be placed. Sign size shall be regulated according to the Monument Sign Table based on the acreage of the property for which the sign is serving.
    6. Be erected on a landscaped area of at least one hundred twenty square feet (120') with a minimum landscaped length and width of three feet (3');
    7. Not be erected in the clear vision area of any road or driveway, except for signs which do not exceed three feet (3') in height from the adjacent street grade; and
    8. Monument signs are permitted in the CG, MC, R&B, CF, PC-1 & 2, LI, RMU-W, and HI zones.
    9. Each parcel or commercial complex may have one monument sign, however, one additional monument sign six feet (6') in height and thirty six square feet (36') in area may be approved where the parcel or commercial complex has more than two hundred feet (200') of frontage on a dedicated street, or has frontage on two (2) or more dedicated streets. Additionally, each parcel may contain a maximum of one (1) off-premise monument sign. The minimum distance between two (2) monument signs on the same parcel or commercial complex shall be one hundred feet (100'), except for off-premise monuments signs which require a minimum distance of fifty feet (50').
        a. The one additional monument sign mentioned above may be eight feet (8') in height and 64 square feet (64') in area if the parcel or commercial complex has more than 500 feet of frontage on a dedicated public street. The minimum distance between two monument signs in this case shall be eighty feet (80').
    10. A three foot (3') high berm (measured from sidewalk grade level) may be placed beneath a monument sign to elevate the sign above the two rail fencing required in the Commercial zones. The berm must be landscaped and run along the entire length of the street frontage on which sign is facing. In no case shall the berm beneath the sign exceed three feet (3'). The total height of a sign placed on top of any berm shall be measured from finish grade at the base of the sign.
    11. All monument signs in the Commercial zones (CG, MC) and adjacent to a public road shall be located in back of any required sidewalk.
    12. A landscaping “clear vision area” is permitted within a distance of forty feet (40') of either side of the sign as measured horizontally along the direction of the street for which the sign is facing. Any required trees or shrubbery within the 40’ clear vision area that may block the view of a monument sign shall be permitted to be moved elsewhere within the required front landscaping area, but any tree or shrub must maintain a minimum three foot (3') separation from any curb, sidewalk, or paved area. In no case shall the net number of required trees or shrubbery be reduced. Grass, flowers, or other low-lying landscaping around the sign will still be required per code or as show on approved site plans.
    13. The use of natural materials such as wood or stone is strongly encouraged in the design of monument sign foundations, frames, or bases.
+-------------------------------+-----------------------+------------+
|   Street Frontage /Acreage    | Max Sign Area (sq ft) | Max Height |
|           (in feet)           |                       | (in feet)  |
+-------------------------------+-----------------------+------------+
| 175 feet or less or 20,000 sq | 36                    | 6          |
| ft                            |                       |            |
+-------------------------------+-----------------------+------------+
| 175 to 200 or up to 27,853 sq | 50                    | 8          |
| ft                            |                       |            |
+-------------------------------+-----------------------+------------+
| 201 to 225 or up to 35,706    | 75                    | 11         |
+-------------------------------+-----------------------+------------+
| 226 or 43,560 sq ft or more   | 110                   | 14         |
+-------------------------------+-----------------------+------------+
(Ord. 2013-6, amended, 2013; Ord. 2012-1, amended, 2012; Ord. 2011-1, amended, 2011; Ord. 2009-4, amended, 2009)
Nameplates. 
    1. No permit is required for Nameplates.
    2. Nameplates shall:
        a. Not exceed three (3) square feet; and b. Not be used to identify a home occupation unless state law mandates the home occupation have exterior identification.
    3. Nameplates are permitted in all zones.
Off-Premises Signs. Off–premises signs are only permitted as monument signs unless expressly allowed by this title. Off-premise signs shall comply with all requirements for a “Monument Sign” with additional regulations as follows:
    1. The maximum size and height of off- premise monument signs, as listed in the Monument Sign Table, will be determined by the street frontage or acreage of the parcel the sign is to occupy and not the location of the business being served by the sign.
    2. A maximum of one (1) off-premise monument signs is permitted to serve each business. Multiple off-premise signs advertising the same business are not permitted.
    3. A minimum separation distance of fifty feet (50') shall be required from any other monument sign.
    4. Off-premise monuments signs are not permitted to be located within a residential zone or on the same lot or parcel as a residential use.
    5. Each business/use advertised by the off-premise monument sign must be within eight hundred feet (800') from the center line of a major arterial or collector street included in this section, and at least 800’ from the proposed off-premise sign. These streets consist of State Street, Geneva Road, 700 North and 200 South. Multiple businesses within the distance limitation may advertise on the same off-premise sign structure.
    6. Off-premise signs shall only be permitted on the same side of the arterial or collector street as the business for which it is serving.
    7. At the time of building permit, the sign owner must submit to the City a written easement from the owner of the property for which the sign will be located. (Ord. 2012-1, amended, 2012)
Pennant Signs. 
    1. No permit is required for pennant signs.
    2. Pennant signs shall:
        a. Not be placed in such a way as to obstruct the vision of any motorist from seeing any traffic or traffic control devices.
        b. Not be attached to any public utility pole unless permitted by the Planning Commission and the respective public utility company with jurisdiction over the utility pole.
        c. The time limit for businesses to display balloon signs, temporary banner signs, and pennant signs is limited to a total display time, for any or all combinations of these sign types, to 75 days in any calendar year. (For example: a banner sign for 25 days and a balloon sign for 50 days would use the 75 day limit per year.)
    3. Pennant signs are permitted in the CG, MC, LI, PC 1 & PC 2, and HI zones.
Pole Sign. 
    1. Pole signs require a sign permit from the City.
    2. Pole signs are only permitted along I-15 in the T-Travel Influence District (T-Zone).
    3. Pole signs shall:
        a. Not exceed a maximum height of thirty- five (35') from the base of the sign, or twenty- five feet (25') above I-15 grade level at a point perpendicular to the sign, whichever is greater;
        b. Not exceed 250 square feet of display area in all zones overlaid by the T-zone, with the exception of the following:
            i. Not exceed 350 square feet of combined display area of “primary signage” for properties within the General Commercial zone (CG) and overlaid by the T-zone. Additional “secondary signage” of up to 200 square feet is permitted for parcels 5 acres or larger within the CG zone and overlaid by the T-zone. Secondary signage shall only be permitted as one single display area and can not be combined in the same display area as the primary signage. Multiple secondary signs are not permitted on the same pole sign. Secondary signage shall be separated by at least 3’ from the primary signage.
        c. Be allowed at the rate of one (1) pole sign per subdivided lot with frontage on I-15 and in the T-Zone with the exception of the following:
            i. Additional pole signs on the same lot may be allowed in the T-Zone provided that the minimum separation, irrespective of lot lines, between other pole signs, billboards, on-premise, or off-premise signs is five hundred feet (500') linear. Individual land divisions in a condominium association shall not be considered lots. Additional pole signs shall be limited to 250 square feet and shall not be permitted to have any “secondary signage” regardless of acreage.
            ii. No more than one additional pole sign, not to exceed 200 square feet of display area, may be allowed within the PC-1 and PC-2 zones in areas overlaid by the T-zone. Irrespective of lot lines, a minimum 100’ separation distance from other pole signs or billboards is required.
        d. Not overhang or extend beyond a property line adjacent to the freeway. A pole sign may be located up to the property line adjacent to the freeway (zero setback). All other setbacks shall be ten (10) feet from a property line. (Ord. 2009-4, amended, 2009; Ord. 2008-5, adopted, 2008; Ord. 2006-1, adopted, 2006)
Political Signs. 
    1. No permit is required for a Political sign.
    2. Political signs shall not be larger than six (6) square feet in any residential zone or thirty- two (32) square feet in the CG, MC, LI, HI, R&B, or PC-1 & 2 zones.
    3. Political signs shall not be placed on public property.
    4. A property owner’s consent shall be given prior to placement of any political sign if the property is not owned by the person or organization that is placing such signs.
    5. Political signs are permitted in all zones.
Portable Signs.  Portable signs are prohibited in all zones in the City
Projecting Signs.  Projecting signs are prohibited in all zones in the City.
Reader Board Signs.  Reader Board signs are prohibited in all zones in the City.
Real Estate Signs. 
    1. No permit is required for a Real Estate sign.
    2. No parcel shall have more than two (2) on- premise real estate signs. The maximum height of any real estate sign shall not exceed eight feet (8'). Except as provided herein, the maximum area of sign of any real estate sign shall not exceed six (6) square feet in residential zones or thirty-two (32) square feet in commercial zones.
    3. Directional Real Estate Signs. An off-premises real estate sign may be used to direct traffic to the location of a parcel or a residential development being offered for lease, rent, sale, trade or public inspection. Such signs shall be subject to the following:
        a. They shall state only the name of the seller or his agent, words or arrows indicating the location of the parcel, and/or the words “open house,” “grand opening” or similar wording;
        b. They shall be erected on private property where the owner of such property has given consent;
        c. They shall have a maximum area of six (6) square feet for parcels and sixteen (16) square feet for residential developments;
        d. They shall have a maximum height of three feet (3') for parcels and eight feet (8') for residential developments; and
        e. No more than three (3) directional real estate signs shall be erected for a parcel and no more than two (2) for a residential development.
    4. Promotional Development Signs.
        a. One (1) on premise promotional development sign may be used to promote any new real estate development.
        b. The maximum area of sign for a promotional development sign shall be calculated by multiplying the acreage of the parcel by twelve and eight tenths (12.8) and adding the product to thirty-two (32); provided however, that no promotional development sign shall exceed ninety-six (96) square feet. (Development Acreage) X (12.8) + (32) = Maximum Area.
        c. A promotional development sign shall be removed from the premise upon which it is erected within one (1) year. No other promotional development signs shall be permitted for that development.
    5. All Real Estate signs shall be removed within thirty (30) days of the property being sold.
    6. Real Estate signs are permitted in all zones.
Roof Signs.  Roof signs are prohibited in all zones in the City.
Roof Signs (Integral). 
    1. Integral Roof signs require a sign permit from the City.
    2. Integral Roof signs shall:
        a. Not be allowed on buildings having a wall sign; and
        b. Not have copy which exceeds ten percent (10%) of the structure to which it is attached.
    3. Integral Roof signs are permitted in the CG, MC, and LI zones.
Rotating Signs.  Rotating Signs are prohibited in all zones in the City.
Special Purpose Signs. 
    1. Special Purpose signs require a sign permit from the City.
    2. Special Purpose signs shall:
        a. Not be an “A-frame” sign;
        b. Not exceed thirty-two (32) square feet; and
        c. Be limited to no more than 50 days display time per calendar year (per organization); and
        d. Be removed within five (5) days of the conclusion of the event.
    3. Special Purpose signs are permitted in all zones.
Statue Signs. 
    1. Statues signs shall be permitted in all zones and shall be counted within the size limitation of a sign area or coverage. (Examples: If a monument sign for a feed store has a statue of a cow on top of the sign, the side elevation (or profile) of the sign & cow would need to fit within the square foot size limitation for monument signs. Or...If a restaurant has a statue of a chili pepper mounted to the front wall of their building, the statue would have to fit within the percent coverage limitations of a wall sign when looking at the front elevation of the building.)
    2. Statues designed and located as public art and not as “promotional displays” are not regulated by this ordinance.
Temporary Signs.  Temporary signs are prohibited in all zones unless expressly allowed by this title (See section 18.02.010(4)(e)).
Wall Signs. 
    1. Wall signs require a sign permit from the City.
    2. Wall signs shall:
        a. Be attached to any wall of a building;
        b. Not exceed ten percent (10%) of the wall area to which the sign is attached or ten-percent (10%) of the wall face dedicated to an individual unit within a commercial complex;
        c. Not extend above the roof line;
        d. Not be used on the same building or unit within a complex which has an Integral Roof sign.
        e. Not project more than twenty-four (24) inches from the face of the part of the building to which it is attached - including any light box or structural part of the sign.
    3. Wall signs are permitted in the CG, MC, PC-1, R&B, LI, HI, RMU-W zones and T zone.
Window Signs. 
    1. No permit is required for a Window sign.
    2. Window signs shall not exceed twenty percent (20%) of the total transparent area of any window on which they are located.
    3. Flashing lights, LED signs, or strobe lights placed on the interior of a window but intended to be seen from the exterior of the building are prohibited.
    4. Window signs are permitted in the CG, MC, PC-1 & 2, LI, and HI zones.
Youth Activity Sponsor Sign. 
    1. Permission must be obtained from the Recreation Director to display a Youth Activity Sponsor sign.
    2. Youth Activity Sponsor signs are permitted in all zones. (Ord. 2019-8 §1, amended, 2019; Ord. 2013-6, amended, 2013; Ord. 2013-4, amended, 2013; Ord. 2012-1, amended, 2012; Ord. 2011-1, amended, 2011; Ord. 2009-4, amended, 2009; Ord. 2008-5, amended, 2008; Ord. 2007-3, amended, 2007; Ord. 2006-1, amended, 2006; Ord. 2005-12, amended, 2005; Ord. 2002-21, repealed and replaced, 2002; Ord. 2000-8, amended, 2000)

Chapter 18.04 BILLBOARD ADVERTISING

Sections:
18.04.010    Purpose and intent.
18.04.020    Specific regulations for billboard signs.
18.04.030    Total number of billboards.
18.04.040    Abandoned and discontinued signs.
18.04.050    Repair of billboards.
18.04.060    Removal of billboards.
18.04.070    Authority to waive.

18.04.010 Purpose and intent.
It is the purpose and intent of this chapter to limit the number of billboards to ten (10). This chapter further provides for the reasonable regulation of billboards with the intent of limiting negative impacts, enhancing the aesthetics of existing and new billboards and implementing goals and policies promoting safety, the protection of property values, aesthetics, and the maintenance of gateways, views and vistas that enhance the city and further the applicable elements of the city’s General Plan.

18.04.020 Specific regulations for billboard signs.
All billboard signs shall comply with the following requirements:
1. Billboard signs require a permit from the City.
2. Billboard signs shall:
    a. be allowed by conditional use permit in the T-zone in accordance with the outdoor advertising regulations of the Utah State Department of Transportation; and in accordance with any other requirements of Utah State Code as presently constituted or as may be periodically amended;
    b. not exceed a maximum height of thirty- five feet (35') from the base of the sign, or twenty-five feet (25') above I-15 grade level at a point perpendicular to the sign, whichever is greater;
    c. not have an area exceeding six hundred seventy five square feet (675') per sign face;
    d. be allowed two faces or back to back sign faces, provided there is no more than five feet (5') separating the sign faces;
    e. not be located any closer than fifteen hundred feet (1500'), measured by radius, from any and all other billboards or off-premises signs irrespective of the I-15 right-of-way; and
    f. not be within one thousand feet (1000') of any residential zone.
    g. not be moved or relocated on the same parcel, building, structure or portion thereof, or to any other parcel, building, structure or portion thereof, unless the billboard complies with all other provisions of this title, or is altered so as to comply therewith. No existing billboard may be expanded or extended unless the billboard, after the expansion or extension, complies with all other provisions of this title.
3. Wood poles or uprights shall not be used in the construction and maintenance of billboards.
4. Billboards shall not overhang boundary lines or adjacent buildings or structures.
5. Electronic Changeable Copy and Mechanically Changeable Copy signs may be permitted on billboards in accordance with LCC Section 18.03.030 Specific regulations by sign type: “Changeable Copy Signs – Electronic or Mechanical”, and through issuance of a building permit.
6. All billboard signs shall conform to lighting standards found within LCC 18.02.090. (Ord. 2012-14, amended, 2012)

18.04.030 Total number of billboards.
As of May 2002, the total number of billboards allowed to locate within Lindon City shall not exceed ten (10) in number.

18.04.040 Abandoned and discontinued signs.
After notice of proceedings and an opportunity for a hearing, Lindon City may require the removal of any legal non-conforming billboard sign which has been discontinued for a period of three hundred and sixty five days (365). A discontinued billboard sign shall be defined as a sign which has no lettering or advertising logo on the sign.

18.04.050 Repair of billboards.
Conforming and nonconforming signs may be repaired or rebuilt in part or entirely if damaged by casualty, act of God, or vandalism. Repairs or reconstruction must be completed within 60 days of the damage or:
1. The sign will lose its legal nonconforming status and must conform to the provisions of this title, or
2. May be deemed unsafe or in an unreasonable state of repair pursuant to Lindon City Code 18.04.060.

18.04.060 Removal of billboards.
After notice of proceedings and an opportunity for a hearing, Lindon City may require the removal of a billboard which is deemed unsafe or in an unreasonable state of repair.

18.04.070 Authority to waive.
The Planning Commission shall have the authority to waive or modify the requirements of 18.04.020.2.e. when necessary to accommodate I-15 on/off ramp construction projects in Lindon City. (Ord. 2002-21, repealed and replaced, 2002)

Chapter 18.05 NON-CONFORMING SIGNS

Sections:
18.05.010    Continuation of legal non-conforming.
18.05.020    Alterations.
18.05.030    Abandoned signs.
18.05.040    Modification of requirements.

18.05.010 Continuation of legal non-conforming.
Any lawfully erected sign which has become unlawful by passage of this title may continue to be maintained under the provisions of 18.05 of the Lindon City Code.

18.05.020 Alterations.
1. A legal non-conforming sign shall not be structurally modified, reconstructed, raised, moved, placed, extended, or enlarged unless the sign is modified to conform with all of the provisions of this title.
2. The sign shall not be changed to or replaced by another nonconforming sign.
3. Alterations shall not be interpreted to include changing the text or copy of off- premise advertising signs, signs for theaters, or other similar signs which are designed to accommodate changeable copy.
4. “Alterations” shall not be interpreted to include changes in any sign face or copy as long as those changes do not require structural modifications to the sign. Content changes to a sign face do not require the sign to come into conformance with the current sign ordinance.
5. Minor repairs and maintenance may be made to a nonconforming sign; however, in the event such sign has deteriorated or is hereafter damaged by whatever means, including an act of God, and such damage exceeds fifty percent (50%) of the reproduction value of the sign, according to appraisal thereof by competent appraisers, the sign may be restored, reconstructed, altered or repaired only to conform with this title. (Ord. 2002-17, amended, 2002; Ord. 99-12, amended, 2000)

18.05.030 Abandoned signs.
Any legal non-conforming sign applicable to a use which has been discontinued for a period of one hundred twenty days (120) shall be deemed to have lost its legal non-conforming status, and shall be removed within ten (10) days following receipt of written notice from the City requiring such removal. A discontinued sign shall be defined as a sign which has no lettering or advertising logo on the sign. A discontinued sign shall also be defined as a sign that was at one time used as part of a business that currently is no longer an existing business whether it presently has an advertising use, lettering, logo, located on the sign or not.

18.05.040 Modification of requirements.
1. Whenever strict compliance with the provisions of chapter 18.05 would cause a hardship on the applicant, the Planning Commission may waive, modify or adjust the requirements for legal nonconforming signs if the sign modification request meets all of the following requirements:
    a. Literal enforcement of the sign ordinance would cause a hardship for the applicant that is not necessary to carry out the general purpose, goals, and character of the underlying zoning district.
    b. There are special circumstances attached to the property that do not generally apply to other property in the same district; (example - deep narrow lots, number of businesses in one commercial complex, geographic features of land such as slope, etc.)
    c. The modification will not substantially affect the general plan and will not be contrary to the public interest; and
    d. The spirit of the sign ordinance, Title 18, and land development ordinance, Title17, is observed and substantial justice is done.
2. In granting such change, the Planning Commission may impose such additional conditions as will, in its judgment, substantially secure the objectives of the standards or requirements that are waived, adjusted or modified. Any recommendations or authorized changes shall be entered into the minutes of the Planning Commission, together with the circumstances that justified the changes granted. (Ord. 2005-12, amended, 2005; Ord. 2002-21, repealed and replaced, 2002; Ord. 99-12, amended, 2000)

Appendix A STANDARD LAND USE TABLE

Section I:
A. Purpose of Table. The standard land use table provides for the regulation and administration of land uses in the various zones in the City. This table indicates what types of land uses are allowed in each individual zone in the City. The letter N indicates a particular use is not allowed in a given zone, a C indicates a use is conditional and subject to Chapter 17.20. and 17.22. of the Lindon City Code and a P indicates a use is permitted.
B. Primary and Secondary Uses. Land uses identified in this table are intended to regulate primary uses of parcels or structures. In some instance some land uses not allowed as a permitted or conditional use may be allowed when the use is secondary or ancillary to the main or primary use of the property when such use is found to be harmonious and compatible with the zone in which the use is located.
(Secondary or ancillary use shall be defined as a use which does not occupy more then 20% of the site or constitute more than 20% of the business.)
C. Authority to require public hearings. The Planning Director and/or the Planning Commission shall have the authority to refer any application for any ‘permitted’ or ‘conditional use’ for consideration at a public hearing if the Planning Director and/or Planning Commission determines the application to have more than routine significance for which the surrounding property owners should be notified in order to protect the public interest.

Section II:
Standard Zones. The following are descriptions of the purpose and intent of the zones in the City:
    R1-12 (Residential-Medium). It is the purpose of this zone to provide areas of medium density, residential neighborhoods of medium sized lots at a suburban density.
    R1-20 (Residential-Low). It is the purpose of this zone to provide areas of low density, residential neighborhoods of essentially spacious and un-crowded character to promote the benefits of open, rural atmosphere, and to provide for areas where larger animals are permitted.
    CG (General Commercial). The Commercial Ordinance is established to promote retail and service uses for general community shopping. The objective in establishing commercial zones is to provide areas within the City where retail and service uses may be located.
    MC (Mixed Commercial). The objective in establishing the Mixed Commercial zone is to provide areas within the City where low intensity light industrial, research and development, professional and business services, retail and other commercial related uses may be located.
    PC-1 and PC-2 (Planned Commercial). The purposes of the PC zones are: 1)To provide for development of regional commercial centers that can accommodate retail, office, and service uses in areas that are convenient to the traveling public while protecting the character and quality of adjacent residential areas and the overall community of Lindon. 2)To provide aesthetic controls for building architecture and site development. 3)To provide development guidelines to ensure effective and safe traffic control and movement while creating an aesthetically pleasing traffic environment.
    HI (Heavy Industrial). It shall be the purpose of the HI district to provide for areas in appropriate locations where heavy industrial processes may be conducted. The regulations of this district are designed to protect environmental quality of the district and adjacent areas.
    LI (Light Industrial). It shall be the purpose of the LI district to provide areas in appropriate locations where light manufacturing, industrial processes and warehousing not producing objectionable effects may be established, maintained, and protected. The regulations of this district are designed to protect environmental quality of the district and adjacent areas.
    R&B (Research and Business). The purpose of the Research and Business (R&B) zone is to provide an aesthetically attractive working environment exclusively for and conducive to the development and protection of offices, research and development institutions, and certain specialized assembling and packaging uses as a secondary use to the primary function of the building. The essential purpose of this zone is to achieve development in a park-like setting that is an economic asset to the owners, neighbors, and the community.
    RMU (Recreation Mixed Use). The RMU zones apply to areas that will remain as open space. This area includes State and Federal Lands, and environmentally sensitive areas such as hillsides and wetlands.
Overlay Zones. 
    T (Travel Influence). The travel influence zone is an overlay district designed to encourage and require appropriate land uses adjacent to freeways to insure attractive and orderly views.
    R2 Overlay. The purpose of the R2 Overlay zone is to afford a reasonable opportunity for higher density housing types, including moderate income housing as defined by the Utah State Code 10-9a-103(18), to meet the needs of people desiring to live and fully participate in all aspects of neighborhood and community life in Lindon.
    R3 Overlay (Residential High). This zone is to allow for moderate income and retirement housing, as well as lower density housing traditional to Lindon. A major consideration of this development is to consider densities that make a portion of the development more affordable or more appropriate for the elderly, while maintaining as much of the character of Lindon as possible, including some larger lots, open space, rural character, compatibility with surrounding development/zones, and modest impact on city infrastructure. To enhance open space, while still allowing for somewhat greater densities, there should be allowance for some clustering, a limited number of duplexes or triplexes which appear as single family dwellings, and variable lot sizes.
    HSO (Hillside Overlay). The Hillside Overlay Zone consists of all areas east of the Salt Lake Aqueduct and other areas with a slope over twenty percent (20%). The purpose of the district is to protect sensitive hillsides, to minimize soil and slope instability, erosion, downstream siltation, and to preserve the character of the hillsides.
    SLO (Sensitive Lands Overlay). The purpose of the Sensitive Areas (SA) district is to designate and describe those areas within the city that possess physical or environmental characteristics that require special public consideration of uses that might affect the structure of the land (sensitive areas); the management of surface or subsurface water; safety of future land occupants due to increased fire, earthquake, or storm hazards from the proposed development.

Section III: Compatibility Standard
For land uses not codified in the Stand Land Use Table
Classification of New and Unlisted Land Uses. It is recognized that new types of land uses will develop and various forms of land uses not anticipated may seek to locate in Lindon. This provision of Appendix A, of the Lindon City Code, shall be to provide a mechanism to classify land uses not codified in the Standard Land Use Table. The Planning Commission and City Council shall review unlisted and uncodified land uses based on specific criteria established in the Compatibility Standard of this Appendix and determine whether or not the use is permitted, conditional or not permitted.
The Planning Commission and City Council shall adhere to specific compatibility standards set forth herein and assure that the proposed unlisted use is similar in character and impact to the uses listed in the zone where an unlisted land use is proposed. Unlisted and/or uncodified land uses must be compatible and harmonious with the zone and geographic area in which they want to locate in the following areas:
    1. Volume and type of sales, retail, wholesale; size and type of items sold and nature of inventory on the premises;
    2. Any processing done on the premises; assembly, manufacturing, smelting, warehousing shipping and distribution; and dangerous, hazardous, toxic or explosive materials used in processing;
    3. The nature and location of storage and outdoor display of merchandise; enclosed, open, inside or outside the principal building; and predominant types of items stored Bbusiness vehicles, work in process, inventory and merchandise, construction materials, scrap and junk, and bulk materials, ores, powders and liquids;
    4. Number and density of employees and customers, per unit area of site and buildings in relation to business hours and employment shifts;
    5. Business hours the use is in operation or open for business, ranging from seven days a week, 24 hours a day to once to several times a year, such as sports stadiums or fairgrounds;
    6. Transportation requirements, including modal split for people and freight, by volume, type and characteristics of traffic generation to and from the site, trip purposes, and whether trip purposes can be shared with other uses on the site;
    7. Parking characteristics, turn over and generation, ration of the number of spacers required per unit area or activity, and potential for shared paring with other uses;
    8. Predilection of attracting or repelling criminal activities to, from or other premises;
    9. Amount and nature of nuisances generated on the premises – noise, smoke, odor, glare, vibration radiation, and fumes; and
    10. Any special public utility requirements for serving the use – water supply, waste water output, pretreatment of wastes and emissions recommended or required, and any significant power structures and communication towers or facilities.
At such time as the Planning Commission finds a proposed land use “compatible and harmonious” with the zone in which it is to locate, they shall make a recommendation to the City Council. The Council shall then consider the application based on the criteria as established herein and the Planning Commission’s recommendation. Decisions based on the Compatibility Standard shall only be valid for the specific site and application. Future applicants shall be required to submit a new application. If the Planning Commission finds that a specific land use should be added to the Standard Land Use Table after applying the Compatibility Standard, they shall do so in a recommendation to the City Council.

Standard Land Use Table
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| Parking |           Permitted            | Residential |     Mixed     |                 Commercial*                 | Industrial | R&B |
|  Group  |            Primary             |             |     Rec.      |                                             |            |     |
|         |              Uses              |             |               |                                             |            |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| "       | "                              |   (R1-12,   | RMU-W | RMU-E | PC-1 | PC-2 | CG | CG-A | CG-A8 | CG-S | MC |  HI  | LI  |     |
|         |                                |   R1-20,    |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         |                                |     R3)     |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| C = Conditional Use, N = Not Permitted, N/A = Not Applicable, P = Permitted                                                             |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| *Lindon Village Commercial Zone use permissions are found in Section                                                                    |
| 17.48.025                                                                                                                               |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| MISCELLANEOUS                                                                                                                           |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| N/A     | Solicitors                     | See Chapter 5.40 – Solicitors Ordinance                                                      |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| N/A     | Itinerant                      | N           | N     | N     | See Section 17.17.140 – Temporary Site                         |
|         | Merchants                      |             |       |       | Plans                                                          |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Fireworks                      | See Chapter 8.28 – Fireworks Ordinance                                                       |
|         | Stands                         |                                                                                              |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Christmas                      | N           | N     | N     | See Section 17.17.140 – Temporary Site                         |
|         | Tree Sales                     |             |       |       | Plans                                                          |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Mechanical                     | N           | N     | N     | C    | C    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Amusement                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| N/A     | Individual                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Containers                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | for Recyclable                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Materials –                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | commercial                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| RESIDENTIAL                                                                                                                             |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| N/A     | Single-Family                  | P           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 1111    | Accessory                      | See         | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Apartments                     | Chapter     |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         |                                | 17.46       |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         |                                | R2          |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         |                                | Overlay     |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 1111    | Condominium                    | "           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 1111    | Apartments                     | "           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 1200    | Rooming &                      | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Boarding                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Houses                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 1233    | Fraternity &                   | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Sorority                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Houses                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 1500    | Membership                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Lodging                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 1233    | Student                        | See Chapter 17.46 – R2 Overlay                                                               |
|         | Housing                        |                                                                                              |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 1241    | Youth Rehabilitation           | See Chapters 17.70 – Group Homes and 17.72 – Care Facilities                                 |
|         |                                | Overlay                                                                                      |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 1241    | Assisted                       | See Chapters 17.70 – Group Homes and 17.72 – Care Facilities                                 |
|         | Living                         | Overlay                                                                                      |
|         | Facilities –                   |                                                                                              |
|         | small                          |                                                                                              |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 1241    | Assisted                       | See Chapters 17.70 – Group Homes and 17.72 – Care Facilities                                 |
|         | Living                         | Overlay                                                                                      |
|         | Facilities –                   |                                                                                              |
|         | large                          |                                                                                              |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 1200    | Transitional                   | See Chapters 17.70 – Group Homes and 17.72 – Care Facilities                                 |
|         | Treatment                      | Overlay                                                                                      |
|         | Home –                         |                                                                                              |
|         | sm.                            |                                                                                              |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 1200    | Transitional                   | See Chapters 17.70 – Group Homes and 17.72 – Care Facilities                                 |
|         | Treatment                      | Overlay                                                                                      |
|         | Home –                         |                                                                                              |
|         | lg.                            |                                                                                              |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 1400    | Subdivided                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Manufactured                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Mobile                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Homes Parks                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 1300    | Hotels,                        | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | P   |
|         | Tourist                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Courts,                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Bed & Breakfast                |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | and Motels                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 1300    | Residential                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Bed & Breakfast                |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Facility –                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | 3 rooms                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | or less                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| N/A     | Caretaker                      | N           | N     | N     | C    | C    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | C    | C   | C   |
|         | Facilities –                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | accessory                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | to main                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | uses only                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| MANUFACTURING                                                                                                                           |
| NOTE: Any listed “indoor only” manufacturing business proposing “outdoor                                                                |
| storage” in the HI or LI zones is required to obtain a conditional                                                                      |
| use permit.                                                                                                                             |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Slaughterhouse                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Meat & Dairy                   | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | P    | C   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | General                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Food Mfg. –                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | under 20,000                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | sq/ft.                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | General                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Food Mfg. –                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | over 20,000                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | sq/ft.                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Candy &                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Other Confectionary            |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Products                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Preparing                      | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | P    | C   | N   |
|         | Feeds for                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Animals &                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Fowl                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Brewery                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | P    | C   | N   |
|         | (Liquors &                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Spirits)                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | max. 1,000                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | sq. ft.                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | and must                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | be in conjunction              |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | with a                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | restaurant                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Ice Manufacturing              | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Textile                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | P    | N   | N   |
|         | Mill Products                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | All General                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Apparel                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Lumber &                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | P    | C   | N   |
|         | Wood Products                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Cabinets                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | and Similar                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | furniture &                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Fixtures –                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | and production                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Pulp Products                  | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Publishing,                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Printing, &                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Misc. Related                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Work                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Industrial                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Chemical                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Explosives                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Petroleum &                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Coal Products                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Other Gas                      | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | C    | N   | N   |
|         | Productions                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Candle and                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | wax products                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | manufacturing                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Rubber and                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | C    | N   | N   |
|         | Misc. Plastics                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Stone, Clay,                   | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Glass, &                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Associated                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Products –                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage &                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | production                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Asphalt &                      | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Concrete                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Batch Plants                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | or Road                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Product                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Manufacturing –                |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | concrete                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | crushing,                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | road base,                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | etc.                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Fabricated                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | P    | C   | N   |
|         | Metal Products                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Fabricated                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Metal products,                |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage &                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | production                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only.                          |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Professional,                  | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Scientific,                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Photographic,                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Optical                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | instruments,                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Etc.                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Tobacco                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | P    | C   | N   |
|         | Products                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Motion Picture                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Production                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | (permanent                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | studios)                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 2000    | Signs &                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Advertising                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| TRANSPORTATION, COMMUNICATIONS, & UTILITIES                                                                                             |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Railroad                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Lines Extension &              |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Associated                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Uses                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Bus Passenger                  | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Terminals                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Bus Garaging &                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Equipment                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Maintenance                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Motor Freight                  | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | P    | C   | N   |
|         | Terminals                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Motor Freight                  | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | P    | C   | N   |
|         | Garaging &                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Equipment                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Maintenance                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Taxicab                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Terminal/Garage                |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Auto Parking                   | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | P    | P   | P   |
|         | Facilities –                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | private                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Telephone                      | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Utility                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Lines –                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | above ground                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Telephone                      | P           | P     | P     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | P    | P   | P   |
|         | Utility                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Lines –                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | underground                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Cellular                       | See Chapter 5.07                                                                             |
|         | Communication                  |                                                                                              |
|         | Towers                         |                                                                                              |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Television                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Broadcasting                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Studios –                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Television                     | N           | C     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Transmitting                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Stations &                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Relay Tower                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | (height                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | of tower                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | may not                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | exceed                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | maximum                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | height                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | of zone)                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Radio &                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Television                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Broadcasting                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Studios                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | (height                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | of any                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | antenna                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | or tower                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | may not                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | exceed                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | maximum                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | height                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | of zone)                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Electric                       | C           | C     | C     | C    | C    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | C    | C   | C   |
|         | Utility                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Lines –                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | above ground                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | 35 kV or                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | greater                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Electric                       | P           | P     | P     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | P    | P   | P   |
|         | Utility                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Lines –                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | underground                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Electric                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Utility                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Lines –                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | above ground                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | and less                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | than 35                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | kV (lines                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | located                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | west of                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | commuter                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | railroad                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | tracks                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | are permitted)                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Electricity                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Regulating                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Substations                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Gas Utilities –                | P           | P     | P     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | P    | P   | P   |
|         | underground                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Natural                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | C    | N   | N   |
|         | or Manufactured                |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Gasoline                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Storage &                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Distribution                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Points                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Gas Pressure                   | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Control                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Stations                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Culinary                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Water Treatment                |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Plants –                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Purification                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Water Storage                  | P           | P     | P     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | P    | P   | P   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Water Pressure                 | P           | P     | P     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | P    | P   | P   |
|         | Control                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Stations                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Sewage Treatment               | N           | C     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Plants                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Sewage Pressure                | P           | P     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | P    | P   | P   |
|         | Control                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Stations                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Solid Waste                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Disposal &                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Incineration                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Freight                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Forwarding                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Packing &                      | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Crating                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 4000    | Waste Transfer                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Stations                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| WHOLESALE TRADE (Sell for Resale)                                                                                                       |
| Note: Any permitted (P) wholesale business proposing “outdoor storage”                                                                  |
| in the HI and LI zones is required to obtain a conditional use permit                                                                   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Automobiles,                   | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Motor Vehicle, &               |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Other Automotive               |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Equipment                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | (outdoor                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | of vehicles                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | is permitted)                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Tires &                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Tubes –                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Drugs, Chemicals &             | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Allied                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Products –                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Drugs, Drug                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Proprietaries &                |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Druggists'                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Sundries –                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Paints &                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Varnishes –                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Dry Goods,                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Piece Goods, &                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Notions –                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Apparel &                      | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Accessories –                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Groceries &                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Food Stuffs –                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Agricultural                   | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Commodities                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | (outdoor                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | is permitted)                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Electrical                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Apparatus &                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Equipment,                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Wiring                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Supplies, &                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Construction                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Materials –                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Hardware –                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Plumbing &                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Heating                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Equipment &                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Supplies –                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Air Conditioning,              | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Refrigeration                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Equipment &                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Supplies –                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Commercial,                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Industrial, &                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Agricultural                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Machine                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Equipment &                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | supplies                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | (outdoor                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | is permitted)                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Professional                   | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Equipment &                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Supplies –                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Transportation                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | equipment,                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Other Machinery                |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Equipment, &                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Supplies                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | (Outdoor                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | of vehicles &                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | trailers                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | is permitted)                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Metal &                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | C    | N   | N   |
|         | Minerals –                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | includes                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Rock Products,                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Concrete,                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Asphalt –                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | excludes                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | liquid                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | petroleum                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | products &                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | scrap                          |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Petroleum                      | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | C    | N   | N   |
|         | Bulk Stations &                |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Terminals                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Scrap &                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Waste Materials                |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Tobacco &                      | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Tobacco                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Products –                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Beer, Wine, &                  | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Distilled                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Alcoholic                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Beverages –                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Paper &                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Paper Products –               |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Furniture &                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Home furnishings –             |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5100    | Lumber &                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Construction                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Materials                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | (outdoor                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | is permitted)                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| RETAIL TRADE                                                                                                                            |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5200    | Lumber yards –                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | outdoor                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5200    | Building                       | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Material,                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Equipment                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Supplies &                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Hardware –                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5200    | Farm Equipment                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | C    | P   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5300    | Home Improvement               | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Centers                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5300    | Department                     | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Stores                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5300    | Mail Order                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Houses                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5300    | Limited                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Price Variety                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Stores                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5300    | Direct Selling                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | C   | C   |
|         | Organizations –                |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Call Centers                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5300    | Arts, Crafts &                 | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Hobbies                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5300    | Musical                        | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Instruments                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5300    | Flea Market –                  | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5300    | Groceries                      | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | &/or Food                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5300    | Farmers                        | N           | P     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Market                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5300    | Candy &                        | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Other Confectionery            |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Products                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5500    | Motorcycles,                   | N           | N     | N     | C    | C    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Personal                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | ATV, Personal                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Water Craft, &                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Snowmobile,                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Sales &                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Service                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5500    | Motor Vehicles/Trucks/Marine – | N           | N     | N     | C    | C    | P  | P    | P     | P    | C  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | New Vehicle                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Dealership                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only (vehicle                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | service                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | centers                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | permitted                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | in conjunction                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | with new                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | vehicle                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | dealership)                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5500    | Used Cars/Trucks –             | N           | N     | N     | N    | C    | N  | P    | P     | N    | N  | C    | P   | N   |
|         | Used Vehicle                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Sales Lots                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5500    | Mobile &                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | C    | P   | N   |
|         | Manufactured                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Homes Sales                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5500    | Tires, Batteries, &            | N           | N     | N     | C    | C    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Accessories                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5500    | Gasoline                       | N           | N     | N     | C    | C    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Service                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Station                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | with or                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Without                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Store                          |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5500    | Marine Craft &                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Accessories                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5500    | Aircraft &                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Accessories                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5600    | Clothing,                      | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Apparel, &                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Accessories                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5700    | Furniture &                    | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Home furnishings –             |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5700    | Music Supplies                 | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5800    | Restaurants                    | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | C    | P   | P   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5800    | Fast Food                      | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Pharmacy                       | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Antiques                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Jeweler                        | N           | N     | N     | C    | C    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | or Gold,                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Silver                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Dealers                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Secondhand                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Merchants –                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | No outdoor                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | except                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | as CUP                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | in LI zone                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Books                          | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Stationery                     | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Office Supplies                | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | P   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Cigars –                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Cigarettes                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Newspapers/Magazines           | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Cameras &                      | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Photographic                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Supplies                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Gifts, Novelties, &            | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Souvenirs                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Florists                       | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Video Rentals                  | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Sporting                       | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Goods                          |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Bicycles                       | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Toys                           | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Farm & Garden                  | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Supplies                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Hay, Grains, &                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Feed                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Nursery –                      | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Plants                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Computer                       | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
|         | Goods &                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 5900    | Optical                        | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Goods                          |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| SERVICES                                                                                                                                |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6100    | Professional                   | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | P    | P   | P   |
|         | Office                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Uses                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6100    | Chartered                      | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | P   |
|         | Banks,                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Credit                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Unions                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | and Other                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Similar                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Financial                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Institutions                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6100    | Check Cashing                  | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | and Other                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Payday                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Loans or                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Similar                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Credit                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6100    | Security &                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | P   |
|         | Commodity                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Brokers,                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Dealers, &                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Exchanges                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6100    | Insurance                      | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | P   |
|         | Agents,                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Brokers,                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | and Related                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6100    | Real Estate                    | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | P   |
|         | Agents,                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Brokers,                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | and Related                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6100    | Title Abstracting              | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | P   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Laundering                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | and Dry                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Cleaning                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Custom Tailoring               | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Laundromats                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | House Cleaning                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Commercial                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Janitorial                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Window Cleaning                | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Chimney                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Sweep                          |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Photographic                   | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | C   |
|         | Services –                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Including                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Commercial                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Beauty &                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Barber                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Shops                          |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Massage                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Therapy/Personal               |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Care Health                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Spa                            |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Funeral                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Homes                          |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Crematory                      | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Cemeteries                     | C           | C     | C     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Child Day                      | C           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | C  | N    | N   | C   |
|         | Care –                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | 5 to 16                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | children                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | (4 or less                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | not regulated)                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Commercial                     | See Chapters 17.70 and 17.72                                                                 |
|         | Adult Day                      |                                                                                              |
|         | Care Facility                  |                                                                                              |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Commercial                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | C   |
|         | Preschool                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Catering                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6200    | Wedding                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Reception                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Centers                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Advertising                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
|         | Services –                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | General                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Direct Mail                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
|         | Advertising                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Travel Services                | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | P   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Private                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | C    | P   | C   |
|         | Postal                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Blueprinting &                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
|         | Photocopying                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Disinfecting &                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Exterminating                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Locksmithing                   | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | News Syndicate                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Employment                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | P   |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Vault Security                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Storage –                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Mini-Storage                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | (outdoor                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | by Conditional                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Use only                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | and is                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | limited                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | to 15%                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | of total                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | space and                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | limited                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | to personal                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | recreational                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | vehicles)                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Research,                      | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
|         | Development, &                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Testing                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Business &                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
|         | Management                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Consulting                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Detective &                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
|         | Protective                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Heavy Equipment                | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | P    | P   | N   |
|         | Rental &                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Leasing;                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Vehicles                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | over 26,000                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | GVW                            |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Light Equipment                | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Rental &                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Leasing;                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Automobile &                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Light-Truck                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Rental                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | (No vehicles                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | over 26,000                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | GVW)                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Photo-Finishing                | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Stamp Trading                  | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6300    | Motion Picture                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Distribution &                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6411    | Automobile                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Wash                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6411    | Auto Lube &                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Tune-up                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6411    | Auto Tire                      | N           | N     | N     | C    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Shops /                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Tire Sales                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | / Tire                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6411    | General                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Auto /                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Vehicle                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Repair                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6400    | Wrecking                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Yards                          |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6400    | Impound                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Yards                          |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6400    | Small Engine,                  | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Appliance,                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Electrical, &                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Machine                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Repair                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6400    | Watch, Clock, &                | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Jewelry                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Repair                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6400    | Re-Upholstery &                | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Furniture                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Repair                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6513    | Medical,                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | P   |
|         | Dental, &                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Health                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Clinic                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | / small,                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | outpatient                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | type services                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6513    | Hospital                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6500    | Medical &                      | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
|         | Dental                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Laboratories                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6500    | Veterinarian                   | N           | C     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Services,                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Animal                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Hospitals –                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | small animals                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6500    | Veterinarian                   | N           | C     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Services,                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Animal                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Hospitals –                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | large animals                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6500    | Legal Services                 | N           | N     | N     | P    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6500    | Engineering &                  | N           | N     | N     | P    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
|         | Architectural                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6500    | Educational &                  | N           | N     | N     | P    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
|         | Scientific                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Research                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6500    | Accounting,                    | N           | N     | N     | P    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
|         | Auditing &                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Bookkeeping                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6500    | Urban Planning                 | N           | N     | N     | P    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6500    | Auction                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Services –                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Indoor                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Only                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6500    | Family &                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | P   |
|         | Behavioral                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Counseling                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6500    | Genealogical –                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | P   |
|         | Family                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | History                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6500    | Interior                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | P   |
|         | Design                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6600    | Building                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Construction –                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | General                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Contractor,                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Office &                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6600    | Landscaping                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Service,                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Office &                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Storage                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6800    | Private                        | C           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Primary &                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Secondary                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Schools                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6800    | Universities &                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | C   | C   |
|         | Colleges                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6800    | Professional &                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | C   | C   |
|         | Vocational                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Schools                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6800    | Martial                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Arts Studios                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6800    | Barber &                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Beauty                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Schools                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6800    | Art & Music                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | C   |
|         | Schools                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6800    | Dancing,                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | C   |
|         | Tumbling,                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | and Gymnastics                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Schools                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6800    | Driving                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | P   | N   |
|         | Schools                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6911    | Churches,                      | C           | C     | C     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | N    | N   | C   |
|         | Synagogues &                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Temples                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6800    | Adoption                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | P   |
|         | Agencies                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6800    | Professional                   | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | N    | C   | P   |
|         | Members                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Organizations                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6800    | Labor Unions &                 | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | N    | C   | P   |
|         | Similar                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Labor Organizations            |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 6800    | Civic, Social &                | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | N    | C   | P   |
|         | Fraternal                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Associations                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| PUBLIC ASSEMBLIES & AMUSEMENTS                                                                                                          |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Libraries                      | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Museums                        | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | P   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Art Galleries                  | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | P   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Planetaria,                    | N           | C     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | C   |
|         | Aquariums,                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Botanical                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Gardens, &                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Arboretums                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Zoos                           | N           | C     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Sexually-Oriented              | See Chapters 8.30 and 17.61                                                                  |
|         | Businesses                     |                                                                                              |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Amphitheaters                  | N           | C     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Motion Picture                 | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Theaters                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Stage Theater                  | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Dance Clubs/Music              | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Venues                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Stadiums                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Arenas /                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Field Houses                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Auditoriums &                  | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Exhibit                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Halls                          |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Convention                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | C   | P   |
|         | Centers                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Fairgrounds                    | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | N    | C   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Amusements                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Parks                          |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Arcades &                      | N           | N     | N     | C    | C    | C  | C    | C     | C    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Miniature                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Golf                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Golf Driving                   | N           | C     | C     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Ranges                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Go-Cart                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Tracks                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Golf Courses                   | C           | C     | C     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | &/ or Country                  |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Clubs                          |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Tennis Courts –                | N           | N     | N     | C    | C    | C  | C    | C     | C    | P  | N    | C   | P   |
|         | Private                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Roller Skating &               | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | P  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Blading                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Skate Board                    | N           | C     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Parks –                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Private                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Skate Board                    | See Section III – Appendix A                                                                 |
|         | Parks –                        |                                                                                              |
|         | Publicly                       |                                                                                              |
|         | Owned                          |                                                                                              |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | BMX Biking                     | N           | C     | C     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Tracks &                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Facilities                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | ATV / Motorcycle               | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Tracks                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Riding Stables –               | C           | C     | C     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Commercial                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Bowling                        | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Lanes                          |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Play Fields &                  | N           | C     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Athletic                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Fields –                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Commercial                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Recreation                     | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | C  | C    | C     | C    | P  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Centers –                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | General                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Gymnasium &                    | N           | N     | N     | P    | P    | C  | C    | C     | C    | P  | N    | C   | C   |
|         | Athletic                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Clubs                          |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Swimming                       | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Pools –                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Commercial                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Indoor Soccer                  | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | P  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Facilities                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Indoor Gun                     | N           | C     | C     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | N    | C   | N   |
|         | Ranges                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Water Slides                   | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | P  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Parks –                        | P           | P     | P     | P    | P    | P  | P    | P     | P    | P  | P    | P   | P   |
|         | General                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Recreation –                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Public                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Property                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Campgrounds                    | N           | C     | C     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| 7100    | Recreational                   | N           | C     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Vehicle                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Park                           |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| AGRICULTURE & RESOURCE EXTRACTION                                                                                                       |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| N/A     | Commercial                     | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Farms &                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Ranches                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | producing                      |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Pigs, Turkeys,                 |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Mink, or                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Chickens                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | products                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| N/A     | Agricultural                   | N           | C     | C     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Related                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Activities:                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Commercial                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Production –                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | large scale                    |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| N/A     | Horticultural                  | N           | C     | C     | N    | N    | C  | C    | C     | C    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| N/A     | Forestry &                     | N           | C     | C     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | C    | N   | N   |
|         | Timber                         |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Production                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| N/A     | All Fisheries &                | N           | C     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | C    | C   | N   |
|         | Fish Hatcheries                |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| N/A     | All Mining &                   | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Related                        |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Services                       |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| N/A     | All Resource                   | N           | N     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | N  | N    | N   | N   |
|         | Production &                   |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
|         | Extraction                     |             |       |       |      |      |    |      |       |      |    |      |     |     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| N/A     | Peat Extraction                | N           | C     | N     | N    | N    | N  | N    | N     | N    | C  | C    | C   | N   |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| See     | CF zone (Commercial Farm) uses – See Chapter 17.51                                                                            |
| Chapter |                                                                                                                               |
| 17.18   |                                                                                                                               |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| UNCLASSIFIED                                                                                                                            |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| N/A     | All unclassified               | See Section III of SLU Table (Appendix A)                                                    |
|         | items                          |                                                                                              |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
| * For zones not listed in the Standard Land Use Table, see the applicable                                                               |
| zoning ordinance for a list of permitted uses (i.e., Commercial Farm                                                                    |
| Zone, T-zone, etc.)                                                                                                                     |
+---------+--------------------------------+-------------+-------+-------+------+------+----+------+-------+------+----+------+-----+-----+
(Ord. 2019-5 §1, amended, 2019; Ord. 2019-4 §3, amended, 2019; Ord. 2018-8 §1, amended, 2018; Ord. 2018-6 §1, amended, 2018; Ord. 2017-10 §1, amended, 2017; Ord. 2016-22 §1, amended, 2016)

Tables
 Statutory References
 State Code Citation Table
 Ordinance Table

Statutory References
for Utah Cities and Towns
The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes applicable to Utah cities and towns. They are current through the 2015 First Special Session.

General Provisions
Creation of municipal corporations. Art. XI, § 5 of the Utah Constitution
Incorporation. U.C.A. § 10-2-101 et seq.
Classification. U.C.A. § 10-2-301 et seq.
Annexation. U.C.A. § 10-2-401 et seq.
Consolidation of municipalities. U.C.A. § 10-2-601 et seq.
City powers generally. U.C.A. § 10-8-1 et seq.
Town powers generally. U.C.A. § 10-8-94
Ordinances and resolutions. U.C.A. § 10-3-701 et seq.
Actions for violation of ordinances. U.C.A. § 10-7-65 et seq.
Punishment for ordinance violations. U.C.A. §§ 10-3-703, 10-8-84
Civil municipal ordinance violation administrative procedures. U.C.A. § 10-3-703.7
Jails and workhouses. U.C.A. § 10-8-58 et seq.
Election Code. U.C.A. Title 20A

Administration and Personnel
Election of governing body. U.C.A. § 10-3-201 et seq.
Officer eligibility and residency requirements. U.C.A. § 10-3-301
Vacancies in offices. U.C.A. § 10-3-302
Meetings of governing body. U.C.A. § 10-3-502 et seq.
Ordinances and resolutions. U.C.A. § 10-3-701 et seq.
Municipal administration. U.C.A. § 10-3-801 et seq.
Appointed officials and their duties. U.C.A. § 10-3-902 et seq.
Municipal Officers and Employees Ethics Act. U.C.A. § 10-3-1301 et seq.
Fire department. U.C.A. § 10-8-55
Civil service commission. U.C.A. § 10-3-1001 et seq.
Personnel rules and benefits. U.C.A. § 10-3-1103 et seq.

Revenue and Finance
Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act for Utah Cities. U.C.A. § 10-6-101 et seq.
Uniform Fiscal Procedures Act for Utah Towns. U.C.A. § 10-5-101 et seq.
Appropriations. U.C.A. § 10-8-2
Adoption of Utah Procurement Code authorized. U.C.A. § 10-7-86
Local Sales and Use Tax Act. U.C.A. § 59-12-201 et seq.
Actions to recover special taxes. U.C.A. § 10-7-32
Local Government Bonding Act. U.C.A. § 11-14-101 et seq.
Local taxation of utilities limitation. U.C.A. § 11-26-1 et seq.
Utah Refunding Bond Act. U.C.A. § 11-27-1 et seq.
Warrants and bonds. U.C.A. §§ 10-8-6 and 10-8-7
Specific city powers. U.C.A. § 10-8-1 et seq.

Business Taxes, Licenses and Regulations
Business licensing and regulation by cities. U.C.A. §§ 10-1-203, 10-8-4, 10-8-42 et seq., 10-8-66
Alcoholic Beverage Control Act. U.C.A. Title 32B
Pawnbrokers and secondhand dealers. U.C.A. § 11-6-1 et seq.

Animals
Generally. U.C.A. §§ 10-8-59, 10-8-65, 10-8-77
Dogs. U.C.A. § 10-8-65 and Title 18
Animal Welfare Act. U.C.A. § 11-46-101 et seq.

Health and Safety
Cooperation with county health department. U.C.A. § 10-7-3
Abatement of weeds and garbage. U.C.A. § 10-11-1 et seq.
County and Municipal Fireworks Act. U.C.A. § 11-3-1 et seq.
Combustibles and explosives. U.C.A. § 10-8-56
Miscellaneous health and safety powers. U.C.A. § 10-8-44 et seq.
Hospitals. U.C.A. § 10-8-90 et seq.

Public Peace, Morals and Welfare
Utah Criminal Code. U.C.A. Title 76
City powers generally. U.C.A. § 10-8-41 et seq.

Vehicles and Traffic
State traffic code. U.C.A. Title 41
Regulatory powers of local authorities. U.C.A. § 41-6a-208
City traffic regulations. U.C.A. § 10-8-30
Pedestrian Mall Law of Utah. U.C.A. § 10-15-1 et seq.

Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places
Contracts for public improvements. U.C.A. § 11-39-101 et seq.
Playgrounds. U.C.A. § 11-2-1 et seq.
Local Government Bonding Act. U.C.A. § 11-14-101 et seq.
Cemeteries. U.C.A. § 10-8-62
Utah Residential Rehabilitation Act. U.C.A. § 11-25-1 et seq.
Numbering houses and lots. U.C.A. § 10-8-31

Public Services
Water, lighting and sewers. U.C.A. §§ 10-7-4 et seq.; 10-8-14 et seq.
Sale of power plants. U.C.A. § 10-7-15 et seq.
Contracts for public improvements. U.C.A. § 11-39-101 et seq.
Sewage systems. U.C.A. §§ 10-8-38, 11-8-1 et seq.
Waterworks. U.C.A. § 10-8-15 et seq.
Cemeteries. U.C.A. § 10-8-62
Public transportation. U.C.A. § 10-8-86
Utah Public Transit District Act. U.C.A. § 17B-2a-801 et seq.
Prohibition on sale of waterworks or rights. Art. XI, § 6 of the Utah Constitution

Buildings and Construction
Building Inspector and Factory Built Housing Licensing Act. U.C.A. § 58-56-1 et seq.
Other building regulations. U.C.A. § 10-8-52 et seq.
Numbering houses and lots. U.C.A. § 10-8-31
Plumbing. U.C.A. § 10-8-46

Subdivisions
Plats and subdivisions. U.C.A. § 10-9a-601 et seq.

Zoning
Zoning power of cities and towns. U.C.A. § 10-9a-501 et seq.
Appeal authority. U.C.A. § 10-9a-701 et seq.

State Code Citation Table
This table lists Utah Code Annotated and Utah Constitution sections that are cited in the Lindon City Code. Thus, Title 2, U.C.A, is cited in Section 3.09.030 of this code.
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
|                  State Citation                   |  Code Section   |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Article I, Section 22 of the Utah Constitution    | 17.57.200       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Article IV, Section 6 of the Utah Constitution    | 2.44.070        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 2, U.C.A.                                   | 3.09.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 3, U.C.A.                                   | 3.09.040        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 3-24-2, U.C.A.                                  | 4.02.080        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 4, Chapter 11, U.C.A.                       | 6.35.050        |
|                                                   | 6.35.070        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 6-32-201(3), U.C.A.                             | 4.01.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 6-32-801, U.C.A.                                | 4.03.070        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 8, Chapter 5, U.C.A.                        | 8.32.320        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 10, Chapter 1, U.C.A.                       | 3.09.070        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-1-203, U.C.A.                                | 3.12.080        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-1-301, U.C.A. et seq.                        | 3.09.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-1-305(2)(b), U.C.A.                          | 3.09.040        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-1-307(4), U.C.A.                             | 3.09.060        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-1-403, U.C.A.                                | 3.12.050        |
|                                                   | 3.12.060        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-1-405, U.C.A.                                | 3.12.070        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-3-208, U.C.A.                                | 2.44.140        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-3-301, U.C.A.                                | 2.44.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-3-606, U.C.A.                                | 2.08.045        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-3-818, U.C.A.                                | 2.28.060        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-6-122, U.C.A.                                | 1.30.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-7-20, U.C.A.                                 | 1.30.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 10, Chapter 8, U.C.A.                       | 17.48.090       |
|                                                   | 17.54.080       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-8-1, U.C.A.                                  | 1.30.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-8-2, U.C.A.                                  | 1.30.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-9-103, U.C.A.                                | 17.14.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-9-103(2), U.C.A.                             | 11.04.040       |
|                                                   | 11.05.050       |
|                                                   | 11.12.040       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-9-307(2)(a), U.C.A.                          | 17.45.030       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-9-808, U.C.A.                                | 17.32.070       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-9a-103(18), U.C.A.                           | Appendix A § II |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-9a-205, U.C.A.                               | 11.13.050       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-9a-523, U.C.A.                               | 17.34.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-9a-801, U.C.A.                               | 17.14.080       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 10-11-4, U.C.A.                                 | 8.20.160        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 11, U.C.A.                                  | 8.20.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 11, Chapter 19, U.C.A.                      | 17.60.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 11, Chapter 22, U.C.A.                      | 10.04.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 11, Chapter 26, U.C.A.                      | 3.12.080        |
|                                                   | 5.06.050        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 11-36-202(3)(a), U.C.A.                         | 11.05.070       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 11-36-302, U.C.A.                               | 11.08.110       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 11-36-401(4)(b), U.C.A.                         | 11.04.070       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 11-36-401(4)(c)(iii), U.C.A.                    | 11.05.090       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 11-36-401(5)(c), U.C.A.                         | 11.04.070       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 11-36-402(1), U.C.A.                            | 11.05.090       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 11, Chapter 36a, U.C.A.                     | 11.13.030       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 11-36a-504, U.C.A.                              | 11.13.040       |
|                                                   | 11.13.050       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 13-22-2(1)(a), U.C.A.                           | 5.40.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 13-22-2(b), U.C.A.                              | 5.40.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 13-22-8(1), U.C.A.                              | 5.40.040        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 15A, U.C.A.                                 | 17.78.070       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 19, Chapter 5, U.C.A.                       | 13.23.260       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 20-2-14, U.C.A.                                 | 2.44.130        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 20-9-203, U.C.A.                                | 2.44.100        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 20A-1-101, U.C.A.                               | 2.44.150        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 20A-1-201.5, U.C.A.                             | 2.44.050        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 20A, Chapter 2, U.C.A.                      | 2.44.060        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 20A-2-101.5, U.C.A.                             | 2.44.070        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 20A-9-203, U.C.A.                               | 2.44.070        |
|                                                   | 2.44.080        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 20A-9-203(5), U.C.A.                            | 2.44.070        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 20A-9-206, U.C.A.                               | 2.44.070        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 20A-9-404, U.C.A.                               | 2.44.050        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 23-20-14, U.C.A.                                | 9.12.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 26-2-12, U.C.A.                                 | 2.42.020        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 26-2-17(3), U.C.A.                              | 2.42.020        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 26-12-17, U.C.A.                                | 2.42.020        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 26, Chapter 21, U.C.A.                      | 5.42.020        |
|                                                   | 17.70.020       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 26-21-2, U.C.A.                                 | 5.42.020        |
|                                                   | 17.70.020       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 27-12-135, U.C.A.                               | 12.16.030       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 31A, Chapter 22, U.C.A.                     | 10.04.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 32-1-3, U.C.A.                                  | 9.16.040        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 32A, U.C.A.                                 | 5.10.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 32B-1-102, U.C.A.                               | 5.08.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 32B-1-202, U.C.A.                               | 5.08.020        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 2, U.C.A.                      | 5.08.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 3, U.C.A.                      | 5.08.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 4, U.C.A.                      | 5.08.010        |
|                                                   | 5.08.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 5, U.C.A.                      | 5.08.010        |
|                                                   | 5.08.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 6, U.C.A.                      | 5.08.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 32B-6-406, U.C.A.                               | 5.08.050        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 7, U.C.A.                      | 5.08.010        |
|                                                   | 5.08.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 8, U.C.A.                      | 5.08.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 8b, U.C.A.                     | 5.08.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 9, U.C.A.                      | 5.08.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 10, U.C.A.                     | 5.08.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 11, U.C.A.                     | 5.08.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 12, U.C.A.                     | 5.08.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 32B, Chapter 13, U.C.A.                     | 5.08.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 1, U.C.A.                       | 10.08.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 1a, U.C.A.                      | 10.04.010       |
|                                                   | 10.18.050       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 2, U.C.A.                       | 10.08.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 6, U.C.A.                       | 10.04.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 6a, U.C.A.                      | 10.18.040       |
|                                                   | 10.18.050       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 41-6a-1509, U.C.A.                              | 10.18.020       |
|                                                   | 10.18.060       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 41-6a-1509(a), U.C.A. – § 41-6a-1509(b), U.C.A. | 10.18.050       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 41-6a-1603, U.C.A.                              | 10.18.050       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 41-6a-1623, U.C.A.                              | 10.18.050       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 41-6a-1626, U.C.A.                              | 10.18.050       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 41-6a-1627, U.C.A.                              | 10.18.050       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 7, U.C.A.                       | 10.04.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 8, U.C.A.                       | 10.04.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 12a, U.C.A.                     | 10.04.010       |
|                                                   | 10.08.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 21, U.C.A.                      | 10.04.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 41, Chapter 22, U.C.A.                      | 9.12.040        |
|                                                   | 10.04.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 41-22-10.5, U.C.A.                              | 10.18.020       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 52, Chapter 4, U.C.A.                       | 2.08.080        |
|                                                   | 17.14.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 52-4-103, U.C.A.                                | 17.14.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 52-4-202, U.C.A.                                | 2.08.055        |
|                                                   | 17.08.055       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 52-4-207, U.C.A.                                | 2.08.055        |
|                                                   | 17.08.055       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 53, Chapter 3, U.C.A.                       | 5.08.010        |
|                                                   | 10.04.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 53-3-207, U.C.A.                                | 5.08.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 53, Chapter 8, U.C.A.                       | 5.08.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 54, U.C.A.                                  | 3.04.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 54-8b-2, U.C.A.                                 | 3.12.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 57, Chapter 2a, U.C.A.                      | 17.33.050       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 57, Chapter 37, U.C.A.                      | 8.20.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 58, Chapter 37, U.C.A.                      | 9.16.050        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 58, Chapter 37a, U.C.A.                     | 9.16.050        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 58-37a-3, U.C.A.                                | 9.16.060        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 58, Chapter 37b, U.C.A.                     | 9.16.050        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 58-55-102, U.C.A.                               | 5.14.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 59, U.C.A.                                  | 3.05.060        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-1-104, U.C.A.                                | 3.04.050        |
|                                                   | 3.09.040        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-1-401, U.C.A.                                | 3.06.060        |
|                                                   | 3.09.090        |
|                                                   | 3.12.090        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-1-402, U.C.A.                                | 3.04.050        |
|                                                   | 3.06.060        |
|                                                   | 3.09.090        |
|                                                   | 3.12.090        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 59, Chapter 10, U.C.A.                      | 8.20.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 59, Chapter 12, U.C.A.                      | 3.04.020        |
|                                                   | 3.04.030        |
|                                                   | 3.05.020        |
|                                                   | 3.09.020        |
|                                                   | 3.09.030        |
|                                                   | 3.09.040        |
|                                                   | 3.09.070        |
|                                                   | 3.12.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-12-101, U.C.A.                               | 3.04.030        |
|                                                   | 3.09.070        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-12-102, U.C.A.                               | 3.12.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-12-103(1), U.C.A.                            | 3.05.040        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-12-104, U.C.A.                               | 3.05.040        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-12-106, U.C.A.                               | 3.04.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-12-119, U.C.A.                               | 3.04.030        |
|                                                   | 3.09.070        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-12-201, U.C.A. et seq.                       | 3.06.050        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-12-207, U.C.A.                               | 3.12.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-12-301, U.C.A. et seq.                       | 3.06.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-12-352(1), U.C.A.                            | 3.06.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-12-352(1)(b), U.C.A.                         | 3.06.040        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-12-1401, U.C.A. et seq.                      | 3.05.060        |
|                                                   | 3.05.070        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-12-1402, U.C.A.                              | 3.05.080        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-12-1402(1)(c), U.C.A.                        | 3.05.040        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 59-12-1402(e), U.C.A.                           | 3.05.040        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 59, Chapter 13, U.C.A.                      | 3.09.040        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 62A, U.C.A.                                 | 9.20.060        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 62A, Chapter 2, U.C.A.                      | 5.42.090        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 62A-4a-501, U.C.A.                              | 9.20.060        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 62A, Chapter 5, U.C.A.                      | 5.42.020        |
|                                                   | 17.70.020       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 62A-15-401, U.C.A.                              | 5.08.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 63-2-201(3)(b), U.C.A.                          | 4.01.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 63-2-206, U.C.A.                                | 4.07.040        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 63-2-304(1), U.C.A.                             | 4.03.100        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 63-2-304(2), U.C.A.                             | 4.03.100        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 63-2-304(34), U.C.A.                            | 4.02.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 63-2-308, U.C.A.                                | 4.02.080        |
|                                                   | 4.06.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 63-2-404(8), U.C.A.                             | 4.03.060        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 63-30-3, U.C.A.                                 | 17.56.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 63-30-10, U.C.A.                                | 17.56.010       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 63-46b-3, U.C.A.                                | 4.02.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 70C-5-103, U.C.A.                               | 5.40.200        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 72-7-102, U.C.A.                                | 3.12.080        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 72-7-108, U.C.A.                                | 3.12.080        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 76, U.C.A.                                  | 9.04.010        |
|                                                   | 9.29.020        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 76-3-203.1, U.C.A.                              | 8.20.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 76, Chapter 10, U.C.A.                      | 6.08.020        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 76-10-505.5(4), U.C.A.                          | 9.29.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 76-10-801, U.C.A.                               | 8.20.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 76-10-803, U.C.A.                               | 8.20.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| Title 77, U.C.A.                                  | 9.04.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 78-3a-801, U.C.A.                               | 9.04.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 78-3a-802, U.C.A.                               | 9.04.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 78-24-8, U.C.A.                                 | 4.02.080        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 78-31-801, U.C.A.                               | 9.04.010        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 78-38-1(1), U.C.A.                              | 8.20.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 78-38-9, U.C.A.                                 | 8.20.030        |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+
| § 78B-4-511, U.C.A.                               | 12.20.180       |
+---------------------------------------------------+-----------------+

Ordinance Table
This table lists all codified ordinances. If an ordinance is codified, its location in the code is cited by chapter number at the end of the ordinance description. Ordinances are codified if they are general, permanent, and/or include penalty provisions for noncompliance. “Not codified” indicates that the ordinance could have been codified but was not for some reason (e.g., superseded by a later ordinance, codified in a separate publication). “Special” means the ordinance was special in nature or for a specific period of time (e.g., budget, annexation, tax levy).
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| Number  | Adoption Date |                Description                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2       | 1957          | Delivery of Irrigation Water               |
|         |               | Stock (17.66)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 9       | 1963          | Residential Solicitation                   |
|         |               | (Repealed)                                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 14      | 1965          | Food Regulations (8.12)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 20      | 1970          | Garbage (8.16)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 22      | 1970          | Trailer Houses (17.64)                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 30      | 1975          | Alcohol Sales                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 42      | 1978          | Connections to Mobile Homes                |
|         |               | or Trailers (13.24)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 43      | 1978          | Offenses by or Against Minors              |
|         |               | (9.20)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 61      | 1978          | Miscellaneous Offenses (9.32)              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 65      | 1979          | Administration (15.04)                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 66      | 1979          | Excavations (12.16)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 81      | 1980          | Dedications of Subdivisions                |
|         |               | (17.58)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 92      | 1982          | Neighborhood Redevelopment                 |
|         |               | Agency (17.60)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 94      | 1982          | Administration and Enforcement;            |
|         |               | Animal Regulations Generally;              |
|         |               | Dog Regulations Generally;                 |
|         |               | Rabies; Impounding of Animals;             |
|         |               | Kennels; Animals and Land                  |
|         |               | Use (6.04, 6.08, 6.12,                     |
|         |               | 6.20, 6.24, 6.28, 6.32)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 95      | 1983          | Officers Generally (2.28)                  |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 97      | 1983          | Uniform Operators and Chauffeurs           |
|         |               | License Act (10.08)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 98      | 1983          | Fireworks; R2 Overlay Zone                 |
|         |               | (8.28, 17.46)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 100     | 1983          | Sale of Property to Collect                |
|         |               | Assessments (3.08)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 101     | 1983          | Pawnbrokers (5.32)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 102     | 1983          | Animal Regulations Generally;              |
|         |               | Dog Regulations Generally                  |
|         |               | (6.08, 6.12)                               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 106     | 1984          | Business Taxes, Licenses                   |
|         |               | and Regulations (5.04)                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 108     | 1984          | Adoption of Traffic Rules                  |
|         |               | and Regulations; Speed                     |
|         |               | Limits; Stopping, Standing                 |
|         |               | and Parking; Stop and Yield                |
|         |               | Intersections (10.04, 10.12,               |
|         |               | 10.16, 10.20)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 110     | 1984          | Flood Damage Prevention                    |
|         |               | (17.62)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 111     | 1985          | Definitions; General and                   |
|         |               | Supplemental Provisions;                   |
|         |               | Restrictions on Inoperable                 |
|         |               | Motor Vehicle and Vehicle                  |
|         |               | Storage; Planning Commission;              |
|         |               | Board of Adjustment; Document              |
|         |               | Submission and Review;                     |
|         |               | Nonconforming Buildings                    |
|         |               | and Uses; Off-Street Parking;              |
|         |               | Conditional Uses Generally;                |
|         |               | Performance Standards for                  |
|         |               | Conditional Uses; General                  |
|         |               | Standards for Conditional                  |
|         |               | Use Developments; Landfills                |
|         |               | and Land Excavations; Subdivisions–Special |
|         |               | Requirements; Zoning District              |
|         |               | Establishment; MU–Multiple                 |
|         |               | Use District; Single Family                |
|         |               | Residential; T–Travel Influence            |
|         |               | District; SA–Sensitive                     |
|         |               | Area District (17.02, 17.04,               |
|         |               | 17.06, 17.08, 17.10, 17.12,                |
|         |               | 17.16, 17.18, 17.20, 17.22,                |
|         |               | 17.24, 17.30, 17.32, 17.40,                |
|         |               | 17.42, 17.44, 17.52, 17.56)                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 114     | 1985          | Public Nuisances (8.20)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 116     | 1985          | Officers Generally (2.28)                  |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 120     | 1985          | Hunting within City Limits                 |
|         |               | (8.24)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 121     | 1985          | General Provisions; Water                  |
|         |               | and Sewer Department; Administration       |
|         |               | of Water and Sewer Service;                |
|         |               | Rates and Fees; Wastewater                 |
|         |               | Discharges (13.04, 13.08,                  |
|         |               | 13.12, 13.16, 13.20)                       |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 124     | —             | Mayor (2.04)                               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 125     | —             | Fire Department (2.32)                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 126     | 1985          | Alcohol Sales (5.08)                       |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 127     | 1985          | Amusement Devices (5.12)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 128     | 1985          | Dance Halls (5.28)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 130     | 1985          | Meetings, Assemblies and                   |
|         |               | Parades (12.12)                            |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 132     | 1985          | Offenses by or Against Minors              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 133     | 1985          | Alcohol Sales; Health Department;          |
|         |               | Food Regulations; Public                   |
|         |               | Nuisances (5.08, 8.04,                     |
|         |               | 8.12, 8.20)                                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 149     | 1986          | Flood Damage Prevention                    |
|         |               | (17.62)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 152     | 1987          | General Penalty (1.16)                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 157     | 1987          | Uniform Operators and Chauffeurs           |
|         |               | License Act (10.08)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 160     | 1987          | Flood Damage Prevention                    |
|         |               | (17.62)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 161     | 1988          | Delivery of Irrigation Water               |
|         |               | Stock (17.66)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 171     | 10/1989       | City Parks (12.20)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 175     | 1990          | Pigeons (6.34)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 176     | 1990          | Sales and Use Tax; Sale                    |
|         |               | of Property to Collect                     |
|         |               | Assessments (3.04, 3.08)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 177     | 1990          | General and Supplemental                   |
|         |               | Provisions (17.04)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 178     | 8/15/1990     | Administration of Water                    |
|         |               | and Sewer Service (13.12)                  |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 1-92    | 1/15/1992     | Pressurized Irrigation (13.18)             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 6-92    | 7/1/1992      | Mayor; City Council; City                  |
|         |               | Recorder; Officers Generally               |
|         |               | (2.04, 2.08, 2.12, 2.28)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 92-6    | 7/1/1992      | Officers Generally; Elections              |
|         |               | (2.28, 2.44)                               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 7-92    | 7/1/1992      | Mayor; Zoning District Establishment       |
|         |               | (2.04, 17.40)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 92-7    | 7/1/1992      | Mayor (2.04)                               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 8-92    | 11/6/1992     | Stopping, Standing and Parking             |
|         |               | (10.16)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 9-92    | 10/7/1992     | Government Records Access                  |
|         |               | Management; Classification                 |
|         |               | of Records; Disclosure                     |
|         |               | of Records; Requests for                   |
|         |               | Records; Records Retention;                |
|         |               | Appeals; Rights of Individuals             |
|         |               | on Whom Data Is Maintained;                |
|         |               | Criminal Penalties (4.01,                  |
|         |               | 4.02, 4.03, 4.04, 4.05,                    |
|         |               | 4.06, 4.07, 4.08)                          |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 10-82   | 10/21/1992    | Reimbursement Fees (17.68)                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 92-11   | 11/4/1992     | City Sexton (2.42)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 11-92   | 11/5/1992     | Cemeteries and Burials (8.32)              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 12-92   | 1/1/1993      | Historic Preservation Commission           |
|         |               | (2.38)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2-93    | —             | Utility Franchise Tax (3.10)               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 6-93    | 3/1993        | Government Records Access                  |
|         |               | Management; Disclosure                     |
|         |               | of Records (4.01, 4.03)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 7-93    | 3/23/1993     | General Penalty (1.16)                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 8-93    | —             | Elections (2.44)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 93-9    | 5/1993        | Uniform Operators and Chauffeurs           |
|         |               | License Act; Speed Limits                  |
|         |               | (10.08, 10.12)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 10-93   | 5/6/1993      | City Pressurized Irrigation                |
|         |               | System (13.19)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 18-93   | 5/21/1993     | Offenses against Public                    |
|         |               | Decency (Repealed)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 93-18   | 10/23/1993    | Alcohol Beverage Control                   |
|         |               | Act (5.10)                                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 94-1    | 1/1994        | Curfew (9.22)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2-94    | 2/1994        | Stopping, Standing and Parking             |
|         |               | (10.16)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 94-3    | 2/15/1994     | City Sexton (2.42)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 3-94    | 1994          | Fireworks; Cemeteries and                  |
|         |               | Burials; Pressurized Irrigation            |
|         |               | (8.28, 8.32, 13.18)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 4-94    | 3/1994        | Curfew (9.22)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 14-94   | 6/7/1994      | Cable TV Non-Exclusive Franchise           |
|         |               | (5.05)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 6-94    | 7/19/1994     | City Pressurized Irrigation                |
|         |               | System (13.19)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 13-94   | 9/20/1994     | Pressurized Irrigation (13.18)             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 95-1    | 1/1995        | Alcohol Beverage Control                   |
|         |               | Act; Adoption of Traffic                   |
|         |               | Rules and Regulations (5.10,               |
|         |               | 10.04)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 1-95    | 2/7/1995      | Adoption of Criminal Code                  |
|         |               | (9.04)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2-95    | 3/1995        | Landfill License Fee (5.48)                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 9-95    | 7/10/1995     | Impact Fees (11.04)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 10-95   | —             | Municipal Energy Sales and                 |
|         |               | Use Tax; Utility Franchise                 |
|         |               | Tax (3.09, 3.10)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 11-95   | 7/18/1995     | Storm Water Utility (13.22)                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 13-95   | 12/1995       | (Repealer)                                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 1-96    | 4/22/1996     | Pressurized Irrigation (13.18)             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 97-1    | 8/16/2000     | General Penalty; Administration            |
|         |               | and Enforcement; Animal                    |
|         |               | Regulations Generally;                     |
|         |               | Dog Regulations Generally;                 |
|         |               | Impounding of Animals;                     |
|         |               | Garbage; Public Nuisances;                 |
|         |               | Adoption of Criminal Code;                 |
|         |               | Offenses against Public                    |
|         |               | Officers and Government;                   |
|         |               | Offenses against Property;                 |
|         |               | Consumer Protection; Offenses              |
|         |               | in Public Schools; Stopping,               |
|         |               | Standing and Parking; General              |
|         |               | Use of Streets; Excavations                |
|         |               | (1.16, 6.04, 6.08, 6.12,                   |
|         |               | 6.24, 8.16, 8.20, 9.04,                    |
|         |               | 9.08, 9.12, 9.28, 9.29,                    |
|         |               | 10.16, 12.08, 12.16)                       |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 97-2    | 4/29/1997     | Pressurized Irrigation (13.18)             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 97-3    | 1997          | General and Supplemental                   |
|         |               | Provisions (17.04)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 97-5    | 6/17/1997     | Municipal Energy Sales and                 |
|         |               | Use Tax (3.09)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 97-7    | 8/17/2000     | Commercial Zones (17.48)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 97-9    | 7/15/1997     | Impact Fees (11.04)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 97-10   | 7/15/1997     | Impact Fees (11.04)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 97-11   | 10/3/2000     | Lindon City Storm Water                    |
|         |               | Impact Fee Ordinance (11.08)               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 97-12   | 7/15/1997     | Impact Fees (11.04)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 97-14   | 9/16/1997     | Storm Water Utility; Storm                 |
|         |               | Drainage (13.22, 13.23)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 19-93   | 12/1/1998     | City Culinary Water System,                |
|         |               | Sewer System, and Pressurized              |
|         |               | Irrigation System--User                    |
|         |               | Fees (13.26)                               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 98-1    | 8/24/2000     | Business Taxes, Licenses                   |
|         |               | and Regulations; Alcohol                   |
|         |               | Sales; Alcohol Beverage                    |
|         |               | Control Act; Amusement                     |
|         |               | Devices; Auctioneers; Billiard             |
|         |               | and Pool Halls; Cigarette                  |
|         |               | Vending Machines; Dance                    |
|         |               | Halls; Pawnbrokers; Secondhand             |
|         |               | and Junk Dealers; Conducting               |
|         |               | Business on Street or Sidewalks;           |
|         |               | Landfill License Fee (5.04,                |
|         |               | 5.08, 5.10, 5.12, 5.16,                    |
|         |               | 5.20, 5.24, 5.28, 5.32,                    |
|         |               | 5.36, 5.44, 5.48)                          |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 98-3    | 10/3/2000     | Document Submission and                    |
|         |               | Review; Site Plan Development              |
|         |               | (17.12, 17.17)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 98-5    | 10/3/2000     | Storm Water Utility (13.22)                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 98-6    | 10/3/2000     | Commercial Zones (17.48)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 98-7    | 10/3/2000     | Research and Business (RandB)              |
|         |               | Zone (17.47)                               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 98-9    | 10/3/2000     | Industrial Zones (17.49)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 98-12   | 10/3/2000     | Off-Street Parking (17.18)                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 98-13   | 10/3/2000     | R2 Overlay Zone (17.46)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-1    | 10/3/2000     | Alcohol Beverage Control                   |
|         |               | Act; Adoption of Criminal                  |
|         |               | Code; Offenses against                     |
|         |               | Public Decency; Adoption                   |
|         |               | of Traffic Rules and Regulations           |
|         |               | (5.10, 9.04, 9.16, 10.04)                  |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-2    | 10/3/2000     | Speed Limits (10.12)                       |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-3    | 10/3/2000     | Officers Generally (2.28)                  |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-6    | 10/4/2000     | Commercial Zones (17.48)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-8    | 10/4/2000     | Off-Street Parking (17.18)                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-9    | 9/8/2000      | SA–Sensitive Area District                 |
|         |               | (17.56)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-10   | 1999          | Public Nuisances (8.20)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-12   | 10/4/2000     | Non-Conforming Signs (18.05)               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-13   | 9/8/2000      | SA–Sensitive Area District                 |
|         |               | (17.56)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-14   | 2000          | Subdivisions–Special Requirements          |
|         |               | (17.32)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-15   | 10/4/2000     | Transient Room Tax; Municipal              |
|         |               | Energy Sales and Use Tax;                  |
|         |               | Telecommunication License                  |
|         |               | Tax (3.06, 3.09, 3.12)                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-17   | 2/16/2001     | Administration and Enforcement;            |
|         |               | Animal Regulations Generally;              |
|         |               | Dog Regulations Generally;                 |
|         |               | Wild and Exotic Animals;                   |
|         |               | Rabies; Impounding of Animals;             |
|         |               | Kennels; Animals and Land                  |
|         |               | Use; Pigeons (6.04, 6.08,                  |
|         |               | 6.12, 6.16, 6.20, 6.24,                    |
|         |               | 6.28, 6.32, 6.34)                          |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-18   | 9/8/2000      | Definitions; Subdivisions–Special          |
|         |               | Requirements (17.02, 17.32)                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-19   | 10/4/2000     | Sexually-Oriented Businesses               |
|         |               | (8.30)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-20   | 10/4/2000     | Sexually Oriented Businesses               |
|         |               | (17.61)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-21   | 10/4/2000     | Cigarette Vending Machines                 |
|         |               | (5.24)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-22   | 10/4/2000     | R2 Overlay Zone (17.46)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 99-23   | 10/4/2000     | Definitions; General and                   |
|         |               | Supplemental Provisions                    |
|         |               | (17.02, 17.04)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2000-2  | 10/4/2000     | Bonds for Completion of                    |
|         |               | Improvements to Real Property              |
|         |               | (17.38)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2000-3  | 10/4/2000     | Commercial Zones (17.48)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2000-4  | 10/4/2000     | Curfew (9.22)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2000-5  | 9/8/2000      | Definitions; Single Family                 |
|         |               | Residential; HP–Hillside                   |
|         |               | Protection District (17.02,                |
|         |               | 17.44, 17.57)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2000-6  | 10/4/2000     | Planning Commission (17.08)                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2000-7  | 10/4/2000     | Cemeteries and Burials (8.32)              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2000-8  | 10/4/2000     | Definitions and Regulations                |
|         |               | (18.03)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2000-9  | 2000          | Single Family Residential                  |
|         |               | (17.44)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2000-11 | 10/4/2000     | Definitions; General and                   |
|         |               | Supplemental Provisions;                   |
|         |               | Conditional Uses Generally;                |
|         |               | General Standards for Conditional          |
|         |               | Use Developments; Subdivisions–Special     |
|         |               | Requirements; MU–Multiple                  |
|         |               | Use District; Single Family                |
|         |               | Residential (17.02, 17.04,                 |
|         |               | 17.20, 17.24, 17.32, 17.42,                |
|         |               | 17.44)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2000-12 | 12/18/2000    | Telecommunications Rights-of-Way           |
|         |               | Ordinance (5.06)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2000-13 | 10/23/2000    | R2 Overlay Zone (17.46)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2000-14 | 12/8/2000     | Personal Wireless Telecommunications       |
|         |               | Facilities (5.07)                          |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2000-15 | 12/11/2000    | General Provisions; Alcohol                |
|         |               | Beverage Control Act; Adoption             |
|         |               | of Criminal Code; Offenses                 |
|         |               | against Property; Offenses                 |
|         |               | against Public Decency;                    |
|         |               | Curfew; Adoption of Traffic                |
|         |               | Rules and Regulations (1.04,               |
|         |               | 5.10, 9.04, 9.12, 9.16,                    |
|         |               | 9.22, 10.04)                               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2000-16 | 12/18/2000    | Municipal Energy Sales and                 |
|         |               | Use Tax; Utility Franchise                 |
|         |               | Tax (3.09, 3.10)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2000-17 | 12/18/2000    | Recoupment of Administrative               |
|         |               | Costs Incurred by the City                 |
|         |               | (1.18)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2001-1  | 1/16/2001     | Definitions; Single Family                 |
|         |               | Residential; HP–Hillside                   |
|         |               | Protection District (17.02,                |
|         |               | 17.44, 17.57)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2001-5  | 6/19/2001     | Industrial Zones (17.49)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2001-7  | 7/17/2001     | Elections (2.44)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2001-9  | 2001          | Subdivisions–Special Requirements;         |
|         |               | Mixed Commercial (17.32,                   |
|         |               | 17.50)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2001-10 | 8/21/2001     | R2 Overlay Zone (17.46)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2001-11 | 8/21/2001     | Sexually Oriented Businesses               |
|         |               | (17.61)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2001-8  | 2001          | Subdivisions–Special Requirements          |
|         |               | (17.32)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-1  | 1/15/2002     | City Pressurized Irrigation                |
|         |               | System (13.19)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-2  | 1/15/2002     | (Repealer)                                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-3  | 1/15/2002     | Alcohol Sales; Health Department;          |
|         |               | Food Regulations (5.08,                    |
|         |               | 8.04, 8.12)                                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-4  | 1/15/2002     | Drinking Water Source Protection           |
|         |               | (13.30)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-6  | 2/19/2002     | Public Nuisances (8.20)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-8  | 4/16/2002     | Subdivisions–Special Requirements          |
|         |               | (17.32)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-9  | 4/16/2002     | Zoning District Establishment              |
|         |               | (17.40)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-10 | 4/16/2002     | Personal Wireless Telecommunications       |
|         |               | Facilities (5.07)                          |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-12 | 5/7/2002      | Subdivisions–Special Requirements          |
|         |               | (17.32)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-13 | 6/4/2002      | Cable TV Non-Exclusive Franchise           |
|         |               | (5.05)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-15 | 6/4/2002      | Delivery of Irrigation Water               |
|         |               | Stock (17.66)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-16 | 6/4/2002      | Sexually Oriented Businesses               |
|         |               | (17.61)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-17 | 6/4/2002      | Non-Conforming Signs (18.05)               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-18 | 7/2/2002      | R2 Overlay Zone (17.46)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-19 | 7/2/2002      | Restrictions on Inoperable                 |
|         |               | Motor Vehicle and Vehicle                  |
|         |               | Storage (17.06)                            |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-21 | 7/16/2002     | Administration; General                    |
|         |               | Requirements; Definitions                  |
|         |               | and Regulations; Billboard                 |
|         |               | Advertising; Non-Conforming                |
|         |               | Signs (18.01, 18.02, 18.03,                |
|         |               | 18.04, 18.05)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-22 | 8/20/2002     | Impact Fees (11.04)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-23 | 8/20/2002     | General and Supplemental                   |
|         |               | Provisions (17.04)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-24 | 11/19/2002    | Planning Commission (17.08)                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2002-25 | 11/19/2002    | Administration; Adoption                   |
|         |               | of Uniform Codes (15.04,                   |
|         |               | 15.08)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2003-1  | 2/18/2003     | Industrial Zones (17.49)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2003-2  | 2/18/2003     | Reimbursement Fees (17.68)                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2003-3  | 3/4/2003      | General and Supplemental                   |
|         |               | Provisions (17.04)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2003-4  | 3/4/2003      | Administration and Enforcement             |
|         |               | (6.04)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2003-7  | 4/15/2003     | Delivery of Irrigation Water               |
|         |               | Stock (17.66)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2003-8  | 5/6/2003      | Impact Fees for Roadway                    |
|         |               | Facilities (11.12)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2003-9  | 5/6/2003      | Offenses against Property                  |
|         |               | (9.12)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2003-11 | 7/15/2003     | (Repealed)                                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2003-12 | 7/15/2003     | Municipal Energy Sales and                 |
|         |               | Use Tax; Utility Franchise                 |
|         |               | Tax (3.09, 3.10)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2003-13 | 8/5/2003      | Reimbursement Fees (17.68)                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2003-14 | 8/5/2003      | Burglar, Robbery and Fire                  |
|         |               | Alarms (5.14)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2003-15 | 11/18/2003    | Single Family Residential                  |
|         |               | (17.44)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2003-16 | 12/16/2003    | Delivery of Irrigation Water               |
|         |               | Stock (17.66)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2004-1  | 1/6/2004      | R2 Overlay Zone (17.46)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2004-2  | 1/20/2004     | Group Homes; Care Facilities               |
|         |               | Overlay (17.72)                            |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2004-3  | 4/6/2004      | Nonconforming Buildings                    |
|         |               | and Uses (17.16)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2004-6  | 6/15/2004     | Telecommunication License                  |
|         |               | Tax (Repealed)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2004-7  | 6/16/2004     | Alcohol Sales (5.08)                       |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2004-10 | 10/19/2004    | Fighting Contests (8.22)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2004-12 | 11/16/2004    | Impact Fees for Roadway                    |
|         |               | Facilities (11.12)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2005-1  | 1/4/2005      | Water Conservation Plan                    |
|         |               | Ordinance (13.32)                          |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2005-2  | 1/4/2005      | Disposal of Parcels of Real                |
|         |               | Property (3.07)                            |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2005-3  | 1/4/2005      | (Repealed)                                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2005-4  | 1/4/2005      | General Provisions; Alcohol                |
|         |               | Beverage Control Act; Adoption             |
|         |               | of Criminal Code; Offenses                 |
|         |               | against Property; Offenses                 |
|         |               | against Public Decency;                    |
|         |               | Curfew (1.04, 5.10, 9.04,                  |
|         |               | 9.12, 9.16, 9.22)                          |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2005-5  | 2/1/2005      | Nonconforming Buildings                    |
|         |               | and Uses (17.16)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2005-6  | 6/10/2005     | R2 Overlay Zone (17.46)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2005-11 | 7/19/2005     | Tree Care Ordinance (17.73)                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2005-12 | 9/6/2005      | Administration; General                    |
|         |               | Requirements; Definitions                  |
|         |               | and Regulations; Non-Conforming            |
|         |               | Signs (18.01, 18.02, 18.03,                |
|         |               | 18.05)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2005-13 | 8/25/2005     | R-3 Overlay Zone (17.45)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2005-17 | 11/15/2005    | General and Supplemental                   |
|         |               | Provisions (17.04)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2006-1  | 2/2/2006      | Definitions and Regulations                |
|         |               | (18.03)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2006-2  | 2/7/2006      | T–Travel Influence District                |
|         |               | (17.52)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2006-3  | 2/7/2006      | Sexually Oriented Businesses               |
|         |               | (17.61)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2006-8  | 10/5/2006     | Subdivisions–Special Requirements          |
|         |               | (17.32)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2006-10 | 10/4/2006     | Commercial Zones (17.48)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2006-11 | 11/21/2006    | HP–Hillside Protection District            |
|         |               | (17.57)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2006-12 | 11/16/2006    | Public Sewage Treatment                    |
|         |               | System (13.13)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2006-13 | 12/5/2006     | (Repealer)                                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2007-5  | 2/20/2007     | Storm Drainage (13.23)                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2007-1  | 6/15/2007     | Elections (2.44)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2007-2  | 6/15/2007     | Elections; Subdivisions–Special            |
|         |               | Requirements (2.44, 17.32)                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2007-3  | 2/3/2007      | Definitions and Regulations                |
|         |               | (18.03)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2007-4  | 2/21/2007     | Adoption of Uniform Codes                  |
|         |               | (15.08)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2007-7  | 6/15/2007     | Elections (2.44)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2007-8  | 6/19/2007     | City Pressurized Irrigation                |
|         |               | System; Subdivisions–Special               |
|         |               | Requirements; Delivery                     |
|         |               | of Irrigation Water Stock                  |
|         |               | (13.19, 17.32, 17.66)                      |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2006-9  | 6/20/2007     | Storm Drainage (13.23)                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2007-10 | 10/2/2007     | Subdivisions–Special Requirements          |
|         |               | (17.32)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2007-11 | 10/10/2007    | Group Homes; Care Facilities               |
|         |               | Overlay (17.70, 17.72)                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2007-12 | 9/18/2007     | Trailer Houses (17.64)                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2007-14 | 12/18/2007    | R2 Overlay Zone (17.46)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2007-15 | 12/18/2007    | Stopping, Standing and Parking             |
|         |               | (10.16)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2007    | 12/18/2007    | Stopping, Standing and Parking             |
|         |               | (10.16)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2008-1  | 2/19/2008     | Document Submission and                    |
|         |               | Review; Noticing; R2 Overlay               |
|         |               | Zone; Reimbursement Fees                   |
|         |               | (17.12, 17.14, 17.46, 17.68)               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2008-2  | 2/19/2008     | Subdivisions–Special Requirements;         |
|         |               | SA–Sensitive Area District                 |
|         |               | (17.32, 17.56)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2008-4  | 2/19/2008     | General Standards for Conditional          |
|         |               | Use Developments; Single                   |
|         |               | Family Residential; Commercial             |
|         |               | Zones; Industrial Zones                    |
|         |               | (17.24, 17.44, 17.48, 17.49)               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2008-5  | 4/15/2008     | Definitions and Regulations                |
|         |               | (18.03)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2008-6  | 4/15/2008     | Off-Street Parking; Single                 |
|         |               | Family Residential; R-3                    |
|         |               | Overlay Zone; R2 Overlay                   |
|         |               | Zone; Research and Business                |
|         |               | (RandB) Zone; Commercial                   |
|         |               | Zones (17.18, 17.44, 17.45,                |
|         |               | 17.46, 17.47, 17.48)                       |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2008-8  | 9/25/2008     | Industrial Zones (17.49)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2008-9  | 9/16/2008     | Curfew; City Parks (9.22,                  |
|         |               | 12.20)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2008-10 | 9/2/2008      | Research and Business (RandB)              |
|         |               | Zone; Commercial Zones;                    |
|         |               | Industrial Zones (17.47,                   |
|         |               | 17.48, 17.49)                              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2008-11 | 11/18/2008    | Planning Commission; Land                  |
|         |               | Use Authority and Appeal                   |
|         |               | Authority; Board of Adjustment             |
|         |               | (17.08, 17.09, 17.10)                      |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2008-12 | 11/18/2008    | R2 Overlay Zone (17.46)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2009-2  | 1/20/2009     | General and Supplemental                   |
|         |               | Provisions (17.04)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2009-3  | 2/3/2009      | Single Family Residential                  |
|         |               | (17.44)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2009-4  | 2/17/2009     | Definitions and Regulations                |
|         |               | (18.03)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2009-5  | 4/7/2009      | Parks, Recreation and Trails               |
|         |               | Facilities Impact Fees                     |
|         |               | (11.05)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2009-6  | 5/5/2009      | Residential Solicitation                   |
|         |               | (5.40)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2009-7  | 7/21/2009     | Planning Commission (17.08)                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2009-8  | 7/21/2009     | Noticing (17.14)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2010-1  | 3/2/2010      | Document Submission and                    |
|         |               | Review; Site Plan Development              |
|         |               | (17.12, 17.17)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2010-2  | 8/17/2010     | Wind Energy Conversion Systems             |
|         |               | (WECS) (17.74)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2010-3  | 8/17/2010     | Definitions (17.02)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2010-4  | 8/17/2010     | General and Supplemental                   |
|         |               | Provisions (17.04)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2010-5  | 8/17/2010     | Cemeteries and Burials (8.32)              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2010-6  | 9/22/2010     | General Penalty; Recoupment                |
|         |               | of Administrative Costs                    |
|         |               | Incurred by the City; City                 |
|         |               | Council; Officers Generally;               |
|         |               | Fire Department; Historic                  |
|         |               | Preservation Commission;                   |
|         |               | City Sexton; Sales and                     |
|         |               | Use Tax; Transient Room                    |
|         |               | Tax; Municipal Energy Sales                |
|         |               | and Use Tax; Utility Franchise             |
|         |               | Tax; Telecommunication                     |
|         |               | License Tax; Lindon City                   |
|         |               | Storm Water Impact Fee                     |
|         |               | Ordinance (1.16, 1.18,                     |
|         |               | 2.08, 2.28, 2.32, 2.38,                    |
|         |               | 2.42, 3.04, 3.06, 3.09,                    |
|         |               | 3.10, 3.12, 11.08)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2010-7  | 10/9/2010     | Offenses against Public                    |
|         |               | Decency (9.16)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2011-1  | 2/15/2011     | Community Center Advisory                  |
|         |               | Board; Definitions and                     |
|         |               | Regulations (18.03)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2011-4  | 6/8/2011      | Requirements for the Control               |
|         |               | of Back Flow and Cross-Connections         |
|         |               | (13.28)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2011-5  | 10/25/2011    | Off-Street Parking (17.18)                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2011-6  | 11/1/2011     | Commercial Farm Zone (17.51)               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2011-10 | 12/6/2011     | Storm Drainage (13.23)                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2011-9  | 12/20/2011    | Offenses against Public                    |
|         |               | Officers and Government;                   |
|         |               | Offenses in Public Schools;                |
|         |               | City Parks (9.08, 9.29,                    |
|         |               | 12.20)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2012-1  | 1/30/2012     | Definitions and Regulations                |
|         |               | (18.03)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2012-2  | 1/18/2012     | R2 Overlay Zone (17.46)                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2012-4  | 2/7/2012      | Cemeteries and Burials (8.32)              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2012-5  | 2/21/2012     | Utah Lake Shoreline Protection             |
|         |               | Overlay Zone (17.55)                       |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2012-7  | 12/18/2012    | Single Family Residential                  |
|         |               | (17.44)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2012-8  | 6/19/2012     | Mixed Commercial (17.50)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2012-11 | 9/18/2012     | Research and Business (RandB)              |
|         |               | Zone (17.47)                               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2012-12 | 9/18/2012     | Commercial Zones; Industrial               |
|         |               | Zones; Mixed Commercial                    |
|         |               | (17.48, 17.49, 17.50)                      |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2012-14 | 11/20/2012    | Billboard Advertising (18.04)              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2012-16 | 12/18/2012    | Administration and Enforcement;            |
|         |               | Animal Regulations Generally;              |
|         |               | Dog Regulations Generally;                 |
|         |               | Wild and Exotic Animals;                   |
|         |               | Rabies; Impounding of Animals;             |
|         |               | Kennels; Animals and Land                  |
|         |               | Use; Pigeons; Beekeeping                   |
|         |               | (6.04, 6.08, 6.12, 6.16,                   |
|         |               | 6.20, 6.24, 6.28, 6.32,                    |
|         |               | 6.34, 6.35)                                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2013-1  | 2/5/2013      | Subdivisions–Special Requirements          |
|         |               | (17.32)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2013-2  | 4/16/2013     | Officers Generally (2.28)                  |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2013-4  | 5/8/2013      | General Requirements; Definitions          |
|         |               | and Regulations (18.02,                    |
|         |               | 18.03)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2013-5  | 7/16/2013     | Senior Housing Facility                    |
|         |               | Overlay (17.75)                            |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2013-6  | 7/17/2013     | Definitions and Regulations                |
|         |               | (18.03)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2013-9  | 8/20/2013     | Street Legal All-Terrain                   |
|         |               | Vehicles (10.18)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2013-11 | 9/17/2013     | Subdivisions–Special Requirements          |
|         |               | (17.32)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2013-12 | 12/4/2013     | Commercial Zones (17.48)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2013-14 | 12/3/2013     | Land Use Authority and Appeal              |
|         |               | Authority (17.09)                          |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2013-17 | 12/3/2013     | Policies and Procedures                    |
|         |               | (1.20)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2013-18 | 12/3/2013     | Purchasing and Procurement                 |
|         |               | (1.30)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2014-1  | 1/21/2014     | Definitions (17.02)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2014-2  | 1/21/2014     | Site Plan Development (17.17)              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2014-3  | 1/21/2014     | City Council (2.08)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2014-4  | 1/21/2014     | City Council (2.08)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2014-5  | 1/21/2014     | Planning Commission (17.08)                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2014-6  | 1/21/2014     | Officers Generally (2.28)                  |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2014-7  | 2/4/2014      | Commercial Zones (17.48)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2014-9  | 4/1/2014      | Cemeteries and Burials (8.32)              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2014-15 | 9/2/2014      | Cemeteries and Burials (8.32)              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2014-18 | 10/7/2014     | Single Family Residential                  |
|         |               | (17.44)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2014-19 | 12/2/2014     | Care Facilities Overlay                    |
|         |               | (17.72)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2015-01 | 1/20/2015     | Subdivisions–Special Requirements          |
|         |               | (17.32)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2015-03 | 2/3/2015      | General and Supplemental                   |
|         |               | Provisions (17.04)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2015-5  | 4/7/2015      | Commercial Zones (17.48)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2015-6  | 2/17/2015     | Industrial Zones; Mixed                    |
|         |               | Commercial (17.49, 17.50)                  |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2015-8  | 3/3/2015      | Amending a Recorded Plat;                  |
|         |               | Parcel Boundary Adjustment                 |
|         |               | (17.33, 17.34)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2015-9  | 3/3/2015      | Bonds for Completion of                    |
|         |               | Improvements to Real Property              |
|         |               | (17.38)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2015-10 | 7/7/2015      | HP–Hillside Protection District            |
|         |               | (17.57)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2015-14 | 6/16/2015     | Hunting within City Limits;                |
|         |               | Weapons (8.24, 9.24)                       |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2015-18 | 8/18/2015     | Industrial Zones (17.49)                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2015-22 | 8/18/2015     | General and Supplemental                   |
|         |               | Provisions; Single Family                  |
|         |               | Residential (17.04, 17.44)                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2015-28 | 12/15/2015    | Off-Street Parking; Commercial             |
|         |               | Zones (17.18, 17.48)                       |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2015-29 | 12/15/2015    | Senior Housing Facility                    |
|         |               | Overlay (17.75)                            |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-1  | 2/2/2016      | Street Master Plan (Special)               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-2  | —             | (Voided)                                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-3  | 2/16/2016     | Amends § 17.48.200, zoning                 |
|         |               | (17.48)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-4  | 2/2/2016      | Rezone (Special)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-5  | 2/2/2016      | Rezone (Special)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-6  | 2/2/2016      | Rezone (Special)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-7  | 2/16/2016     | Anderson Farms Planned Development         |
|         |               | Zone (PD Zone) (17.41)                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-8  | 2/16/2016     | Rezone (Special)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-9  | 3/15/2016     | Rezone (Special)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-10 | 3/15/2016     | Rezone (Special)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-11 | 5/3/2016      | Street Master Plan (Special)               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-12 | 5/3/2016      | Street Master Plan (Special)               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-13 | 4/19/2016     | Lindon City Public Safety                  |
|         |               | Impact Fees Ordinance (11.13)              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-14 | 7/19/2016     | Amends Ch. 11.04, impact                   |
|         |               | fees                                       |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-15 | —             | (Voided)                                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-16 | —             | (Voided)                                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-17 | —             | (Voided)                                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-18 | 9/20/2016     | Adds § 12.20.215, smoking                  |
|         |               | and vaping (12.20)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-19 | 10/4/2016     | Amends § 17.68.030, reimbursement          |
|         |               | fees (17.68)                               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-20 | 11/15/2016    | Amends Ch. 8.32, cemeteries                |
|         |               | and burials (8.32)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-21 | 12/6/2016     | Rezone (Special)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-22 | 12/6/2016     | Amends standard land use                   |
|         |               | table, zoning (Appendix                    |
|         |               | A)                                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-23 | 12/6/2016     | Amends Ch. 17.48, zoning                   |
|         |               | (17.48)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2016-24 | 12/20/2016    | Amends § 17.32.120, zoning                 |
|         |               | (17.32)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-1  | 4/18/2017     | Amends commercial design                   |
|         |               | standards (Special)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-2  | 3/7/2017      | Amends General Plan Land                   |
|         |               | Use Map (Special)                          |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-3  | 6/20/2017     | Amends General Plan Land                   |
|         |               | Use Map (Special)                          |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-4  | 6/20/2017     | Rezone (Special)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-5  | 2/20/2018     | Amends General Plan Land                   |
|         |               | Use Map (Special)                          |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-6  | 2/20/2018     | Rezone (Special)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-7  | 6/6/2017      | Amends Ch. 2.44, elections                 |
|         |               | (2.44)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-8  | —             | (Voided)                                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-9  | —             | (Voided)                                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-10 | 7/18/2017     | Amends standard land use                   |
|         |               | table, zoning (Appendix                    |
|         |               | A)                                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-11 | 9/19/2017     | Adds Ch. 17.54; amends city                |
|         |               | zoning map, regional commercial            |
|         |               | zone (17.54)                               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-12 | 10/17/2017    | Amends § 17.04.400, home                   |
|         |               | occupation requirements                    |
|         |               | (17.04)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-13 | 12/19/2017    | Amends § 17.48.025, Lindon                 |
|         |               | Village commercial zone                    |
|         |               | (17.48)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-14 | 10/3/2017     | Rezone (Special)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-15 | 11/21/2017    | Amends LCC 17.09, Table                    |
|         |               | #1, regional commercial                    |
|         |               | zone (17.09)                               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-16 | 12/5/2017     | Amends Ch. 17.51, commercial               |
|         |               | farm zone (17.51)                          |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-17 | —             | (Voided)                                   |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2017-18 | 12/19/2017    | Amends Street Master Plan                  |
|         |               | (Special)                                  |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-1  | 1/2/2018      | Amends development manual                  |
|         |               | (Special)                                  |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-2  | 1/16/2018     | Adds Ch. 5.42; amends § 17.02.010,         |
|         |               | Ch. 17.70 and § 17.72.010,                 |
|         |               | residential care facilities                |
|         |               | (5.42, 17.02, 17.70, 17.72)                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-3  | 1/16/2018     | Amends Ch. 17.14, noticing                 |
|         |               | (17.14)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-4  | 1/16/2018     | Amends fee schedule (Special)              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-5  | 3/6/2018      | Amends fee schedule (Special)              |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-6  | 4/17/2018     | Amends standard land use                   |
|         |               | table, zoning (Appendix                    |
|         |               | A)                                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-7  | 8/21/2018     | Adds Ch. 17.43, residential/business       |
|         |               | district overlay zone (RBO)                |
|         |               | (17.43)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-8  | 6/19/2018     | Amends standard land use                   |
|         |               | table, zoning (Appendix                    |
|         |               | A)                                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-9  | —             | (Reserved)                                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-10 | 6/19/2018     | Adopts FY2019 budget (Special)             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-11 | 8/21/2018     | Amends Ch. 5.08, alcohol                   |
|         |               | sales and licensing (5.08)                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-12 | 7/17/2018     | Rezone (Special)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-13 | 7/17/2018     | Amends Chs. 12.04 and 12.08,               |
|         |               | streets, sidewalks and                     |
|         |               | public places (12.04, 12.08)               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-14 | 8/21/2018     | Approves annexation plat                   |
|         |               | (Special)                                  |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-15 | 8/21/2018     | Amends § 8.32.190; repeals                 |
|         |               | § 8.32.220, cemeteries                     |
|         |               | and burials (8.32)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-16 | 9/4/2018      | Amends zoning map (Special)                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-17 | 9/18/2018     | Amends zoning map (Special)                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2018-18 | 2/19/2019     | Amends Chs. 13.12 and 13.16,               |
|         |               | public utility services                    |
|         |               | (13.12, 13.16)                             |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2019-1  | 2/5/2019      | Amends §§ 17.02.010 and                    |
|         |               | 17.44.090, zoning (17.02,                  |
|         |               | 17.44)                                     |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2019-2  | 3/5/2019      | Repeals Ch. 2.39, community                |
|         |               | center advisory board (Repealer)           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2019-3  | 3/5/2019      | Amends §§ 2.28.010, 2.28.040               |
|         |               | and 2.28.050; repeals § 2.28.020,          |
|         |               | municipality officers,                     |
|         |               | bonds and insurance (2.28)                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2019-4  | 4/2/2019      | Adds Ch. 17.78; amends Ch.                 |
|         |               | 17.64 and standard land                    |
|         |               | use table, recreational                    |
|         |               | vehicles (17.64, 17.78,                    |
|         |               | Appendix A)                                |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2019-5  | 4/2/2019      | Amends standard land use                   |
|         |               | table, zoning (Appendix                    |
|         |               | A)                                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2019-6  | 4/16/2019     | Amends § 17.46.100, accessory              |
|         |               | apartments (17.46)                         |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2019-7  | —             | (Reserved)                                 |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2019-8  | 5/21/2019     | Amends § 18.03.030, signs                  |
|         |               | (18.03)                                    |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2019-9  | 6/6/2019      | Amends § 17.51.130, parking                |
|         |               | in the commercial farm                     |
|         |               | zone (17.51)                               |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2019-10 | 6/18/2019     | Amends § 17.32.120, subdivision            |
|         |               | streets (17.32)                            |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2019-11 | 6/18/2019     | Adopts FY2020 budget, fee                  |
|         |               | schedule and compensation                  |
|         |               | programs; amends FY2019                    |
|         |               | budget; sets certified                     |
|         |               | tax rate; authorizes renewal               |
|         |               | of contract with redevelopment             |
|         |               | agency (Special)                           |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+
| 2019-12 | 6/18/2019     | Adds § 6.16.012, feeding                   |
|         |               | wild animals (6.16)                        |
+---------+---------------+--------------------------------------------+

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The Lindon City Code is current through Ordinance 2019-12, passed June 18, 2019.
Disclaimer: The city recorder’s office has the official version of the Lindon City Code. Users should contact the city recorder’s office for ordinances passed subsequent to the ordinance cited above.

City Website: www.lindoncity.org
City Telephone: (801) 785-5043
Code Publishing Company